<doc id="11955" wikidata="Q23505" url="?curid=11955" title="George H. W. Bush">
<text>George Herbert Walker Bush (June 12, 1924 – November 30, 2018) was the 41st president of the United States, serving from 1989 to 1993. A member of the Republican Party, he also served as the 43rd vice president from 1981 to 1989 under Ronald Reagan and previously in various other federal positions.

Born into a wealthy, established family in Milton, Massachusetts, Bush was raised in Greenwich, Connecticut. He attended Phillips Academy and served as a pilot in the United States Navy Reserve during World War II before graduating from Yale and moving to West Texas, where he established a successful oil company. Following an unsuccessful run for the United States Senate in 1964, he was elected to represent Texas&#x27;s 7th congressional district in 1966. President Richard Nixon appointed Bush as the ambassador to the United Nations in 1971 and as chairman of the Republican National Committee in 1973. President Gerald Ford appointed him as the chief of the Liaison Office to the People&#x27;s Republic of China in 1974 and as the director of Central Intelligence in 1976. Bush ran for president in 1980 but was defeated in the Republican presidential primaries by Reagan, who then selected Bush as his vice presidential running mate. In the 1988 presidential election, Bush defeated Democrat Michael Dukakis.

Foreign policy drove Bush&#x27;s presidency as he navigated the final years of the Cold War and played a key role in the reunification of Germany. He presided over the invasion of Panama and the Gulf War, ending the Iraqi occupation of Kuwait in the latter conflict. Though the agreement was not ratified until after he left office, Bush negotiated and signed the North American Free Trade Agreement, which created a trade bloc consisting of the United States, Canada and Mexico. Domestically, Bush reneged on a 1988 campaign promise by enacting legislation to raise taxes to justify reducing the budget deficit. He championed and signed three pieces of bipartisan legislation in 1990, the Americans with Disabilities Act, the Immigration Act and the Clean Air Act Amendments. He also appointed David Souter and Clarence Thomas to the Supreme Court. Bush lost the 1992 presidential election to Democrat Bill Clinton following an economic recession, his turnaround on his tax promise, and the decreased emphasis of foreign policy in a post–Cold War political climate.

After leaving office in 1993, Bush was active in humanitarian activities, often working alongside Clinton. With the victory of his eldest son, George W. Bush, in the 2000 and 2004 presidential elections, the two became the second father–son pair to serve as the nation&#x27;s president, following John Adams and John Quincy Adams. His second son, Jeb Bush, unsuccessfully sought the Republican presidential nomination in the 2016 primaries. Historians generally rank Bush as an above-average president. 

== Early life and education (1924–1948) ==

George Herbert Walker Bush was born on June 12, 1924, in Milton, Massachusetts. He was the second son of Prescott Bush and Dorothy (Walker) Bush, and a younger brother of Prescott Bush Jr. His paternal grandfather, Samuel P. Bush, worked as an executive for a railroad parts company in Columbus, Ohio, while his maternal grandfather and namesake, George Herbert Walker, led Wall Street investment bank W. A. Harriman &amp; Co. Walker was known as &quot;Pop&quot;, and young Bush was called &quot;Poppy&quot; as a tribute to him.

The Bush family moved to Greenwich, Connecticut, in 1925, and Prescott took a position with W. A. Harriman &amp; Co., which later merged into Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Co. the following year. Bush spent most of his childhood in Greenwich, at the family vacation home in Kennebunkport, Maine, or at his maternal grandparents&#x27; plantation in South Carolina.

Because of the family&#x27;s wealth, Bush was largely unaffected by the Great Depression. He attended Greenwich Country Day School from 1929 to 1937 and Phillips Academy, an elite private academy in Massachusetts, from 1937 to 1942. While at Phillips Academy, he served as president of the senior class, secretary of the student council, president of the community fund-raising group, a member of the editorial board of the school newspaper, and captain of the varsity baseball and soccer teams.

=== World War II ===

On his 18th birthday, immediately after graduating from Phillips Academy, he enlisted in the United States Navy as a naval aviator. After a period of training, he was commissioned as an ensign in the Naval Reserve at Naval Air Station Corpus Christi on June 9, 1943, becoming one of the youngest pilots in the Navy. Beginning in 1944, Bush served in the Pacific theater, where he flew a Grumman TBM Avenger, a torpedo bomber capable of taking off from aircraft carriers. His squadron was assigned to the as a member of Air Group 51, where his lanky physique earned him the nickname &quot;Skin&quot;.

Bush flew his first combat mission in May 1944, bombing Japanese-held Wake Island, and was promoted to lieutenant (junior grade) on August 1, 1944. During an attack on a Japanese installation in Chichijima, Bush&#x27;s aircraft successfully attacked several targets but was downed by enemy fire. Though both of Bush&#x27;s fellow crew members died, Bush successfully bailed out from the aircraft and was rescued by the submarine . Several of the aviators shot down during the attack were captured and executed, and their livers were cannibalized by their captors. Bush&#x27;s survival after such a close brush with death shaped him profoundly, leading him to ask, &quot;Why had I been spared and what did God have for me?&quot; He was later awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross for his role in the mission.

Bush returned to &quot;San Jacinto&quot; in November 1944, participating in operations in the Philippines. In early 1945, he was assigned to a new combat squadron, VT-153, where he trained to participate in an invasion of mainland Japan. Between March and May 1945, he trained in Auburn, Maine, where he and Barbara lived in a small apartment. On September 2, 1945, before any invasion took place, Japan formally surrendered following the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Bush was released from active duty that same month but was not formally discharged from the Navy until October 1955, when he had reached the rank of lieutenant. By the end of his period of active service, Bush had flown 58 missions, completed 128 carrier landings, and recorded 1228 hours of flight time.

=== Marriage ===
Bush met Barbara Pierce at a Christmas dance in Greenwich in December 1941, and, after a period of courtship, they became engaged in December 1943. While Bush was on leave from the Navy, they married in Rye, New York, on January 6, 1945. The Bushes enjoyed a strong marriage, and Barbara would later be a popular First Lady, seen by many as &quot;a kind of national grandmother&quot;. They had six children: George W. (b. 1946), Robin (1949–1953), Jeb (b. 1953), Neil (b. 1955), Marvin (b. 1956), and Doro (b. 1959). Their oldest daughter, Robin, died of leukemia in 1953.

=== College years ===
Bush enrolled at Yale College, where he took part in an accelerated program that enabled him to graduate in two and a half years rather than the usual four. He was a member of the Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity and was elected its president. He also captained the Yale baseball team and played in the first two College World Series as a left-handed first baseman. Like his father, he was a member of the Yale cheerleading squad and was initiated into the Skull and Bones secret society. He graduated Phi Beta Kappa in 1948 with a Bachelor of Arts degree in economics.

== Business career (1948–1963) ==
After graduating from Yale, Bush moved his young family to West Texas. Biographer Jon Meacham writes that Bush&#x27;s relocation to Texas allowed him to move out of the &quot;daily shadow of his Wall Street father and Grandfather Walker, two dominant figures in the financial world,&quot; but would still allow Bush to &quot;call on their connections if he needed to raise capital.&quot; His first position in Texas was an oil field equipment salesman for Dresser Industries, which was led by family friend Neil Mallon. While working for Dresser, Bush lived in various places with his family: Odessa, Texas; Ventura, Bakersfield and Compton, California; and Midland, Texas. In 1952, he volunteered for the successful presidential campaign of Republican candidate Dwight D. Eisenhower. That same year, his father won election to represent Connecticut in the United States Senate as a member of the Republican Party.

With support from Mallon and Bush&#x27;s uncle, George Herbert Walker Jr., Bush and John Overbey launched the Bush-Overbey Oil Development Company in 1951. In 1953, he co-founded the Zapata Petroleum Corporation, an oil company that drilled in the Permian Basin in Texas. In 1954, he was named president of the Zapata Offshore Company, a subsidiary which specialized in offshore drilling. Shortly after the subsidiary became independent in 1959, Bush moved the company and his family from Midland to Houston. There, he befriended James Baker, a prominent attorney who later became an important political ally. Bush remained involved with Zapata until the mid-1960s, when he sold his stock in the company for approximately $1 million.

In 1988, &quot;The Nation&quot; published an article alleging that Bush worked as an operative of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) during the 1960s; Bush denied this claim.

== Early political career (1963–1971) ==
=== Entry into politics ===
By the early 1960s, Bush was widely regarded as an appealing political candidate, and some leading Democrats attempted to convince Bush to become a Democrat. He declined to leave the Republican Party, later citing his belief that the national Democratic Party favored &quot;big, centralized government&quot;. The Democratic Party had historically dominated Texas, but Republicans scored their first major victory in the state with John G. Tower&#x27;s victory in a 1961 special election to the United States Senate. Motivated by Tower&#x27;s victory and hoping to prevent the far-right John Birch Society from coming to power, Bush ran for the chairmanship of the Harris County Republican Party, winning election in February 1963. Like most other Texas Republicans, Bush supported conservative Senator Barry Goldwater over the more centrist Nelson Rockefeller in the 1964 Republican Party presidential primaries.

In 1964, Bush sought to unseat liberal Democrat Ralph W. Yarborough in Texas&#x27;s U.S. Senate election. Bolstered by superior fundraising, Bush won the Republican primary by defeating former gubernatorial nominee Jack Cox in a run-off election. In the general election, Bush attacked Yarborough&#x27;s vote for the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which banned racial and gender discrimination in public institutions and many privately owned businesses. Bush argued that the act unconstitutionally expanded the federal government&#x27;s powers, but he was privately uncomfortable with the racial politics of opposing the act. He lost the election 56 percent to 44 percent, though he did run well ahead of Barry Goldwater, the Republican presidential nominee. Despite the loss, &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported that Bush was &quot;rated by political friend and foe alike as the Republicans&#x27; best prospect in Texas because of his attractive personal qualities and the strong campaign he put up for the Senate&quot;.

=== U.S. House of Representatives ===
In 1966, Bush ran for the United States House of Representatives in Texas&#x27;s 7th congressional district, a newly redistricted seat in the Greater Houston area. Initial polling showed him trailing his Democratic opponent, Harris County District Attorney Frank Briscoe, but he ultimately won the race with 57 percent of the vote. To woo potential candidates in the South and Southwest, House Republicans secured Bush an appointment to the powerful United States House Committee on Ways and Means, making Bush the first freshman to serve on the committee since 1904. His voting record in the House was generally conservative. He supported the Nixon administration&#x27;s Vietnam policies but broke with Republicans on the issue of birth control, which he supported. He also voted for the Civil Rights Act of 1968, although it was generally unpopular in his district. In 1968, Bush joined several other Republicans in issuing the party&#x27;s Response to the State of the Union address; Bush&#x27;s part of the address focused on a call for fiscal responsibility.

Though most other Texas Republicans supported Ronald Reagan in the 1968 Republican Party presidential primaries, Bush endorsed Richard Nixon, who went on to win the party&#x27;s nomination. Nixon considered selecting Bush as his running mate in the 1968 presidential election, but he ultimately chose Spiro Agnew instead. Bush won re-election to the House unopposed, while Nixon defeated Hubert Humphrey in the presidential election. In 1970, with President Nixon&#x27;s support, Bush gave up his seat in the House to run for the Senate against Yarborough. Bush easily won the Republican primary, but Yarborough was defeated by the more centrist Lloyd Bentsen in the Democratic primary. Ultimately, Bentsen defeated Bush, taking 53.5 percent of the vote.

== Nixon and Ford administrations (1971–1977) ==
=== Ambassador to the United Nations ===
After the 1970 Senate election, Bush accepted a position as a senior adviser to the president, but he convinced Nixon to instead appoint him as the U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations. The position represented Bush&#x27;s first foray into foreign policy, as well as his first major experiences with the Soviet Union and China, the two major U.S. rivals in the Cold War. During Bush&#x27;s tenure, the Nixon administration pursued a policy of détente, seeking to ease tensions with both the Soviet Union and China. Bush&#x27;s ambassadorship was marked by a defeat on the China question, as the United Nations General Assembly voted, in Resolution 2758, to expel the Republic of China and replace it with the People&#x27;s Republic of China in October 1971. In the 1971 crisis in Pakistan, Bush supported an Indian motion at the UN General Assembly to condemn the Pakistani government of Yahya Khan for waging genocide in East Pakistan (modern Bangladesh), referring to the &quot;tradition which we have supported that the human rights question transcended domestic jurisdiction and should be freely debated&quot;. Bush&#x27;s support for India at the UN put him into conflict with Nixon who was supporting Pakistan, partly because Yahya Khan was a useful intermediary in his attempts to reach out to China and partly because the president was fond of Yahya Khan. In 1972, during a controversy over whether the United States was intentionally bombing civilian hydrological infrastructure in Vietnam, Bush was sent by Nixon to convince Kurt Waldheim of the United States&#x27; position. Bush, who was himself a fighter pilot in the Second World War, was &quot;unwilling to press his assigned case that the dikes had been spared,&quot; and told reporters &quot;I think that the best thing I can do on the subject is shut up.&quot;

=== Chairman of the Republican National Committee ===
After Nixon won a landslide victory in the 1972 presidential election, he appointed Bush as chair of the Republican National Committee (RNC). In that position, he was charged with fundraising, candidate recruitment, and making appearances on behalf of the party in the media.

When Agnew was being investigated for corruption, Bush assisted, at the request of Nixon and Agnew, in pressuring John Glenn Beall Jr., the U.S. Senator from Maryland, to force his brother, George Beall the U.S. Attorney in Maryland, to shut down the investigation into Agnew. Attorney Beall ignored the pressure.

During Bush&#x27;s tenure at the RNC, the Watergate scandal emerged into public view; the scandal originated from the June 1972 break-in of the Democratic National Committee but also involved later efforts to cover up the break-in by Nixon and other members of the White House. Bush initially defended Nixon steadfastly, but as Nixon&#x27;s complicity became clear he focused more on defending the Republican Party.

Following the resignation of Vice President Agnew in 1973 for a scandal unrelated to Watergate, Bush was considered for the position of vice president, but the appointment instead went to Gerald Ford. After the public release of an audio recording that confirmed that Nixon had plotted to use the CIA to cover up the Watergate break-in, Bush joined other party leaders in urging Nixon to resign. When Nixon resigned on August 9, 1974, Bush noted in his diary that &quot;There was an aura of sadness, like somebody died... The [resignation] speech was vintage Nixon—a kick or two at the press—enormous strains. One couldn&#x27;t help but look at the family and the whole thing and think of his accomplishments and then think of the shame... [President Gerald Ford&#x27;s swearing-in offered] indeed a new spirit, a new lift.&quot;

=== Head of U.S. Liaison Office in China ===

Upon his ascension to the presidency, Ford strongly considered Bush, Donald Rumsfeld, and Nelson Rockefeller for the vacant position of vice president. Ford ultimately chose Nelson Rockefeller, partly because of the publication of a news report claiming that Bush&#x27;s 1970 campaign had benefited from a secret fund set up by Nixon; Bush was later cleared of any suspicion by a special prosecutor. Bush accepted appointment as Chief of the U.S. Liaison Office in the People&#x27;s Republic of China, making him the de facto ambassador to China. According to biographer Jon Meacham, Bush&#x27;s time in China convinced him that American engagement abroad was needed to ensure global stability and that the United States &quot;needed to be visible but not pushy, muscular but not domineering&quot;.

=== Director of Central Intelligence ===

In January 1976, Ford brought Bush back to Washington to become the Director of Central Intelligence (DCI), placing him in charge of the CIA. In the aftermath of the Watergate scandal and the Vietnam War, the CIA&#x27;s reputation had been damaged for its role in various covert operations. Bush was tasked with restoring the agency&#x27;s morale and public reputation. During Bush&#x27;s year in charge of the CIA, the U.S. national security apparatus actively supported Operation Condor operations and right-wing military dictatorships in Latin America.

Meanwhile, Ford decided to drop Rockefeller from the ticket for the 1976 presidential election; he considered Bush as his running mate, but ultimately chose Bob Dole. In his capacity as DCI, Bush gave national security briefings to Jimmy Carter both as a presidential candidate and as president-elect.

== 1980 presidential election ==
=== Presidential campaign ===
Bush&#x27;s tenure at the CIA ended after Carter narrowly defeated Ford in the 1976 presidential election. Out of public office for the first time since the 1960s, Bush became chairman on the executive committee of the First International Bank in Houston. He also spent a year as a part-time professor of Administrative Science at Rice University&#x27;s Jones School of Business, continued his membership in the Council on Foreign Relations, and joined the Trilateral Commission. Meanwhile, he began to lay the groundwork for his candidacy in the 1980 Republican Party presidential primaries. In the 1980 Republican primary campaign, Bush faced Ronald Reagan, who was widely regarded as the front-runner, as well as other contenders like Senator Bob Dole, Senator Howard Baker, Texas Governor John Connally, Congressman Phil Crane, and Congressman John B. Anderson.

Bush&#x27;s campaign cast him as a youthful, &quot;thinking man&#x27;s candidate&quot; who would emulate the pragmatic conservatism of President Eisenhower. Amid the Soviet–Afghan War, which brought an end to a period of détente, and the Iran hostage crisis, in which 52 Americans were taken hostage, the campaign highlighted Bush&#x27;s foreign policy experience. At the outset of the race, Bush focused heavily on winning the January 21 Iowa caucuses, making 31 visits to the state. He won a close victory in Iowa with 31.5% to Reagan&#x27;s 29.4%. After the win, Bush stated that his campaign was full of momentum, or &quot;the Big Mo&quot;, and Reagan reorganized his campaign. Partly in response to the Bush campaign&#x27;s frequent questioning of Reagan&#x27;s age (Reagan turned 69 in 1980), the Reagan campaign stepped up attacks on Bush, painting him as an elitist who was not truly committed to conservatism. Prior to the New Hampshire primary, Bush and Reagan agreed to a two-person debate, organized by &quot;The Nashua Telegraph&quot; but paid for by the Reagan campaign.

Days before the debate, Reagan announced that he would invite four other candidates to the debate; Bush, who had hoped that the one-on-one debate would allow him to emerge as the main alternative to Reagan in the primaries, refused to debate the other candidates. All six candidates took the stage, but Bush refused to speak in the presence of the other candidates. Ultimately, the other four candidates left the stage, and the debate continued, but Bush&#x27;s refusal to debate anyone other than Reagan badly damaged his campaign in New Hampshire. He decisively lost New Hampshire&#x27;s primary to Reagan, winning just 23 percent of the vote. Bush revitalized his campaign with a victory in Massachusetts but lost the next several primaries. As Reagan built up a commanding delegate lead, Bush refused to end his campaign, but the other candidates dropped out of the race. Criticizing his more conservative rival&#x27;s policy proposals, Bush famously labeled Reagan&#x27;s supply side–influenced plans for massive tax cuts as &quot;voodoo economics&quot;. Though he favored lower taxes, Bush feared that dramatic reductions in taxation would lead to deficits and, in turn, cause inflation.

=== Vice presidential campaign ===

After Reagan clinched a majority of delegates in late May, Bush reluctantly dropped out of the race. At the 1980 Republican National Convention, Reagan made the last-minute decision to select Bush as his vice presidential nominee after negotiations with Ford regarding a Reagan–Ford ticket collapsed. Though Reagan had resented many of the Bush campaign&#x27;s attacks during the primary campaign, and several conservative leaders had actively opposed Bush&#x27;s nomination, Reagan ultimately decided that Bush&#x27;s popularity with moderate Republicans made him the best and safest pick. Bush, who had believed his political career might be over following the primaries, eagerly accepted the position and threw himself into campaigning for the Reagan–Bush ticket. The 1980 general election campaign between Reagan and Carter was conducted amid a multitude of domestic concerns and the ongoing Iran hostage crisis, and Reagan sought to focus the race on Carter&#x27;s handling of the economy. Though the race was widely regarded as a close contest for most of the campaign, Reagan ultimately won over the large majority of undecided voters. Reagan took 50.7 percent of the popular vote and 489 of the 538 electoral votes, while Carter won 41% of the popular vote and John Anderson, running as an independent candidate, won 6.6% of the popular vote.

== Vice presidency (1981–1989) ==


As vice president, Bush generally maintained a low profile, recognizing the constitutional limits of the office; he avoided decision-making or criticizing Reagan in any way. This approach helped him earn Reagan&#x27;s trust, easing tensions left over from their earlier rivalry. Bush also generally enjoyed a good relationship with Reagan staffers, including Bush&#x27;s close friend James Baker, who served as Reagan&#x27;s initial chief of staff. His understanding of the vice presidency was heavily influenced by Vice President Walter Mondale, who enjoyed a strong relationship with Carter in part because of his ability to avoid confrontations with senior staff and Cabinet members, and by Vice President Nelson Rockefeller&#x27;s difficult relationship with some members of the White House staff during the Ford administration. The Bushes attended a large number of public and ceremonial events in their positions, including many state funerals, which became a common joke for comedians. As the president of the Senate, Bush also stayed in contact with members of Congress and kept the president informed on occurrences on Capitol Hill.

=== First term ===

On March 30, 1981, while Bush was in Texas, Reagan was shot and seriously wounded by John Hinckley Jr. Bush immediately flew back to Washington D.C.; when his plane landed, his aides advised him to proceed directly to the White House by helicopter to show that the government was still functioning. Bush rejected the idea, fearing that such a dramatic scene risked giving the impression that he sought to usurp Reagan&#x27;s powers and prerogatives. During Reagan&#x27;s short period of incapacity, Bush presided over Cabinet meetings, met with congressional and foreign leaders, and briefed reporters. Still, he consistently rejected invoking the Twenty-fifth Amendment. Bush&#x27;s handling of the attempted assassination and its aftermath made a positive impression on Reagan, who recovered and returned to work within two weeks of the shooting. From then on, the two men would have regular Thursday lunches in the Oval Office.

Reagan assigned Bush to chair two special task forces, one on deregulation and one on international drug smuggling. Both were popular issues with conservatives, and Bush, largely a moderate, began courting them through his work. The deregulation task force reviewed hundreds of rules, making specific recommendations on which ones to amend or revise to curb the size of the federal government. The Reagan administration&#x27;s deregulation push strongly impacted broadcasting, finance, resource extraction, and other economic activities, and the administration eliminated numerous government positions. Bush also oversaw the administration&#x27;s national security crisis management organization, which had traditionally been the responsibility of the National Security Advisor. In 1983, Bush toured Western Europe as part of the Reagan administration&#x27;s ultimately successful efforts to convince skeptical NATO allies to support the deployment of Pershing II missiles.

Reagan&#x27;s approval ratings fell after his first year in office, but they bounced back when the United States began to emerge from recession in 1983. Former vice president Walter Mondale was nominated by the Democratic Party in the 1984 presidential election. Down in the polls, Mondale selected Congresswoman Geraldine Ferraro as his running mate in hopes of galvanizing support for his campaign, thus making Ferraro the first female major party vice presidential nominee in U.S. history. She and Bush squared off in a single televised vice presidential debate. Public opinion polling consistently showed a Reagan lead in the 1984 campaign, and Mondale was unable to shake up the race. In the end, Reagan won re-election, winning 49 of 50 states and receiving 59% of the popular vote to Mondale&#x27;s 41%.

=== Second term ===
Mikhail Gorbachev came to power in the Soviet Union in 1985. Rejecting the ideological rigidity of his three elderly sick predecessors, Gorbachev insisted on urgently needed economic and political reforms called &quot;glasnost&quot; (openness) and &quot;perestroika&quot; (restructuring). At the 1987 Washington Summit, Gorbachev and Reagan signed the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, which committed both signatories to the total abolition of their respective short-range and medium-range missile stockpiles. The treaty began a new era of trade, openness, and cooperation between the two powers. President Reagan and Secretary of State George Shultz took the lead in these negotiations, but Bush sat in on many meetings. Bush did not agree with many of the Reagan policies, but he did tell Gorbachev that he would seek to continue improving relations if he succeeded Reagan. On July 13, 1985, Bush became the first vice president to serve as acting president when Reagan underwent surgery to remove polyps from his colon; Bush served as the acting president for approximately eight hours.

In 1986, the Reagan administration was shaken by a scandal when it was revealed that administration officials had secretly arranged weapon sales to Iran during the Iran–Iraq War. The officials had used the proceeds to fund the Contra rebels in their fight against the leftist Sandinista government in Nicaragua. Democrats had passed a law that appropriated funds could not be used to help the Contras. Instead, the administration used non-appropriated funds from the sales. When news of the affair broke to the media, Bush stated that he had been &quot;out of the loop&quot; and unaware of the diversion of funds. Biographer Jon Meacham writes that &quot;no evidence was ever produced proving Bush was aware of the diversion to the contras,&quot; but he criticizes Bush&#x27;s &quot;out of the loop&quot; characterization, writing that the &quot;record is clear that Bush was aware that the United States, in contravention of its own stated policy, was trading arms for hostages&quot;. The Iran–Contra scandal, as it became known, did serious damage to the Reagan presidency, raising questions about Reagan&#x27;s competency. Congress established the Tower Commission to investigate the scandal, and, at Reagan&#x27;s request, a panel of federal judges appointed Lawrence Walsh as a special prosecutor charged with investigating the Iran–Contra scandal. The investigations continued after Reagan left office, and, though Bush was never charged with a crime, the Iran–Contra scandal would remain a political liability for him.

On July 3, 1988, the guided missile cruiser accidentally shot down Iran Air Flight 655, killing 290 passengers. Bush, then-vice president, defended his country at the United Nations by arguing that the U.S. attack had been a wartime incident and the crew of &quot;Vincennes&quot; had acted appropriately to the situation.

==== 1988 presidential election ====
Bush began planning for a presidential run after the 1984 election, and he officially entered the 1988 Republican Party presidential primaries in October 1987. He put together a campaign led by Reagan staffer Lee Atwater, which also included his son, George W. Bush, and media consultant Roger Ailes. Though he had moved to the right during his time as vice president, endorsing a Human Life Amendment and repudiating his earlier comments on &quot;voodoo economics&quot;, Bush still faced opposition from many conservatives in the Republican Party. His major rivals for the Republican nomination were Senate Minority Leader Bob Dole of Kansas, Representative Jack Kemp of New York, and Christian televangelist Pat Robertson. Reagan did not publicly endorse any candidate but privately expressed support for Bush.

Though considered the early front-runner for the nomination, Bush came in third in the Iowa caucus, behind Dole and Robertson. Much as Reagan had done in 1980, Bush reorganized his staff and concentrated on the New Hampshire primary. With help from Governor John H. Sununu and an effective campaign attacking Dole for raising taxes, Bush overcame an initial polling deficit and won New Hampshire with 39 percent of the vote. After Bush won South Carolina and 16 of the 17 states holding a primary on Super Tuesday, his competitors dropped out of the race.

Bush, occasionally criticized for his lack of eloquence compared to Reagan, delivered a well-received speech at the Republican convention. Known as the &quot;thousand points of light&quot; speech, it described Bush&#x27;s vision of America: he endorsed the Pledge of Allegiance, prayer in schools, capital punishment, and gun rights. Bush also pledged that he would not raise taxes, stating: &quot;Congress will push me to raise taxes, and I&#x27;ll say no, and they&#x27;ll push, and I&#x27;ll say no, and they&#x27;ll push again. And all I can say to them is: read my lips. No new taxes.&quot; Bush selected little-known Senator Dan Quayle of Indiana as his running mate. Though Quayle had compiled an unremarkable record in Congress, he was popular among many conservatives, and the campaign hoped that Quayle&#x27;s youth would appeal to younger voters.

Meanwhile, the Democratic Party nominated Governor Michael Dukakis, known for presiding over an economic turnaround in Massachusetts. Leading in the general election polls against Bush, Dukakis ran an ineffective, low-risk campaign. The Bush campaign attacked Dukakis as an unpatriotic liberal extremist and seized on the Willie Horton case, in which a convicted felon from Massachusetts raped a woman while on a prison furlough, a program Dukakis supported as governor. The Bush campaign charged that Dukakis presided over a &quot;revolving door&quot; that allowed dangerous convicted felons to leave prison. Dukakis damaged his own campaign with a widely mocked ride in an M1 Abrams tank and poor performance at the second presidential debate. Bush also attacked Dukakis for opposing a law that would require all students to recite the Pledge of Allegiance. The election is widely considered to have had a high level of negative campaigning, though political scientist John Geer has argued that the share of negative ads was in line with previous presidential elections.

Bush defeated Dukakis by a margin of 426 to 111 in the Electoral College, and he took 53.4 percent of the national popular vote. Bush ran well in all the major regions of the country, but especially in the South. He became the fourth sitting vice president to be elected president and the first to do so since Martin Van Buren in 1836 and the first person to succeed a president from his own party via election since Herbert Hoover in 1929. In the concurrent congressional elections, Democrats retained control of both houses of Congress.

== Presidency (1989–1993) ==


Bush was inaugurated on January 20, 1989, succeeding Reagan. In his inaugural address, Bush said:
Bush&#x27;s first major appointment was that of James Baker as Secretary of State. Leadership of the Department of Defense went to Dick Cheney, who had previously served as Gerald Ford&#x27;s chief of staff and would later serve as vice president under his son George W. Bush. Jack Kemp joined the administration as Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, while Elizabeth Dole, the wife of Bob Dole and a former Secretary of Transportation, became the Secretary of Labor under Bush. Bush retained several Reagan officials, including Secretary of the Treasury Nicholas F. Brady, Attorney General Dick Thornburgh, and Secretary of Education Lauro Cavazos. New Hampshire Governor John Sununu, a strong supporter of Bush during the 1988 campaign, became chief of staff. Brent Scowcroft was appointed as the National Security Advisor, a role he had also held under Ford.

=== Foreign affairs ===
==== End of the Cold War ====
During the first year of his tenure, Bush paused Reagan&#x27;s détente policy toward the Soviet Union. Bush and his advisers were initially divided on Gorbachev; some administration officials saw him as a democratic reformer, but others suspected him of trying to make the minimum changes necessary to restore the Soviet Union to a competitive position with the United States. In 1989, all the Communist governments collapsed in Eastern Europe. Gorbachev declined to send in the Soviet military, effectively abandoning the Brezhnev Doctrine. The U.S. was not directly involved in these upheavals, but the Bush administration avoided gloating over the demise of the Eastern Bloc to avoid undermining further democratic reforms.

Bush and Gorbachev met at the Malta Summit in December 1989. Though many on the right remained wary of Gorbachev, Bush came away believing that Gorbachev would negotiate in good faith. For the remainder of his term, Bush sought cooperative relations with Gorbachev, believing he was the key to peace. The primary issue at the Malta Summit was the potential reunification of Germany. While Britain and France were wary of a reunified Germany, Bush joined German chancellor Helmut Kohl in pushing for German reunification. Bush believed that a reunified Germany would serve American interests. After extensive negotiations, Gorbachev agreed to allow a reunified Germany to be a part of NATO, and Germany officially reunified in October 1990 after paying billions of marks to Moscow.

Gorbachev used force to suppress nationalist movements within the Soviet Union itself. A crisis in Lithuania left Bush in a difficult position, as he needed Gorbachev&#x27;s cooperation in the reunification of Germany and feared that the collapse of the Soviet Union could leave nuclear arms in dangerous hands. The Bush administration mildly protested Gorbachev&#x27;s suppression of Lithuania&#x27;s independence movement but took no action to intervene directly. Bush warned independence movements of the disorder that could come with secession from the Soviet Union; in a 1991 address that critics labeled the &quot;Chicken Kiev speech&quot;, he cautioned against &quot;suicidal nationalism&quot;. In July 1991, Bush and Gorbachev signed the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START I) treaty, in which both countries agreed to cut their strategic nuclear weapons by 30 percent.

In August 1991, hard-line Communists launched a coup against Gorbachev; while the coup quickly fell apart, it broke the remaining power of Gorbachev and the central Soviet government. Later that month, Gorbachev resigned as general secretary of the Communist party, and Russian president Boris Yeltsin ordered the seizure of Soviet property. Gorbachev clung to power as the President of the Soviet Union until December 1991, when the Soviet Union dissolved. Fifteen states emerged from the Soviet Union, and of those states, Russia was the largest and most populous. Bush and Yeltsin met in February 1992, declaring a new era of &quot;friendship and partnership&quot;. In January 1993, Bush and Yeltsin agreed to START II, which provided for further nuclear arms reductions on top of the original START treaty.

==== Invasion of Panama ====
Through the late 1980s, the U.S. provided aid to Manuel Noriega, the anti-Communist leader of Panama. Noriega had long-standing ties to United States intelligence agencies, including during Bush&#x27;s tenure as Director of Central Intelligence, and was also deeply involved in drug trafficking. In May 1989, Noriega annulled the results of a democratic presidential election in which Guillermo Endara had been elected. Bush objected to the annulment of the election and worried about the status of the Panama Canal with Noriega still in office. Bush dispatched 2,000 soldiers to the country, where they began conducting regular military exercises violating prior treaties. After Panamanian forces shot a U.S. serviceman in December 1989, Bush ordered the United States invasion of Panama, known as &quot;Operation Just Cause&quot;. The invasion was the first large-scale American military operation unrelated to the Cold War in more than 40 years. American forces quickly took control of the Panama Canal Zone and Panama City. Noriega surrendered on January 3, 1990, and was quickly transported to a prison in the United States. Twenty-three Americans died in the operation, while another 394 were wounded. Noriega was convicted and imprisoned on racketeering and drug trafficking charges in April 1992. Historian Stewart Brewer argues that the invasion &quot;represented a new era in American foreign policy&quot; because Bush did not justify the invasion under the Monroe Doctrine or the threat of Communism, but rather because it was in the best interests of the United States.

==== Gulf War ====

Faced with massive debts and low oil prices in the aftermath of the Iran–Iraq War, Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein decided to conquer the country of Kuwait, a small, oil-rich country situated on Iraq&#x27;s southern border. After Iraq invaded Kuwait in August 1990, Bush imposed economic sanctions on Iraq and assembled a multi-national coalition opposed to the invasion. Some in the administration feared that a failure to respond to the invasion would embolden Hussein to attack Saudi Arabia or Israel. Robert Gates attempted to convince Brent Scowcroft that Bush should tone down the rhetoric but Bush insisted it was his primary concern to discourage other countries from &quot;unanswered aggression&quot;. Bush also wanted to ensure continued access to oil, as Iraq and Kuwait collectively accounted for 20 percent of the world&#x27;s oil production, and Saudi Arabia produced another 26 percent of the world&#x27;s oil supply.

At Bush&#x27;s insistence, in November 1990, the United Nations Security Council approved a resolution authorizing the use of force if Iraq did not withdraw from Kuwait by January 15, 1991. Gorbachev&#x27;s support and China&#x27;s abstention helped ensure passage of the United Nations resolution. Bush convinced Britain, France, and other nations to commit soldiers to an operation against Iraq. He won important financial backing from Germany, Japan, South Korea, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates. In January 1991, Bush asked Congress to approve a joint resolution authorizing a war against Iraq. Bush believed that the United Nations resolution had already provided him with the necessary authorization to launch a military operation against Iraq. Still, he wanted to show that the nation was united behind military action. Despite the opposition of a majority of Democrats in both the House and the Senate, Congress approved the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 1991.

After the January 15 deadline passed without an Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait, U.S. and coalition forces conducted a bombing campaign that devastated Iraq&#x27;s power grid and communications network and resulted in the desertion of about 100,000 Iraqi soldiers. In retaliation, Iraq launched Scud missiles at Israel and Saudi Arabia, but most missiles did little damage. On February 23, coalition forces began a ground invasion into Kuwait, evicting Iraqi forces by the end of February 27. About 300 Americans and approximately 65 soldiers from other coalition nations died during the military action. A ceasefire was arranged on March 3, and the United Nations passed a resolution establishing a peacekeeping force in a demilitarized zone between Kuwait and Iraq. A March 1991 Gallup poll showed that Bush had an approval rating of 89 percent, the highest presidential approval rating in the history of Gallup polling. After 1991, the United Nations maintained economic sanctions against Iraq, and the United Nations Special Commission was assigned to ensure that Iraq did not revive its weapons of mass destruction program.

==== NAFTA ====

In 1987, the U.S. and Canada reached a free trade agreement that eliminated many tariffs between the two countries. President Reagan had intended it as the first step towards a larger trade agreement to eliminate most tariffs among the United States, Canada, and Mexico. The Bush administration, along with the Progressive Conservative Canadian prime minister Brian Mulroney, spearheaded the negotiations of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) with Mexico. In addition to lowering tariffs, the proposed treaty would affect patents, copyrights, and trademarks. In 1991, Bush sought fast track authority, which grants the president the power to submit an international trade agreement to Congress without the possibility of amendment. Despite congressional opposition led by House Majority Leader Dick Gephardt, both houses of Congress voted to grant Bush fast track authority. NAFTA was signed in December 1992, after Bush lost reelection, but President Clinton won ratification of NAFTA in 1993. NAFTA was controversial for its impact on wages, jobs, and overall economic growth. In 2020, it was replaced entirely by the United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement (USMCA).

=== Domestic affairs ===
==== Economy and fiscal issues ====
The U.S. economy had generally performed well since emerging from recession in late 1982, but it slipped into a mild recession in 1990. The unemployment rate rose from 5.9 percent in 1989 to a high of 7.8 percent in mid-1991. Large federal deficits, spawned during the Reagan years, rose from $152.1 billion in 1989 to $220 billion for 1990; the $220 billion deficit represented a threefold increase since 1980. As the public became increasingly concerned about the economy and other domestic affairs, Bush&#x27;s well-received handling of foreign affairs became less of an issue for most voters. Bush&#x27;s top domestic priority was to end federal budget deficits, which he saw as a liability for the country&#x27;s long-term economic health and standing in the world. As he was opposed to major defense spending cuts and had pledged not to raise taxes, the president had major difficulties in balancing the budget.

Bush and congressional leaders agreed to avoid major changes to the budget for fiscal year 1990, which began in October 1989. However, both sides knew spending cuts or new taxes would be necessary for the following year&#x27;s budget to avoid the draconian automatic domestic spending cuts required by the Gramm–Rudman–Hollings Balanced Budget Act of 1987. Bush and other leaders also wanted to cut deficits because Federal Reserve Chair Alan Greenspan refused to lower interest rates and thus stimulate economic growth unless the federal budget deficit was reduced. In a statement released in late June 1990, Bush said that he would be open to a deficit reduction program which included spending cuts, incentives for economic growth, budget process reform, as well as tax increases. To fiscal conservatives in the Republican Party, Bush&#x27;s statement represented a betrayal, and they heavily criticized him for compromising so early in the negotiations.

In September 1990, Bush and congressional Democrats announced a compromise to cut mandatory and discretionary programs funding while raising revenue, partly through a higher gas tax. The compromise additionally included a &quot;pay as you go&quot; provision that required that new programs be paid for at the time of implementation. House Minority Whip Newt Gingrich led the conservative opposition to the bill, strongly opposing any form of tax increase. Some liberals also criticized the budget cuts in the compromise, and in October, the House rejected the deal, resulting in a brief government shutdown. Without the strong backing of the Republican Party, Bush agreed to another compromise bill, this one more favorable to Democrats. The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 (OBRA-90), enacted on October 27, 1990, dropped much of the gasoline tax increase in favor of higher income taxes on top earners. It included cuts to domestic spending, but the cuts were not as deep as those proposed in the original compromise. Bush&#x27;s decision to sign the bill damaged his standing with conservatives and the general public, but it also laid the groundwork for the budget surpluses of the late 1990s.

==== Discrimination ====
The disabled had not received legal protections under the landmark Civil Rights Act of 1964, and many faced discrimination and segregation by the time Bush took office. In 1988, Lowell P. Weicker Jr. and Tony Coelho introduced the Americans with Disabilities Act, which barred employment discrimination against qualified individuals with disabilities. The bill had passed the Senate but not the House and was reintroduced in 1989. Though some conservatives opposed the bill due to its costs and potential burdens on businesses, Bush strongly supported it, partly because his son, Neil, had struggled with dyslexia. After the bill passed both houses of Congress, Bush signed the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 into law in July 1990. The act required employers and public accommodations to make &quot;reasonable accommodations&quot; for disabled people while providing an exception when such accommodations imposed an &quot;undue hardship&quot;.

Senator Ted Kennedy later led the congressional passage of a separate civil rights bill designed to facilitate launching employment discrimination lawsuits. In vetoing the bill, Bush argued that it would lead to racial quotas in hiring. In November 1991, Bush signed the Civil Rights Act of 1991, which was largely similar to the bill he had vetoed in the previous year.

In August 1990, Bush signed the Ryan White CARE Act, the largest federally funded program dedicated to assisting persons living with HIV/AIDS. Throughout his presidency, the AIDS epidemic grew dramatically in the U.S. and around the world, and Bush often found himself at odds with AIDS activist groups who criticized him for not placing a high priority on HIV/AIDS research and funding. Frustrated by the administration&#x27;s lack of urgency on the issue, ACT UP dumped the ashes of deceased HIV/AIDS patients on the White House lawn during a viewing of the AIDS Quilt in 1992. By that time, HIV had become the leading cause of death in the U.S. for men aged 25–44.

==== Environment ====
In June 1989, the Bush administration proposed a bill to amend the Clean Air Act. Working with Senate Majority Leader George J. Mitchell, the administration won passage of the amendments over the opposition of business-aligned members of Congress who feared the impact of tougher regulations. The legislation sought to curb acid rain and smog by requiring decreased emissions of chemicals such as sulfur dioxide, and was the first major update to the Clean Air Act since 1977. Bush also signed the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 in response to the &quot;Exxon Valdez&quot; oil spill. However, the League of Conservation Voters criticized some of Bush&#x27;s other environmental actions, including his opposition to stricter auto-mileage standards.

==== Points of Light ====
Bush devoted attention to voluntary service to solve some of America&#x27;s most serious social problems. He often used the &quot;thousand points of light&quot; theme to describe the power of citizens to solve community problems. In his 1989 inaugural address, Bush said, &quot;I have spoken of a thousand points of light, of all the community organizations that are spread like stars throughout the Nation, doing good.&quot; During his presidency, Bush honored numerous volunteers with the Daily Point of Light Award, a tradition that his presidential successors continued. In 1990, the Points of Light Foundation was created as a nonprofit organization in Washington to promote this spirit of volunteerism. In 2007, the Points of Light Foundation merged with the Hands On Network to create a new organization, Points of Light.

==== Judicial appointments ====

Bush appointed two justices to the Supreme Court of the United States. In 1990, Bush appointed a largely unknown state appellate judge, David Souter, to replace liberal icon William J. Brennan Jr. Souter was easily confirmed and served until 2009, but joined the liberal bloc of the court, disappointing Bush. In 1991, Bush nominated conservative federal judge Clarence Thomas to succeed Thurgood Marshall, a long-time liberal stalwart. Thomas, the former head of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), faced heavy opposition in the Senate, as well as from pro-choice groups and the NAACP. His nomination faced another difficulty when Anita Hill accused Thomas of having sexually harassed her during his time as the chair of EEOC. Thomas won confirmation in a narrow 52–48 vote; 43 Republicans and 9 Democrats voted to confirm Thomas&#x27;s nomination, while 46 Democrats and 2 Republicans voted against confirmation. Thomas became one of the most conservative justices of his era.

==== Other issues ====
Bush&#x27;s education platform consisted mainly of offering federal support for a variety of innovations, such as open enrollment, incentive pay for outstanding teachers, and rewards for schools that improve performance with underprivileged children. Though Bush did not pass a major educational reform package during his presidency, his ideas influenced later reform efforts, including Goals 2000 and the No Child Left Behind Act. Bush signed the Immigration Act of 1990, which led to a 40 percent increase in legal immigration to the United States. The act more than doubled the number of visas given to immigrants on the basis of job skills. In the wake of the savings and loan crisis, Bush proposed a $50 billion package to rescue the savings and loans industry, and also proposed the creation of the Office of Thrift Supervision to regulate the industry. Congress passed the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989, which incorporated most of Bush&#x27;s proposals.

=== Public image ===
Bush was widely seen as a &quot;pragmatic caretaker&quot; president who lacked a unified and compelling long-term theme in his efforts. A Bush sound bite, referring to the issue of overarching purpose as &quot;the vision thing&quot;, has become a metonym applied to other political figures accused of similar difficulties. His ability to gain broad international support for the Gulf War and the war&#x27;s result were seen as both a diplomatic and military triumph, rousing bipartisan approval, though his decision to withdraw without removing Saddam Hussein left mixed feelings, and attention returned to the domestic front and a souring economy. A &quot;New York Times&quot; article mistakenly depicted Bush as being surprised to see a supermarket barcode reader; the report of his reaction exacerbated the notion that he was &quot;out of touch&quot;.

Bush was popular throughout most of his presidency. After the Gulf war concluded in February 1991, his approval rating saw a high of 89 percent, before gradually declining for the rest of the year, and eventually falling below 50 percent according to a January 1992 Gallup poll. His sudden drop in his favorability was likely due to the early 1990s recession, which shifted his image from &quot;conquering hero&quot; to &quot;politician befuddled by economic matters&quot;. At the elite level, several commentators and political experts lamented the state of American politics in 1991–1992 and reported the voters were angry. Many analysts blamed the poor quality of national election campaigns.

=== 1992 presidential campaign ===
Bush announced his reelection bid in early 1992; with a coalition victory in the Persian Gulf War and high approval ratings, Bush&#x27;s reelection initially looked likely. As a result, many leading Democrats, including Mario Cuomo, Dick Gephardt, and Al Gore, declined to seek their party&#x27;s presidential nomination. However, Bush&#x27;s tax increase angered many conservatives, who believed that Bush had strayed from the conservative principles of Ronald Reagan. He faced a challenge from conservative political columnist Pat Buchanan in the 1992 Republican primaries. Bush fended off Buchanan&#x27;s challenge and won his party&#x27;s nomination at the 1992 Republican National Convention. Still, the convention adopted a socially conservative platform strongly influenced by the Christian right.
Meanwhile, the Democrats nominated Governor Bill Clinton of Arkansas. A moderate who was affiliated with the Democratic Leadership Council (DLC), Clinton favored welfare reform, deficit reduction, and a tax cut for the middle class. In early 1992, the race took an unexpected twist when Texas billionaire H. Ross Perot launched a third-party bid, claiming that neither Republicans nor Democrats could eliminate the deficit and make government more efficient. His message appealed to voters across the political spectrum disappointed with both parties&#x27; perceived fiscal irresponsibility. Perot also attacked NAFTA, which he claimed would lead to major job losses. National polling taken in mid-1992 showed Perot in the lead, but Clinton experienced a surge through effective campaigning and the selection of Senator Al Gore, a popular and relatively young Southerner, as his running mate.

Clinton won the election, taking 43 percent of the popular vote and 370 electoral votes, while Bush won 37.5 percent of the popular vote and 168 electoral votes. Perot won 19% of the popular vote, one of the highest totals for a third-party candidate in U.S. history, drawing equally from both major candidates, according to exit polls. Clinton performed well in the Northeast, the Midwest, and the West Coast, while also waging the strongest Democratic campaign in the South since the 1976 election. Several factors were important in Bush&#x27;s defeat. The ailing economy which arose from recession may have been the main factor in Bush&#x27;s loss, as 7 in 10 voters said on election day that the economy was either &quot;not so good&quot; or &quot;poor&quot;. On the eve of the 1992 election, the unemployment rate stood at 7.8%, which was the highest it had been since 1984. The president was also damaged by his alienation of many conservatives in his party. Bush partially blamed Perot for his defeat, though exit polls showed that Perot drew his voters about equally from Clinton and Bush.

Despite his defeat, Bush left office with a 56 percent job approval rating in January 1993. Like many of his predecessors, Bush issued a series of pardons during his last days in office. In December 1992, he granted executive clemency to six former senior government officials implicated in the Iran-Contra scandal, most prominently former Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger. The charges against the six were that they lied to or withheld information from Congress. The pardons effectively brought an end to the Iran-Contra scandal.

According to Seymour Martin Lipset, the 1992 election had several unique characteristics. Voters felt that economic conditions were worse than they were, which harmed Bush. A rare event was the presence of a strong third-party candidate. Liberals launched a backlash against 12 years of a conservative White House. The chief factor was Clinton uniting his party and winning over several heterogeneous groups.

== Post-presidency (1993–2018) ==
=== Appearances ===
After leaving office, Bush and his wife built a retirement house in the community of West Oaks, Houston. He established a presidential office within the Park Laureate Building on Memorial Drive in Houston. He also frequently spent time at his vacation home in Kennebunkport, took annual cruises in Greece, went on fishing trips in Florida, and visited the Bohemian Club in Northern California. He declined to serve on corporate boards but delivered numerous paid speeches and was an adviser to The Carlyle Group, a private equity firm. He never published his memoirs, but he and Brent Scowcroft co-wrote &quot;A World Transformed&quot;, a 1998 work on foreign policy. Portions of his letters and his diary were later published as &quot;The China Diary of George H. W. Bush&quot; and &quot;All the Best, George Bush&quot;.

During a 1993 visit to Kuwait, Bush was targeted in an assassination plot directed by the Iraqi Intelligence Service. President Clinton retaliated when he ordered the firing of 23 cruise missiles at Iraqi Intelligence Service headquarters in Baghdad. Bush did not publicly comment on the assassination attempt or the missile strike, but privately spoke with Clinton shortly before the strike took place.

In the 1994 gubernatorial elections, his sons George W. and Jeb concurrently ran for Governor of Texas and Governor of Florida. Concerning their political careers, he advised them both that &quot;[a]t some point both of you may want to say &#x27;Well, I don&#x27;t agree with my Dad on that point&#x27; or &#x27;Frankly I think Dad was wrong on that.&#x27; Do it. Chart your own course, not just on the issues but on defining yourselves&quot;. George W. won his race against Ann Richards while Jeb lost to Lawton Chiles. After the results came in, the elder Bush told ABC, &quot;I have very mixed emotions. Proud father, is the way I would sum it all up.&quot; Jeb would again run for governor of Florida in 1998 and win at the same time that his brother George W. won re-election in Texas. It marked the second time in United States history that a pair of brothers served simultaneously as governors (the first of which spanned from 1967 to 1971, when Nelson Rockefeller and brother Winthrop Rockefeller were governors of New York and Arkansas respectively).

Bush supported his son&#x27;s candidacy in the 2000 presidential election but did not actively campaign in the election and did not deliver a speech at the 2000 Republican National Convention. George W. Bush defeated Al Gore in the 2000 election and was re-elected in 2004. Bush and his son thus became the second father–son pair to each serve as President of the United States, following John Adams and John Quincy Adams. Through previous administrations, the elder Bush had ubiquitously been known as &quot;George Bush&quot; or &quot;President Bush&quot;, but following his son&#x27;s election, the need to distinguish between them has made retronymic forms such as &quot;George H. W. Bush&quot; and &quot;George Bush Sr.&quot; and colloquialisms such as &quot;Bush 41&quot; and &quot;Bush the Elder&quot; more common. Bush advised his son on some personnel choices, approving of the selection of Dick Cheney as running mate and the retention of George Tenet as CIA Director. However, he was not consulted on all appointments, including that of his old rival, Donald Rumsfeld, as Secretary of Defense. Though he avoided giving unsolicited advice to his son, Bush and his son also discussed some policy matters, especially regarding national security issues.

In his retirement, Bush used the public spotlight to support various charities. Despite earlier political differences with Bill Clinton, the two former presidents eventually became friends. They appeared together in television ads, encouraging aid for victims of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami and Hurricane Katrina. However, when interviewed by Jon Meacham, Bush criticized Donald Rumsfeld, Dick Cheney, and even his son George W. Bush for their handling of foreign policy after the September 11 attacks.

=== Final years ===
Bush supported Republican John McCain in the 2008 presidential election, and Republican Mitt Romney in the 2012 presidential election, but both were defeated by Democrat Barack Obama. In 2011, Obama awarded Bush with the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian honor in the United States.

Bush supported his son Jeb&#x27;s bid in the 2016 Republican primaries. Jeb Bush&#x27;s campaign struggled, however, and he withdrew from the race during the primaries. Neither George H. W. nor George W. Bush endorsed the eventual Republican nominee, Donald Trump; all three Bushes emerged as frequent critics of Trump&#x27;s policies and speaking style, while Trump frequently criticized George W. Bush&#x27;s presidency. George H. W. later said he voted for the Democratic nominee, Hillary Clinton, in the general election. After the election, Bush wrote a letter to President-elect Donald Trump in January 2017 to inform him that because of his poor health, he would not be able to attend Trump&#x27;s inauguration on January 20; he gave him his best wishes.

In August 2017, after the violence at Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville, Virginia, both presidents Bush released a joint statement saying, &quot;America must always reject racial bigotry, anti-Semitism, and hatred in all forms[. ...] As we pray for Charlottesville, we are all reminded of the fundamental truths recorded by that city&#x27;s most prominent citizen in the Declaration of Independence: we are all created equal and endowed by our Creator with unalienable rights.&quot;

On April 17, 2018, Barbara Bush died at the age of 92 at her home in Houston, Texas. Her funeral was held at St. Martin&#x27;s Episcopal Church in Houston four days later. Bush, along with former presidents Barack Obama, George W. Bush (son), Bill Clinton and First Ladies Melania Trump, Michelle Obama, Laura Bush (daughter-in-law) and Hillary Clinton attended the funeral and posed together for a photo as a sign of unity.

On November 1, 2018, Bush went to the polls to vote early in the midterm elections. This would be his final public appearance.

== Death and funeral ==
After a long battle with vascular Parkinson&#x27;s disease, Bush died at his home in Houston on November 30, 2018, at the age of 94. At the time of his death he was the longest-lived U.S. president until March 22, 2019, when Jimmy Carter surpassed his lifespan. He was also the third-oldest vice president. Bush lay in state in the Rotunda of the U.S. Capitol from December 3 through December 5; he was the 12th U.S. president to be accorded this honor. Then, on December 5, Bush&#x27;s casket was transferred from the Capitol rotunda to Washington National Cathedral where a state funeral was held. After the funeral, Bush&#x27;s body was transported to George H.W. Bush Presidential Library in College Station, Texas, where he was buried next to his wife Barbara and daughter Robin. At the funeral, former president George W. Bush eulogized his father saying,
&quot;He looked for the good in each person, and he usually found it.&quot;

== Personal life ==
In May 1991, &quot;The New York Times&quot; revealed that Bush had developed Graves&#x27; disease, a non-contagious thyroid condition that his wife Barbara also had. Bush had two separate hip replacement surgeries in 2000 and 2007. Thereafter, Bush started to experience weakness in his legs, which was attributed to vascular parkinsonism, a form of Parkinson&#x27;s disease. He progressively developed problems walking, initially needing a walking stick for mobility aid before he eventually came to rely on a wheelchair from 2011 onwards.

Bush was a lifelong Episcopalian and a member of St. Martin&#x27;s Episcopal Church in Houston. As President, Bush regularly attended services at St. John&#x27;s Episcopal Church in Washington D.C. He cited various moments in his life on the deepening of his faith, including his escape from Japanese forces in 1944, and the death of his three-year-old daughter Robin in 1953. His faith was reflected in his &quot;thousand points of light&quot; speech, his support for prayer in schools, and his support for the pro-life movement (following his election as vice president). Shortly after his death, it was revealed that Bush secretly financed the education and food expenses of a schoolboy from the Philippines under the assumed name &quot;George Walker&quot; through the charity Compassion International.

== Legacy ==
=== Historical reputation ===

Polls of historians and political scientists have ranked Bush in the top half of presidents. A 2018 poll of the American Political Science Association&#x27;s Presidents and Executive Politics section ranked Bush as the 17th best president out of 44. A 2017 C-SPAN poll of historians also ranked Bush as the 20th best president out of 43. Richard Rose described Bush as a &quot;guardian&quot; president, and many other historians and political scientists have similarly described Bush as a passive, hands-off president who was &quot;largely content with things as they were&quot;. Professor Steven Knott writes that &quot;[g]enerally the Bush presidency is viewed as successful in foreign affairs but a disappointment in domestic affairs.&quot;

Biographer Jon Meacham writes that, after he left office, many Americans viewed Bush as &quot;a gracious and underappreciated man who had many virtues but who had failed to project enough of a distinctive identity and vision to overcome the economic challenges of 1991–92 and to win a second term.&quot; Bush himself noted that his legacy was &quot;lost between the glory of Reagan ... and the trials and tribulations of my sons.&quot; In the 2010s, Bush was fondly remembered for his willingness to compromise, which contrasted with the intensely partisan era that followed his presidency.

In 2018, &quot;Vox&quot; highlighted Bush for his &quot;pragmatism&quot; as a moderate Republican president by working across the aisle. They specifically noted Bush&#x27;s accomplishments within the domestic policy by making bipartisan deals, including raising the tax budget among the wealthy with the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990. Bush also helped pass the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 which &quot;The New York Times&quot; described as &quot;the most sweeping anti-discrimination law since the Civil Rights Act of 1964. In response to the &quot;Exxon Valdez&quot; oil spill, Bush built another bipartisan coalition to strengthen the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990. Bush also championed and signed into a law the Immigration Act of 1990, a sweeping bipartisan immigration reform act that made it easier for immigrants to legally enter the county, while also granting immigrants fleeing violence the temporary protected status visa, as well as lifted the pre-naturalization English testing process, and finally &quot;eliminated the exclusion of homosexuals under what Congress now deemed the medically unsound classification of &#x27;sexual deviant&#x27; that was included in the 1965 act.&quot; Bush stated, &quot;Immigration is not just a link to our past but it&#x27;s also a bridge to America&#x27;s future&quot;.

According to &quot;USA Today&quot;, the legacy of Bush&#x27;s presidency was defined by his victory over Iraq after the invasion of Kuwait and by his presiding over the dissolution of the Soviet Union and German reunification. Michael Beschloss and Strobe Talbott praise Bush&#x27;s handling of the Soviet Union, especially how he prodded Gorbachev in terms of releasing control over the satellite states and permitting German unification—and especially a united Germany in NATO. Andrew Bacevich judges the Bush administration as &quot;morally obtuse&quot; in the light of its &quot;business-as-usual&quot; attitude towards China after the massacre in Tiananmen Square and its uncritical support of Gorbachev as the Soviet Union disintegrated. David Rothkopf argues:

However, &quot;TIME&quot; has criticized Bush&#x27;s domestic policies involving &quot;drugs, homelessness, racial hostility, education gaps, [and] issues with the environment&quot;, and it argues that these issues in the United States became worse in the 21st century primarily due to Bush setting a poor example and his handling of these concepts during his presidency.

=== Memorials, awards, and honors ===

In 1990, &quot;Time&quot; magazine named him the Man of the Year. In 1997, the Houston Intercontinental Airport was renamed as the George Bush Intercontinental Airport. In 1999, the CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia, was named the &quot;George Bush Center for Intelligence&quot; in his honor. In 2011, Bush, an avid golfer, was inducted in the World Golf Hall of Fame. The (CVN-77), the tenth and last supercarrier of the United States Navy, was named for Bush. Bush is commemorated on a postage stamp that was issued by the United States Postal Service in 2019. In December 2020, the United States Mint honored Bush with a Presidential Dollar coin.

The George H.W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum, the tenth U.S. presidential library, was completed in 1997. It contains the presidential and vice presidential papers of Bush and the vice presidential papers of Dan Quayle. The library is located on a site on the west campus of Texas A&amp;M University in College Station, Texas. Texas A&amp;M University also hosts the Bush School of Government and Public Service, a graduate public policy school. In 2012, Phillips Academy also awarded Bush its Alumni Award of Distinction.

== See also ==
* Electoral history of George H. W. Bush
* List of members of the American Legion
* List of presidents of the United States
* List of presidents of the United States by previous experience

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Works cited ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==
=== Secondary sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


=== Primary sources ===
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

* George H.W. Bush Presidential Library Center
* White House biography
* Full audio of a number of Bush speeches Miller Center of Public Affairs
* 
* 1992 election episode in CNN&#x27;s Race for the White House
* Extensive essays on Bush and shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs
** &quot;Life Portrait of George H. W. Bush&quot;, from C-SPAN&#x27;s &quot;American Presidents: Life Portraits&quot;, December 13, 1999
* &quot;George H. W. Bush&quot;  an American Experience documentary
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="0" end="26" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George Herbert Walker Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="76" end="106" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="151" end="167" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="196" end="210" title="vice president of the United States" label="vice president"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="235" end="248" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="281" end="298" title="Federal government of the United States" label="federal positions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743830" start="313" end="340" title="Bush family" label="wealthy, established family"/>
<link wikidata="Q739428" start="344" end="365" title="Milton, Massachusetts" label="Milton, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49202" start="386" end="408" title="Greenwich, Connecticut" label="Greenwich, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432645" start="422" end="438" title="Phillips Academy" label="Phillips Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550750" start="468" end="494" title="United States Navy Reserve" label="United States Navy Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358102" start="557" end="567" title="West Texas" label="West Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q25080096" start="678" end="682" title="1964 United States Senate election in Texas" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707394" start="712" end="751" title="Texas&amp;#x27;s 7th congressional district" label="Texas&amp;#x27;s 7th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="771" end="784" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q112177529" start="807" end="839" title="United States Ambassador to the United Nations" label="ambassador to the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145369" start="855" end="900" title="chairman of the Republican National Committee" label="chairman of the Republican National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="920" end="931" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q115151654" start="953" end="1019" title="chief of the Liaison Office to the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="chief of the Liaison Office to the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227524" start="1039" end="1071" title="director of Central Intelligence" label="director of Central Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314682" start="1136" end="1169" title="1980 Republican Party presidential primaries" label="Republican presidential primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q643015" start="1250" end="1276" title="1988 United States presidential election" label="1988 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q319099" start="1301" end="1316" title="Michael Dukakis" label="Michael Dukakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719914" start="1340" end="1362" title="Presidency of George H. W. Bush" label="Bush&amp;#x27;s presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="1402" end="1410" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="1440" end="1464" title="reunification of Germany" label="reunification of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q459282" start="1487" end="1505" title="invasion of Panama" label="invasion of Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="1514" end="1522" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q856650" start="1535" end="1561" title="Iraqi occupation of Kuwait" label="Iraqi occupation of Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q181574" start="1683" end="1718" title="North American Free Trade Agreement" label="North American Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1829" end="1852" title="Read my lips: no new taxes" label="a 1988 campaign promise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111004" start="2009" end="2040" title="Americans with Disabilities Act" label="Americans with Disabilities Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109482" start="2046" end="2061" title="Immigration Act of 1990" label="Immigration Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978744" start="2070" end="2094" title="Clean Air Act Amendments" label="Clean Air Act Amendments"/>
<link wikidata="Q472547" start="2114" end="2126" title="David Souter" label="David Souter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11142" start="2131" end="2146" title="Clarence Thomas" label="Clarence Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q699776" start="2183" end="2209" title="1992 United States presidential election" label="1992 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="2222" end="2234" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394220" start="2245" end="2266" title="Early 1990s recession" label="an economic recession"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2286" end="2301" title="Read my lips: no new taxes" label="his tax promise"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="2530" end="2544" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q327959" start="2553" end="2557" title="2000 United States presidential election" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q464075" start="2562" end="2589" title="2004 United States presidential election" label="2004 presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="2684" end="2694" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816" start="2699" end="2716" title="John Quincy Adams" label="John Quincy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q221997" start="2734" end="2742" title="Jeb Bush" label="Jeb Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092711" start="2812" end="2826" title="2016 Republican Party presidential primaries" label="2016 primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243931" start="2828" end="2858" title="Historical rankings of presidents of the United States" label="Historians generally rank Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q739428" start="2993" end="3014" title="Milton, Massachusetts" label="Milton, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q324742" start="3041" end="3054" title="Prescott Bush" label="Prescott Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743830" start="3107" end="3124" title="Prescott Bush Jr." label="Prescott Bush Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1376227" start="3151" end="3165" title="Samuel P. Bush" label="Samuel P. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="3222" end="3236" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q535360" start="3283" end="3304" title="George Herbert Walker" label="George Herbert Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q11690" start="3310" end="3321" title="Wall Street" label="Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3645421" start="3338" end="3362" title="W. A. Harriman &amp;amp; Co." label="W. A. Harriman &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q49202" start="3491" end="3513" title="Greenwich, Connecticut" label="Greenwich, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3645421" start="3608" end="3641" title="Brown Brothers Harriman &amp;amp; Co." label="Brown Brothers Harriman &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q1738795" start="3740" end="3760" title="Kennebunkport, Maine" label="Kennebunkport, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q696482" start="3903" end="3919" title="Great Depression in the United States" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604846" start="3933" end="3961" title="Greenwich Country Day School" label="Greenwich Country Day School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432645" start="3984" end="4000" title="Phillips Academy" label="Phillips Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="4443" end="4461" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890793" start="4467" end="4480" title="naval aviator (United States)" label="naval aviator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016314" start="4567" end="4599" title="Naval Air Station Corpus Christi" label="Naval Air Station Corpus Christi"/>
<link wikidata="Q734103" start="4737" end="4756" title="Grumman TBM Avenger" label="Grumman TBM Avenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q753224" start="4760" end="4774" title="torpedo bomber" label="torpedo bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q43296" start="5021" end="5032" title="Wake Island" label="Wake Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072125" start="5146" end="5156" title="Chichijima" label="Chichijima"/>
<link wikidata="Q11274692" start="5484" end="5513" title="Chichijima incident" label="cannibalized by their captors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754110" start="5704" end="5730" title="Distinguished Flying Cross (United States)" label="Distinguished Flying Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q300879" start="5971" end="5997" title="Operation Downfall" label="invasion of mainland Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q758545" start="6041" end="6054" title="Auburn, Maine" label="Auburn, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="6200" end="6241" title="atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q190628" start="6575" end="6589" title="Barbara Bush" label="Barbara Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379757" start="6769" end="6782" title="Rye, New York" label="Rye, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="6974" end="6983" title="George W. Bush" label="George W."/>
<link wikidata="Q52159104" start="6995" end="7000" title="Pauline Robinson Bush" label="Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q221997" start="7014" end="7017" title="Jeb Bush" label="Jeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q320829" start="7029" end="7033" title="Neil Bush" label="Neil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375345" start="7045" end="7051" title="Marvin Bush" label="Marvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305438" start="7067" end="7071" title="Dorothy Bush Koch" label="Doro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599077" start="7179" end="7191" title="Yale College" label="Yale College"/>
<link wikidata="Q975232" start="7342" end="7361" title="Delta Kappa Epsilon" label="Delta Kappa Epsilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q787505" start="7473" end="7493" title="College World Series" label="College World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q195604" start="7617" end="7632" title="Skull and Bones" label="Skull and Bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938003" start="7662" end="7676" title="Phi Beta Kappa" label="Phi Beta Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358102" start="7824" end="7834" title="West Texas" label="West Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845437" start="8188" end="8197" title="oil field" label="oil field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258651" start="8221" end="8239" title="Dresser Industries" label="Dresser Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q128361" start="8358" end="8371" title="Odessa, Texas" label="Odessa, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q490434" start="8373" end="8380" title="Ventura, California" label="Ventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q49256" start="8382" end="8393" title="Bakersfield, California" label="Bakersfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q487119" start="8398" end="8417" title="Compton, California" label="Compton, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q128321" start="8423" end="8437" title="Midland, Texas" label="Midland, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="8507" end="8517" title="Republican (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="8528" end="8548" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="8622" end="8642" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507567" start="8729" end="8754" title="George Herbert Walker Jr." label="George Herbert Walker Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q147224" start="8864" end="8892" title="HRG Group" label="Zapata Petroleum Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887576" start="8929" end="8942" title="Permian Basin (North America)" label="Permian Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079691" start="9051" end="9068" title="offshore drilling" label="offshore drilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="9181" end="9188" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q223151" start="9211" end="9222" title="James Baker" label="James Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897630" start="9431" end="9441" title="The Nation" label="The Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="9518" end="9545" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="9763" end="9772" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658030" start="10095" end="10108" title="John G. Tower" label="John G. Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q585727" start="10250" end="10268" title="John Birch Society" label="John Birch Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q26676" start="10328" end="10341" title="Harris County, Texas" label="Harris County"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="10466" end="10481" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q11237" start="10505" end="10523" title="Nelson Rockefeller" label="Nelson Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314677" start="10531" end="10575" title="1964 Republican Party presidential primaries" label="1964 Republican Party presidential primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129881" start="10626" end="10645" title="Ralph W. Yarborough" label="Ralph W. Yarborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q25080096" start="10649" end="10682" title="1964 United States Senate election in Texas" label="Texas&amp;#x27;s U.S. Senate election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012400" start="10793" end="10801" title="Jack Cox (Texas politician)" label="Jack Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="10807" end="10823" title="run-off election" label="run-off election"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="10895" end="10919" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="11356" end="11374" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4450487" start="11641" end="11645" title="1966 United States House of Representatives elections" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="11664" end="11702" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707394" start="11706" end="11745" title="Texas&amp;#x27;s 7th congressional district" label="Texas&amp;#x27;s 7th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q426435" start="11780" end="11795" title="Greater Houston" label="Greater Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q260239" start="12088" end="12135" title="United States House Committee on Ways and Means" label="United States House Committee on Ways and Means"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="12251" end="12263" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241106" start="12282" end="12302" title="Presidency of Richard Nixon" label="Nixon administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q927708" start="12310" end="12326" title="Vietnamization" label="Vietnam policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="12370" end="12383" title="birth control" label="birth control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094483" start="12427" end="12451" title="Civil Rights Act of 1968" label="Civil Rights Act of 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255894" start="12581" end="12623" title="Response to the State of the Union address" label="Response to the State of the Union address"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="12749" end="12762" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314680" start="12770" end="12814" title="1968 Republican Party presidential primaries" label="1968 Republican Party presidential primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="12830" end="12843" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q693742" start="12952" end="12978" title="1968 United States presidential election" label="1968 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q203433" start="13004" end="13015" title="Spiro Agnew" label="Spiro Agnew"/>
<link wikidata="Q209989" start="13091" end="13106" title="Hubert Humphrey" label="Hubert Humphrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098209" start="13221" end="13239" title="1970 United States Senate election in Texas" label="run for the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q455401" start="13349" end="13362" title="Lloyd Bentsen" label="Lloyd Bentsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q112177529" start="13697" end="13734" title="U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations" label="U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="13854" end="13866" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="13911" end="13919" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="14145" end="14176" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334327" start="14187" end="14202" title="Resolution 2758" label="Resolution 2758"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="14217" end="14234" title="Republic of China" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922071" start="14315" end="14338" title="Indo-Pakistani War of 1971" label="1971 crisis in Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q333981" start="14438" end="14448" title="Yahya Khan" label="Yahya Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q842931" start="14472" end="14485" title="East Pakistan" label="East Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="15041" end="15048" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260" start="15085" end="15098" title="Kurt Waldheim" label="Kurt Waldheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q644161" start="15477" end="15503" title="1972 United States presidential election" label="1972 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145369" start="15539" end="15568" title="Republican National Committee" label="Republican National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q325914" start="15825" end="15845" title="John Glenn Beall Jr." label="John Glenn Beall Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q622518" start="15851" end="15877" title="U.S. Senator from Maryland" label="U.S. Senator from Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q28443730" start="15901" end="15913" title="George Beall (attorney)" label="George Beall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094335" start="15918" end="15931" title="U.S. Attorney" label="U.S. Attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="16068" end="16085" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185863" start="16170" end="16199" title="Democratic National Committee" label="Democratic National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="16631" end="16642" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041997" start="16675" end="16690" title="Nixon White House tapes" label="audio recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q25046275" start="17363" end="17382" title="1974 United States vice presidential confirmation" label="strongly considered"/>
<link wikidata="Q184650" start="17389" end="17404" title="Donald Rumsfeld" label="Donald Rumsfeld"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17762" end="17781" title="De facto embassy#China and the United States" label="U.S. Liaison Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227524" start="18230" end="18262" title="Director of Central Intelligence" label="Director of Central Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="18354" end="18365" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q156017" start="18634" end="18650" title="Operation Condor" label="Operation Condor"/>
<link wikidata="Q49896" start="18677" end="18698" title="military dictatorship" label="military dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467810" start="18703" end="18716" title="Latin America–United States relations" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q699693" start="18787" end="18813" title="1976 United States presidential election" label="1976 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q319079" start="18876" end="18884" title="Bob Dole" label="Bob Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="18951" end="18963" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453099" start="19304" end="19328" title="First International Bank" label="First International Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186377" start="19439" end="19463" title="Jesse H. Jones Graduate School of Business" label="Jones School of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="19497" end="19525" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q218868" start="19542" end="19563" title="Trilateral Commission" label="Trilateral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q118905960" start="19611" end="19624" title="George H. W. Bush 1980 presidential campaign" label="his candidacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314682" start="19632" end="19676" title="1980 Republican Party presidential primaries" label="1980 Republican Party presidential primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337643" start="19849" end="19861" title="Howard Baker" label="Howard Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q311293" start="19878" end="19891" title="John Connally" label="John Connally"/>
<link wikidata="Q325960" start="19905" end="19915" title="Phil Crane" label="Phil Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q936548" start="19933" end="19949" title="John B. Anderson" label="John B. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="20118" end="20135" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet–Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q589673" start="20190" end="20209" title="Iran hostage crisis" label="Iran hostage crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443004" start="20391" end="20404" title="Iowa caucuses" label="Iowa caucuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717706" start="20579" end="20589" title="the Big Mo" label="the Big Mo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899221" start="20884" end="20905" title="New Hampshire primary" label="New Hampshire primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768283" start="20973" end="20993" title="The Nashua Telegraph" label="The Nashua Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q531186" start="22015" end="22026" title="supply-side economics" label="supply side"/>
<link wikidata="Q608537" start="22074" end="22090" title="Reaganomics" label="voodoo economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579378" start="22377" end="22412" title="1980 Republican National Convention" label="1980 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q49216" start="24188" end="24202" title="Walter Mondale" label="Walter Mondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q11237" start="24366" end="24384" title="Nelson Rockefeller" label="Nelson Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824551" start="24469" end="24488" title="Ford administration" label="Ford administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052001" start="24592" end="24605" title="state funeral" label="state funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="24657" end="24680" title="President of the U.S. Senate" label="president of the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q757979" start="24864" end="24879" title="Attempted assassination of Ronald Reagan" label="Reagan was shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q343960" start="24905" end="24922" title="John Hinckley Jr." label="John Hinckley Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q217797" start="25468" end="25490" title="Twenty-fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Twenty-fifth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q338067" start="25738" end="25749" title="Oval Office" label="Oval Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q902410" start="25814" end="25826" title="deregulation" label="deregulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414246" start="26504" end="26529" title="National Security Advisor (United States)" label="National Security Advisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="26663" end="26667" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q20203109" start="26704" end="26715" title="Pershing II" label="Pershing II"/>
<link wikidata="Q699744" start="26962" end="26988" title="1984 United States presidential election" label="1984 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q25046235" start="27017" end="27025" title="1984 Democratic Party vice presidential candidate selection" label="selected"/>
<link wikidata="Q229141" start="27040" end="27057" title="Geraldine Ferraro" label="Geraldine Ferraro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893535" start="27248" end="27291" title="United States vice-presidential debate, 1984" label="a single televised vice presidential debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="27559" end="27576" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q173100" start="27777" end="27785" title="glasnost" label="glasnost"/>
<link wikidata="Q167634" start="27813" end="27824" title="perestroika" label="perestroika"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972334" start="27860" end="27877" title="Washington Summit (1987)" label="Washington Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q169401" start="27911" end="27951" title="Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty" label="Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q313411" start="28205" end="28218" title="George Shultz" label="George Shultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123628" start="28511" end="28527" title="Acting President of the United States" label="acting president"/>
<link wikidata="Q657665" start="28568" end="28574" title="polyp (medicine)" label="polyps"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083" start="28584" end="28589" title="Large intestine" label="colon"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="28823" end="28836" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q286810" start="28886" end="28892" title="Contras" label="Contra"/>
<link wikidata="Q27389" start="28935" end="28969" title="Sandinista National Liberation Front" label="Sandinista government in Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q273659" start="29649" end="29668" title="Iran–Contra scandal" label="Iran–Contra scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829657" start="29810" end="29826" title="Tower Commission" label="Tower Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q521032" start="29922" end="29936" title="Lawrence Walsh" label="Lawrence Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863164" start="29942" end="29960" title="United States Office of the Independent Counsel" label="special prosecutor"/>
<link wikidata="Q743060" start="30253" end="30272" title="Iran Air Flight 655" label="Iran Air Flight 655"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314684" start="30644" end="30688" title="1988 Republican Party presidential primaries" label="1988 Republican Party presidential primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811707" start="30755" end="30766" title="Lee Atwater" label="Lee Atwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q983981" start="30834" end="30845" title="Roger Ailes" label="Roger Ailes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003471" start="30927" end="30947" title="Human Life Amendment" label="Human Life Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q357676" start="31205" end="31214" title="Jack Kemp" label="Jack Kemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407240" start="31242" end="31255" title="televangelist" label="televangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q364990" start="31256" end="31269" title="Pat Robertson" label="Pat Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443004" start="31447" end="31458" title="Iowa caucus" label="Iowa caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q887489" start="31618" end="31632" title="John H. Sununu" label="John H. Sununu"/>
<link wikidata="Q846330" start="31860" end="31873" title="Super Tuesday" label="Super Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797078" start="32075" end="32099" title="thousand points of light" label="thousand points of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q875611" start="32174" end="32194" title="Pledge of Allegiance" label="Pledge of Allegiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251200" start="32196" end="32213" title="school prayer" label="prayer in schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435124" start="32215" end="32233" title="Capital punishment in the United States" label="capital punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932144" start="32239" end="32249" title="Right to keep and bear arms in the United States" label="gun rights"/>
<link wikidata="" start="32261" end="32298" title="Read my lips: no new taxes" label="pledged that he would not raise taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25046222" start="32518" end="32526" title="1988 Republican Party vice presidential candidate selection" label="selected"/>
<link wikidata="Q49214" start="32548" end="32558" title="Dan Quayle" label="Dan Quayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q319099" start="32827" end="32842" title="Michael Dukakis" label="Michael Dukakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021572" start="33098" end="33111" title="Willie Horton" label="Willie Horton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532786" start="33189" end="33204" title="prison furlough" label="prison furlough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256780" start="33308" end="33322" title="revolving door" label="revolving door"/>
<link wikidata="Q173684" start="33451" end="33460" title="M1 Abrams" label="M1 Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="33905" end="33922" title="Electoral College (United States)" label="Electoral College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="34056" end="34061" title="Southern United States" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q11820" start="34160" end="34176" title="Martin Van Buren" label="Martin Van Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q174492" start="34180" end="34184" title="1836 United States presidential election" label="1836"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="34267" end="34281" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6013752" start="34285" end="34289" title="Inauguration of Herbert Hoover" label="1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892452" start="34309" end="34332" title="1988 United States elections" label="congressional elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153922" start="34421" end="34441" title="Inauguration of George H. W. Bush" label="Bush was inaugurated"/>
<link wikidata="Q48259" start="34650" end="34661" title="Dick Cheney" label="Dick Cheney"/>
<link wikidata="Q239571" start="34885" end="34899" title="Elizabeth Dole" label="Elizabeth Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q723444" start="35082" end="35099" title="Nicholas F. Brady" label="Nicholas F. Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q885091" start="35118" end="35133" title="Dick Thornburgh" label="Dick Thornburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808424" start="35162" end="35175" title="Lauro Cavazos" label="Lauro Cavazos"/>
<link wikidata="Q656511" start="35289" end="35304" title="Brent Scowcroft" label="Brent Scowcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q223777" start="35967" end="35984" title="Brezhnev Doctrine" label="Brezhnev Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="36109" end="36121" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157030" start="36202" end="36214" title="Malta Summit" label="Malta Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="36529" end="36553" title="reunification of Germany" label="reunification of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518" start="36644" end="36655" title="Helmut Kohl" label="Helmut Kohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q16068" start="36936" end="36941" title="Deutsche Mark" label="marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096252" start="37574" end="37593" title="Chicken Kiev speech" label="Chicken Kiev speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q931492" start="37700" end="37741" title="START I" label="Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START I)"/>
<link wikidata="Q221382" start="37884" end="37888" title="1991 Soviet coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="38060" end="38100" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="general secretary of the Communist party"/>
<link wikidata="Q34453" start="38124" end="38137" title="Boris Yeltsin" label="Boris Yeltsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255261" start="38210" end="38239" title="President of the Soviet Union" label="President of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="38283" end="38292" title="Dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="38294" end="38308" title="Post-Soviet states" label="Fifteen states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187969" start="38549" end="38557" title="START II" label="START II"/>
<link wikidata="Q192667" start="38726" end="38740" title="Manuel Noriega" label="Manuel Noriega"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="38955" end="38971" title="drug trafficking" label="drug trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q443831" start="39062" end="39078" title="Guillermo Endara" label="Guillermo Endara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="39180" end="39192" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q459282" start="39433" end="39465" title="United States invasion of Panama" label="United States invasion of Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306" start="39692" end="39703" title="Panama City" label="Panama City"/>
<link wikidata="Q181026" start="40145" end="40160" title="Monroe Doctrine" label="Monroe Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="40331" end="40361" title="aftermath of the Iran–Iraq War" label="aftermath of the Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="40376" end="40390" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q856650" start="40506" end="40525" title="Iraqi invasion of Kuwait" label="Iraq invaded Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099093" start="40555" end="40573" title="Sanctions against Iraq" label="economic sanctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115894" start="40598" end="40622" title="Coalition of the Gulf War" label="multi-national coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q212979" start="40781" end="40793" title="Robert Gates" label="Robert Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q656511" start="40816" end="40831" title="Brent Scowcroft" label="Brent Scowcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="41259" end="41290" title="United Nations Security Council" label="United Nations Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825950" start="42154" end="42225" title="Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 1991" label="Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q221641" start="42520" end="42532" title="Scud missile" label="Scud missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064062" start="42925" end="42943" title="United Nations Iraq–Kuwait Observation Mission" label="peacekeeping force"/>
<link wikidata="Q65358" start="43006" end="43012" title="Gallup (company)" label="Gallup"/>
<link wikidata="Q657112" start="43231" end="43264" title="United Nations Special Commission" label="United Nations Special Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790993" start="43317" end="43352" title="Iraq and weapons of mass destruction" label="weapons of mass destruction program"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536928" start="43411" end="43431" title="free trade agreement" label="free trade agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292617" start="43683" end="43707" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada" label="Progressive Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q128563" start="43732" end="43746" title="Brian Mulroney" label="Brian Mulroney"/>
<link wikidata="Q181574" start="43784" end="43819" title="North American Free Trade Agreement" label="North American Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437054" start="43965" end="43985" title="fast track authority" label="fast track authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209677" start="44179" end="44192" title="Dick Gephardt" label="Dick Gephardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q56839716" start="44505" end="44542" title="United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement" label="United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326572" start="44680" end="44702" title="Early 1980s recession in the United States" label="recession in late 1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326573" start="44731" end="44748" title="Early 1990s recession in the United States" label="recession in 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138777" start="44846" end="44862" title="United States public debt" label="federal deficits"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45612" end="45623" title="fiscal year#United States" label="fiscal year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258192" start="45839" end="45880" title="Gramm–Rudman–Hollings Balanced Budget Act" label="Gramm–Rudman–Hollings Balanced Budget Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q193635" start="45971" end="45985" title="Alan Greenspan" label="Alan Greenspan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698984" start="46320" end="46340" title="Fiscal conservatism" label="fiscal conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364792" start="46714" end="46739" title="PAYGO" label="&amp;quot;pay as you go&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q182788" start="46845" end="46858" title="Newt Gingrich" label="Newt Gingrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931243" start="47234" end="47275" title="Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990" label="Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q12131" start="47729" end="47737" title="disability" label="disabled"/>
<link wikidata="Q881318" start="47903" end="47924" title="Lowell P. Weicker Jr." label="Lowell P. Weicker Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2442506" start="47929" end="47940" title="Tony Coelho" label="Tony Coelho"/>
<link wikidata="Q132971" start="48330" end="48338" title="dyslexia" label="dyslexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111004" start="48403" end="48442" title="Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990" label="Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="48687" end="48698" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Ted Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124537" start="48950" end="48974" title="Civil Rights Act of 1991" label="Civil Rights Act of 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q7384638" start="49083" end="49102" title="Ryan White CARE Act" label="Ryan White CARE Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="49184" end="49192" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077789" start="49225" end="49238" title="AIDS epidemic" label="AIDS epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q343047" start="49509" end="49515" title="ACT UP" label="ACT UP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418433" start="49611" end="49621" title="AIDS Quilt" label="AIDS Quilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16879561" start="49664" end="49686" title="List of causes of death by rate" label="leading cause of death"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978744" start="49809" end="49822" title="Clean Air Act (United States)" label="Clean Air Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q368920" start="49860" end="49878" title="George J. Mitchell" label="George J. Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q40178" start="50066" end="50075" title="acid rain" label="acid rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="50139" end="50153" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016847" start="50240" end="50265" title="Oil Pollution Act of 1990" label="Oil Pollution Act of 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196587" start="50285" end="50319" title="Exxon Valdez oil spill" label="&amp;quot;Exxon Valdez&amp;quot; oil spill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509032" start="50334" end="50363" title="League of Conservation Voters" label="League of Conservation Voters"/>
<link wikidata="Q188844" start="51207" end="51219" title="volunteerism" label="volunteerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647617" start="51277" end="51293" title="Hands On Network" label="Hands On Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4270138" start="51324" end="51339" title="Points of Light" label="Points of Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="51410" end="51444" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q472547" start="51511" end="51523" title="David Souter" label="David Souter"/>
<link wikidata="Q717401" start="51549" end="51571" title="William J. Brennan Jr." label="William J. Brennan Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q11142" start="51736" end="51751" title="Clarence Thomas" label="Clarence Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q312348" start="51763" end="51780" title="Thurgood Marshall" label="Thurgood Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3673184" start="51843" end="51882" title="Equal Employment Opportunity Commission" label="Equal Employment Opportunity Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126773" start="51891" end="51913" title="Clarence Thomas Supreme Court nomination" label="faced heavy opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893172" start="51945" end="51962" title="United States pro-choice movement" label="pro-choice groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="51971" end="51976" title="NAACP" label="NAACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850177" start="52023" end="52033" title="Anita Hill" label="Anita Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982201" start="52781" end="52791" title="Goals 2000" label="Goals 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329394" start="52800" end="52824" title="No Child Left Behind Act" label="No Child Left Behind Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109482" start="52842" end="52865" title="Immigration Act of 1990" label="Immigration Act of 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309633" start="52911" end="52943" title="immigration to the United States" label="immigration to the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326489" start="53058" end="53081" title="savings and loan crisis" label="savings and loan crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091703" start="53133" end="53150" title="Savings and loan association" label="savings and loans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881025" start="53199" end="53227" title="Office of Thrift Supervision" label="Office of Thrift Supervision"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449605" start="53274" end="53342" title="Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989" label="Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635030" start="53559" end="53569" title="sound bite" label="sound bite"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="53795" end="53803" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q116093799" start="54102" end="54121" title="Supermarket scanner moment" label="mistakenly depicted"/>
<link wikidata="Q807980" start="54167" end="54181" title="barcode reader" label="barcode reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q65358" start="54538" end="54544" title="Gallup Inc." label="Gallup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394220" start="54609" end="54630" title="early 1990s recession" label="early 1990s recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q521145" start="55224" end="55235" title="Mario Cuomo" label="Mario Cuomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19673" start="55256" end="55263" title="Al Gore" label="Al Gore"/>
<link wikidata="Q149127" start="55533" end="55545" title="Pat Buchanan" label="Pat Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314686" start="55553" end="55578" title="1992 Republican Party presidential primaries" label="1992 Republican primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587881" start="55665" end="55700" title="1992 Republican National Convention" label="1992 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322213" start="55792" end="55807" title="Christian right" label="Christian right"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="55853" end="55865" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705326" start="55918" end="55947" title="Democratic Leadership Council" label="Democratic Leadership Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q313697" start="56114" end="56127" title="H. Ross Perot" label="H. Ross Perot"/>
<link wikidata="Q24966041" start="56911" end="56953" title="List of third party performances in United States presidential elections" label="highest totals for a third-party candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633158" start="57939" end="57956" title="List of people pardoned by George H. W. Bush" label="series of pardons"/>
<link wikidata="Q434142" start="58163" end="58180" title="Caspar Weinberger" label="Caspar Weinberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q352959" start="58353" end="58374" title="Seymour Martin Lipset" label="Seymour Martin Lipset"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986102" start="58889" end="58907" title="West Oaks, Houston" label="West Oaks, Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815394" start="58983" end="58997" title="Memorial Drive (Houston)" label="Memorial Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091018" start="59160" end="59173" title="Bohemian Club" label="Bohemian Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q926806" start="59298" end="59315" title="The Carlyle Group" label="The Carlyle Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660806" start="59414" end="59433" title="A World Transformed" label="A World Transformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511147" start="59593" end="59618" title="All the Best (book)" label="All the Best, George Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164304" start="59717" end="59743" title="Iraqi Intelligence Service" label="Iraqi Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189962" start="59794" end="59800" title="1993 cruise missile strikes on Iraq" label="firing"/>
<link wikidata="Q181860" start="59807" end="59821" title="cruise missile" label="cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="59869" end="59876" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892516" start="60039" end="60067" title="1994 United States gubernatorial elections" label="1994 gubernatorial elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589725" start="60117" end="60134" title="Governor of Texas" label="Governor of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q20198851" start="60139" end="60158" title="Governor of Florida" label="Governor of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q237918" start="60507" end="60519" title="Ann Richards" label="Ann Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q744098" start="60538" end="60551" title="Lawton Chiles" label="Lawton Chiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11237" start="60985" end="61003" title="Nelson Rockefeller" label="Nelson Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q878708" start="61016" end="61036" title="Winthrop Rockefeller" label="Winthrop Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="61055" end="61063" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="61068" end="61076" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q327959" start="61140" end="61166" title="2000 United States presidential election" label="2000 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597789" start="61249" end="61284" title="2000 Republican National Convention" label="2000 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="61482" end="61492" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11816" start="61497" end="61514" title="John Quincy Adams" label="John Quincy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130239" start="61736" end="61744" title="retronym" label="retronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q201430" start="62041" end="62053" title="George Tenet" label="George Tenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="62621" end="62661" title="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami" label="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="62666" end="62683" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="62852" end="62872" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q10390" start="62921" end="62932" title="John McCain" label="John McCain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496" start="62983" end="62994" title="Mitt Romney" label="Mitt Romney"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="63065" end="63077" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144" start="63116" end="63145" title="Presidential Medal of Freedom" label="Presidential Medal of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092711" start="63242" end="63267" title="2016 Republican Party presidential primaries" label="2016 Republican primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="63448" end="63460" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="63681" end="63696" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q27824398" start="63889" end="63914" title="First inauguration of Donald Trump" label="Trump&amp;#x27;s inauguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q36248530" start="63998" end="64019" title="Unite the Right rally" label="Unite the Right rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q123766" start="64023" end="64048" title="Charlottesville, Virginia" label="Charlottesville, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590017" start="64560" end="64594" title="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Church (Houston)" label="St. Martin&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q432473" start="64724" end="64737" title="Melania Trump" label="Melania Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q13133" start="64739" end="64753" title="Michelle Obama" label="Michelle Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q152019" start="64755" end="64765" title="Laura Bush" label="Laura Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085" start="65063" end="65087" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q59344430" start="65094" end="65110" title="Death and state funeral of George H. W. Bush" label="died at his home"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099823" start="65198" end="65226" title="List of presidents of the United States by age" label="longest-lived U.S. president"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="65254" end="65266" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603529" start="65307" end="65334" title="List of vice presidents of the United States by age" label="third-oldest vice president"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65341" end="65353" title="Lying in state#United States" label="lay in state"/>
<link wikidata="Q918708" start="65361" end="65388" title="United States Capitol rotunda" label="Rotunda of the U.S. Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q668710" start="65567" end="65596" title="Washington National Cathedral" label="Washington National Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q695511" start="65725" end="65747" title="College Station, Texas" label="College Station, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16483" start="66065" end="66085" title="Graves&amp;#x27; disease" label="Graves&amp;#x27; disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q16399" start="66104" end="66111" title="thyroid" label="thyroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531991" start="66314" end="66326" title="parkinsonism" label="parkinsonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="66550" end="66562" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588667" start="66676" end="66708" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Church, Lafayette Square" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129261" start="67042" end="67059" title="Anti-abortion movements" label="pro-life movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708912" start="67164" end="67172" title="Child sponsorship" label="financed"/>
<link wikidata="Q843818" start="67310" end="67334" title="Compassion International" label="Compassion International"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243931" start="67431" end="67437" title="Historical rankings of presidents of the United States" label="ranked"/>
<link wikidata="Q433211" start="67493" end="67531" title="American Political Science Association" label="American Political Science Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022311" start="67638" end="67644" title="C-SPAN" label="C-SPAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q20877087" start="68733" end="68736" title="Vox (website)" label="Vox"/>
<link wikidata="Q333034" start="68944" end="68954" title="Bipartisanship" label="bipartisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q505311" start="69925" end="69933" title="Immigration Act of 1965" label="1965 act"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="70083" end="70092" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="70269" end="70289" title="German reunification" label="German reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814226" start="70291" end="70308" title="Michael Beschloss" label="Michael Beschloss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287886" start="70313" end="70327" title="Strobe Talbott" label="Strobe Talbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q325261" start="70452" end="70467" title="satellite state" label="satellite state"/>
<link wikidata="Q933939" start="70544" end="70559" title="Andrew Bacevich" label="Andrew Bacevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q164055" start="70716" end="70732" title="Tiananmen Square" label="Tiananmen Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="70841" end="70857" title="Time (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;TIME&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573035" start="70885" end="70902" title="domestic policies" label="domestic policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="71259" end="71263" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q207826" start="71293" end="71308" title="Time Person of the Year" label="Man of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q744748" start="71375" end="71411" title="George Bush Intercontinental Airport" label="George Bush Intercontinental Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q523606" start="71446" end="71463" title="Langley, Virginia" label="Langley, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425102" start="71485" end="71520" title="George Bush Center for Intelligence" label="George Bush Center for Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q258851" start="71592" end="71615" title="World Golf Hall of Fame" label="World Golf Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="71650" end="71662" title="supercarrier" label="supercarrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="71773" end="71801" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141049" start="71833" end="71851" title="United States Mint" label="United States Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063458" start="71872" end="71891" title="Presidential Dollar" label="Presidential Dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507065" start="71903" end="71951" title="George H.W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum" label="George H.W. Bush Presidential Library and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546583" start="71968" end="71988" title="Presidential library system" label="presidential library"/>
<link wikidata="Q49212" start="72182" end="72206" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720722" start="72274" end="72318" title="Bush School of Government and Public Service" label="Bush School of Government and Public Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391922" start="72331" end="72351" title="public policy school" label="public policy school"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356308" start="72448" end="72486" title="Electoral history of George H. W. Bush" label="Electoral history of George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858067" start="72489" end="72527" title="List of members of the American Legion" label="List of members of the American Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q35073" start="72530" end="72569" title="List of presidents of the United States" label="List of presidents of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594910" start="72572" end="72634" title="List of presidents of the United States by previous experience" label="List of presidents of the United States by previous experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859101" start="72957" end="72988" title="Miller Center of Public Affairs" label="Miller Center of Public Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859101" start="73155" end="73186" title="Miller Center of Public Affairs" label="Miller Center of Public Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022311" start="73243" end="73249" title="C-SPAN" label="C-SPAN"/>
<link wikidata="" start="73263" end="73298" title="American Presidents: Life Portraits" label="American Presidents: Life Portraits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842919" start="73360" end="73379" title="American Experience" label="American Experience"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11956" wikidata="Q342254" url="?curid=11956" title="GPS (disambiguation)">
<text>[[GPS]] is the Global Positioning System, a satellite-based navigation system.

GPS may also refer to:
==Technology==
* GPS navigation device, especially an automotive navigation system
* Generalized processor sharing, an algorithm to fairly share computer processing time
* General Problem Solver, a 1959 computer program
* Satellite navigation, GPS (global positioning system) in common parlance

==Organizations==
* Crossroads GPS (Grassroots Policy Strategies), a nonprofit corporation that works in conjunction with the Super PAC American Crossroads
* Fusion GPS, American commercial and strategic research firm
* Ghana Prisons Service
* GPS (band), a progressive rock band
* GPS Rugby, an Australian rugby union club
* Geirus Policies and Standards committee, a body of the Rabbinical Council of America
* Gabungan Parti Sarawak, a Malaysian political coalition based in Sarawak

===Education===
* Greenwich Public Schools, a school district in Greenwich, Connecticut, US
* Gilbert Public Schools, a school district in Gilbert, Arizona, US
* Girls Preparatory School, an all-girls prep school in Chattanooga, Tennessee, US
* Great Public Schools. In Australia, several associations of boys&#x27; private schools
:* Athletic Association of the Great Public Schools of New South Wales
:* Great Public Schools Association of Queensland Inc.
* Grosse Pointe South High School, a public high school in Grosse Pointe, Michigan, US
* Greenville Public Schools (a.k.a. Greenville Public School District), a school district in Greenville, Mississippi, US
* The School of Global Policy and Strategy, an institute of international studies at the University of California, San Diego

===Medicine===
* Goodpasture syndrome, a rare autoimmune disease
* Gray platelet syndrome, a rare congenital autosomal recessive bleeding disorder

==Other uses==
* Seymour Airport (IATA code), Galápagos Islands, Ecuador
* &quot;Fareed Zakaria GPS&quot; (&quot;Global Public Square&quot;), a CNN television show
* Geometrical Products Specification, an international standard for geometric dimensioning and tolerancing
* Genealogical Proof Standard (see also Cluster genealogy)
* &quot;GPS&quot; (song), a song by Maluma
* &quot;Var är jag&quot;, renamed to &quot;GPS&quot;, a song by Basshunter from his &quot;LOL &lt;(^^,)&gt;&quot; album</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q342254" start="0" end="7" title="GPS (disambiguation)" label="[[GPS]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q342254" start="80" end="83" title="GPS (disambiguation)" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486497" start="120" end="141" title="GPS navigation device" label="GPS navigation device"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532503" start="188" end="217" title="Generalized processor sharing" label="Generalized processor sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387212" start="275" end="297" title="General Problem Solver" label="General Problem Solver"/>
<link wikidata="Q179435" start="325" end="345" title="Satellite navigation" label="Satellite navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743565" start="419" end="433" title="Crossroads GPS" label="Crossroads GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q28450532" start="557" end="567" title="Fusion GPS" label="Fusion GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555388" start="619" end="640" title="Ghana Prisons Service" label="Ghana Prisons Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q368785" start="643" end="653" title="GPS (band)" label="GPS (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093339" start="681" end="690" title="GPS Rugby" label="GPS Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569750" start="725" end="764" title="Geirus Policies and Standards committee" label="Geirus Policies and Standards committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q54929147" start="812" end="834" title="Gabungan Parti Sarawak" label="Gabungan Parti Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604871" start="904" end="928" title="Greenwich Public Schools" label="Greenwich Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561160" start="980" end="1002" title="Gilbert Public Schools" label="Gilbert Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q5564658" start="1048" end="1072" title="Girls Preparatory School" label="Girls Preparatory School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813733" start="1221" end="1288" title="Athletic Association of the Great Public Schools of New South Wales" label="Athletic Association of the Great Public Schools of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376824" start="1292" end="1343" title="Great Public Schools Association of Queensland Inc." label="Great Public Schools Association of Queensland Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q5610558" start="1346" end="1377" title="Grosse Pointe South High School" label="Grosse Pointe South High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604726" start="1467" end="1500" title="Greenville Public School District" label="Greenville Public School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592038" start="1558" end="1594" title="School of Global Policy and Strategy" label="School of Global Policy and Strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345792" start="1695" end="1715" title="Goodpasture syndrome" label="Goodpasture syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598273" start="1745" end="1767" title="Gray platelet syndrome" label="Gray platelet syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186422" start="1843" end="1858" title="Seymour Airport" label="Seymour Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434939" start="1907" end="1925" title="Fareed Zakaria GPS" label="Fareed Zakaria GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q110652882" start="1992" end="2026" title="Geometrical Products Specification" label="Geometrical Products Specification"/>
<link wikidata="Q25036432" start="2099" end="2126" title="Genealogical Proof Standard" label="Genealogical Proof Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5136700" start="2137" end="2154" title="Cluster genealogy" label="Cluster genealogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47014903" start="2158" end="2180" title="GPS (song)" label="&amp;quot;GPS&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q664873" start="2289" end="2306" title="LOL (Basshunter album)" label="LOL &amp;lt;(^^,)&amp;gt;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11958" wikidata="Q82049" url="?curid=11958" title="George Berkeley">
<text>George Berkeley ( ; 12 March 168514 January 1753) – known as Bishop Berkeley (Bishop of Cloyne of the Anglican Church of Ireland) – was an Anglo-Irish philosopher whose primary achievement was the advancement of a theory he called &quot;immaterialism&quot; (later referred to as &quot;subjective idealism&quot; by others). This theory denies the existence of material substance and instead contends that familiar objects like tables and chairs are ideas perceived by the mind and, as a result, cannot exist without being perceived. Berkeley is also known for his critique of abstraction, an important premise in his argument for immaterialism. Interest in his works increased significantly in the United States during the 19th century, and the University of California, Berkeley, is named after him. 

In 1709, Berkeley published his first major work, &quot;&quot;, in which he discussed the limitations of human vision and advanced the theory that the proper objects of sight are not material objects, but light and colour. This foreshadowed his chief philosophical work, &quot;A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge&quot;, in 1710, which, after its poor reception, he rewrote in dialogue form and published under the title &quot;Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous&quot; in 1713. In this book, Berkeley&#x27;s views were represented by Philonous (Greek: &quot;lover of mind&quot;), while Hylas (&quot;hyle&quot;, Greek: &quot;matter&quot;) embodies Berkeley&#x27;s opponents, in particular John Locke.

Berkeley argued against Isaac Newton&#x27;s doctrine of absolute space, time and motion in &quot;De Motu&quot; (&quot;On Motion&quot;), published 1721. His arguments were a precursor to the views of Ernst Mach and Albert Einstein. In 1732, he published &quot;Alciphron&quot;, a Christian apologetic against the free-thinkers, and in 1734, he published &quot;The Analyst&quot;, a critique of the foundations of calculus, which was influential in the development of mathematics.

Interest in Berkeley&#x27;s work increased after World War II because he tackled many of the issues of paramount interest to philosophy in the 20th century, such as the problems of perception, the difference between primary and secondary qualities, and the importance of language.

==Biography==
===Ireland===

Berkeley was born at his family home, Dysart Castle, near Thomastown, County Kilkenny, Ireland, the eldest son of William Berkeley, a cadet of the noble family of Berkeley whose ancestry can be traced back to the Anglo-Saxon period and who had served as feudal lords and landowners in Gloucester, England. Little is known of his mother. He was educated at Kilkenny College and attended Trinity College Dublin, where he was elected a Scholar in 1702, being awarded BA in 1704 and MA and a Fellowship in 1707. He remained at Trinity College after the completion of his degree as a tutor and Greek lecturer.

His earliest publication was on mathematics, but the first that brought him notice was his &quot;&quot;, first published in 1709. In the essay, Berkeley examines visual distance, magnitude, position and problems of sight and touch. While this work raised much controversy at the time, its conclusions are now accepted as an established part of the theory of optics.

The next publication to appear was the &quot;Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge&quot; in 1710, which had great success and gave him a lasting reputation, though few accepted his theory that nothing exists outside the mind. This was followed in 1713 by &quot;Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous&quot;, in which he propounded his system of philosophy, the leading principle of which is that the world, as represented by our senses, depends for its existence on being perceived.

For this theory, the &quot;Principles&quot; gives the exposition and the &quot;Dialogues&quot; the defence. One of his main objectives was to combat the prevailing materialism of his time. The theory was largely received with ridicule, while even those such as Samuel Clarke and William Whiston, who did acknowledge his &quot;extraordinary genius,&quot; were nevertheless convinced that his first principles were false.

=== England and Europe ===
Shortly afterwards, Berkeley visited England and was received into the circle of Addison, Pope and Steele. In the period between 1714 and 1720, he interspersed his academic endeavours with periods of extensive travel in Europe, including one of the most extensive Grand Tours of the length and breadth of Italy ever undertaken. In 1721, he took Holy orders in the Church of Ireland, earning his doctorate in divinity, and once again chose to remain at Trinity College Dublin, lecturing this time in Divinity and in Hebrew. In 1721/2 he was made Dean of Dromore and, in 1724, Dean of Derry.

In 1723, Berkeley was named co-heir of Esther Vanhomrigh, along with the barrister Robert Marshall. This naming followed Vanhomrigh&#x27;s violent quarrel with Jonathan Swift, who had been her intimate friend for many years. Vanhomrigh&#x27;s choice of legatees caused a good deal of surprise since she did not know either of them well, although Berkeley as a very young man had known her father. Swift said that he did not grudge Berkeley his inheritance, much of which vanished in a lawsuit in any event. A story that Berkeley and Marshall disregarded a condition of the inheritance that they must publish the correspondence between Swift and Vanessa is probably untrue.

In 1725, Berkeley began the project of founding a college in Bermuda for training ministers and missionaries in the colony, in pursuit of which he gave up his deanery with its income of £1,100.

===Marriage and America===

On 1 August 1728 at St Mary le Strand, London, Berkeley married Anne Forster, daughter of John Forster, Chief Justice of the Irish Common Pleas, and Forster&#x27;s first wife Rebecca Monck. He then went to America on a salary of £100 per annum. He landed near Newport, Rhode Island, where he bought a plantation at Middletownthe famous &quot;Whitehall&quot;. Berkeley purchased several enslaved Africans to work on the plantation. In 2023, Trinity College Dublin removed Berkeley&#x27;s name from one of its libraries because of his slave ownership and his active defence of slavery.

It has been claimed that &quot;he introduced Palladianism into America by borrowing a design from [William] Kent&#x27;s &quot;Designs of Inigo Jones&quot; for the door-case of his house in Rhode Island, Whitehall&quot;. He also brought to New England John Smibert, the Scottish artist he &quot;discovered&quot; in Italy, who is generally regarded as the founding father of American portrait painting. Meanwhile, he drew up plans for the ideal city he planned to build on Bermuda. He lived at the plantation while he waited for funds for his college to arrive. The funds, however, were not forthcoming. &quot;With the withdrawal from London of his own persuasive energies, opposition gathered force; and the Prime Minister, Walpole grew steadily more sceptical and lukewarm. At last it became clear that the essential Parliamentary grant would be not forthcoming&quot;, and in 1732 he left America and returned to London.

He and Anne had four children who survived infancy Henry, George, William and Julia and at least two other children who died in infancy. William&#x27;s death in 1751 was a great cause of grief for his father.

===Episcopate in Ireland===
Berkeley was nominated to be the Bishop of Cloyne in the Church of Ireland on 18 January 1734. He was consecrated as such on 19 May 1734. He was the Bishop of Cloyne until his death on 14 January 1753, although he died at Oxford (see below).

===Humanitarian work===
While living in London&#x27;s Saville Street, he took part in efforts to create a home for the city&#x27;s abandoned children. The Foundling Hospital was founded by royal charter in 1739, and Berkeley is listed as one of its original governors.

===Last works===
His last two publications were &quot;Siris: A Chain of Philosophical Reflexions and Inquiries Concerning the Virtues of Tarwater, And divers other Subjects connected together and arising one from another&quot; (1744) and &quot;Further Thoughts on Tar-water&quot; (1752). Pine tar is an effective antiseptic and disinfectant when applied to cuts on the skin, but Berkeley argued for the use of pine tar as a broad panacea for diseases. His 1744 work on tar-water sold more copies than any of his other books during Berkeley&#x27;s lifetime.

He remained at Cloyne until 1752, when he retired. With his wife and daughter Julia, he went to Oxford to live with his son George and supervise his education. He died soon afterwards and was buried in Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford. His affectionate disposition and genial manners made him much loved and held in warm regard by many of his contemporaries. Anne outlived her husband by many years, and died in 1786.

==Contributions to philosophy==

The use of the concepts of &quot;spirit&quot; and &quot;idea&quot; is central in Berkeley&#x27;s philosophy. As used by him, these concepts are difficult to translate into modern terminology. His concept of &quot;spirit&quot; is close to the concept of &quot;conscious subject&quot; or of &quot;mind&quot;, and the concept of &quot;idea&quot; is close to the concept of &quot;sensation&quot; or &quot;state of mind&quot; or &quot;conscious experience&quot;.

Thus Berkeley denied the existence of matter as a metaphysical substance, but did not deny the existence of physical objects such as apples or mountains (&quot;I do not argue against the existence of any one thing that we can apprehend, either by sense or reflection. That the things I see with mine eyes and touch with my hands do exist, really exist, I make not the least question. The only thing whose existence we deny, is that which philosophers call matter or corporeal substance. And in doing of this, there is no damage done to the rest of mankind, who, I dare say, will never miss it.&quot;, &quot;Principles&quot; #35). This basic claim of Berkeley&#x27;s thought, his &quot;idealism&quot;, is sometimes and somewhat derisively called &quot;immaterialism&quot; or, occasionally, subjective idealism. In &quot;Principles&quot; #3, he wrote, using a combination of Latin and English, &quot;esse is percipi&quot; (to be is to be perceived), most often if slightly inaccurately attributed to Berkeley as the pure Latin phrase esse est percipi. The phrase appears associated with him in authoritative philosophical sources, e.g., &quot;Berkeley holds that there are no such mind-independent things, that, in the famous phrase, &quot;esse est percipi (aut percipere)&quot;—to be is to be perceived (or to perceive).&quot;

Hence, human knowledge is reduced to two elements: that of spirits and of ideas (&quot;Principles&quot; #86). In contrast to ideas, a spirit cannot be perceived. A person&#x27;s spirit, which perceives ideas, is to be comprehended intuitively by inward feeling or reflection (&quot;Principles&quot; #89). For Berkeley, we have no direct &#x27;idea&#x27; of spirits, albeit we have good reason to believe in the existence of other spirits, for their existence explains the purposeful regularities we find in experience (&quot;It is plain that we cannot know the existence of other spirits otherwise than by their operations, or the ideas by them excited in us&quot;, &quot;Dialogues&quot; #145). This is the solution that Berkeley offers to the problem of other minds. Finally, the order and purposefulness of the whole of our experience of the world and especially of nature overwhelms us into believing in the existence of an extremely powerful and intelligent spirit that causes that order. According to Berkeley, reflection on the attributes of that external spirit leads us to identify it with God. Thus a material thing such as an apple consists of a collection of ideas (shape, colour, taste, physical properties, etc.) which are caused in the spirits of humans by the spirit of God.

===Theology===
A convinced adherent of Christianity, Berkeley believed God to be present as an immediate cause of all our experiences.

Here is Berkeley&#x27;s proof of the existence of God:

As T. I. Oizerman explained:

Berkeley believed that God is not the distant engineer of Newtonian machinery that in the fullness of time led to the growth of a tree in the university quadrangle. Rather, the perception of the tree is an idea that God&#x27;s mind has produced in the mind, and the tree continues to exist in the quadrangle when &quot;nobody&quot; is there, simply because God is an infinite mind that perceives all.

The philosophy of David Hume concerning causality and objectivity is an elaboration of another aspect of Berkeley&#x27;s philosophy. A.A. Luce, the most eminent Berkeley scholar of the 20th century, constantly stressed the continuity of Berkeley&#x27;s philosophy. The fact that Berkeley returned to his major works throughout his life, issuing revised editions with only minor changes, also counts against any theory that attributes to him a significant volte-face.

Yet as Colin Murray Turbayne observed, late entries found amidst Berkeley&#x27;s unpublished private notes in the &quot;Philosophical Commentaries&quot; point toward his inclination to withdraw from a dogmatic form of ontological idealism in order to adopt a more skeptical attitude toward the existence of an active, universal substantial mind such as God. Here, Berkeley&#x27;s &quot;official doctrine&quot; that &quot;Mind is a substance.&quot; in a literal sense is accompanied by additional puzzling references to a universal &quot;thinking substance, something unknown&quot; (687) and &quot;the substance of Spirit we do not know, it not being knowable&quot; (701). In his exegesis of the term &quot;substance&quot;, and his description of the soul as a substance in which ideas &quot;inhere&quot; while it &quot;supports&quot; ideas, Berkeley also asserts that he must &quot;use utmost caution not to give give the least handle of offense to the Church or Church-men (715)&quot;. Keeping in mind Berkeley&#x27;s development of a philosophy of science and his theory of vision, this suggests that his final references to God as a universal and &quot;substantial mind&quot; are essentially metaphorical in nature and indicate a willingness to diplomatically uphold a &quot;purely substantivalist conception of the mind, confirmed by his private utterances&quot;.

===Relativity arguments===

John Locke (Berkeley&#x27;s intellectual predecessor) states that we define an object by its primary and secondary qualities. He takes heat as an example of a secondary quality. If you put one hand in a bucket of cold water, and the other hand in a bucket of warm water, then put both hands in a bucket of lukewarm water, one of your hands is going to tell you that the water is cold and the other that the water is hot. Locke says that since two different objects (both your hands) perceive the water to be hot &quot;and&quot; cold, then the heat is not a quality of the water.

While Locke used this argument to distinguish primary from secondary qualities, Berkeley extends it to cover primary qualities in the same way. For example, he says that size is not a quality of an object because the size of the object depends on the distance between the observer and the object, or the size of the observer. Since an object is a different size to different observers, then size is not a quality of the object. Berkeley rejects shape with a similar argument and then asks: if neither primary qualities nor secondary qualities are of the object, then how can we say that there is anything more than the qualities we observe?

Relativity is the idea that there is no objective, universal truth; it is a state of dependence in which the existence of one independent object is solely dependent on that of another. According to Locke, characteristics of primary qualities are mind-independent, such as shape, size, etc., whereas secondary qualities are mind-dependent, for example, taste and colour. George Berkeley refuted John Locke&#x27;s belief on primary and secondary qualities because Berkeley believed that &quot;we cannot abstract the primary qualities (e.g shape) from secondary ones (e.g colour)&quot;. Berkeley argued that perception is dependent on the distance between the observer and the object, and &quot;thus, we cannot conceive of mechanist material bodies which are extended but not (in themselves) colored&quot;. What perceived can be the same type of quality, but completely opposite from each other because of different positions and perceptions, what we perceive can be different even when the same types of things consist of contrary qualities. Secondary qualities aid in people&#x27;s conception of primary qualities in an object, like how the colour of an object leads people to recognize the object itself. More specifically, the colour red can be perceived in apples, strawberries, and tomatoes, yet we would not know what these might look like without its colour. We would also be unaware of what the colour red looked like if red paint, or any object that has a perceived red colour, failed to exist. From this, we can see that colours cannot exist on their own and can solely represent a group of perceived objects. Therefore, both primary and secondary qualities are mind-dependent: they cannot exist without our minds.
George Berkeley was a philosopher who opposed rationalism and &quot;classical&quot; empiricism. He was a &quot;subjective idealist&quot; or &quot;empirical idealist&quot;, who believed that reality is constructed entirely of immaterial, conscious minds and their ideas; everything that exists is somehow dependent on the subject perceiving it, except the subject themselves. He refuted the existence of abstract objects that many other philosophers believed to exist, notably Plato. According to Berkeley, &quot;an abstract object does not exist in space or time and which is therefore entirely non-physical and non-mental&quot;; however, this argument contradicts his relativity argument. If &quot;esse est percipi&quot;, (Latin meaning that to exist is to be perceived) is true, then the objects in the relativity argument made by Berkeley can either exist or not. Berkeley believed that only the minds&#x27; perceptions and the Spirit that perceives are what exists in reality; what people perceive every day is only the idea of an object&#x27;s existence, but the objects themselves are not perceived. Berkeley also discussed how, at times, materials cannot be perceived by oneself, and the mind of oneself cannot understand the objects. However, there also exists an &quot;omnipresent, eternal mind&quot; that Berkeley believed to consist of God and the Spirit, both omniscient and all-perceiving. According to Berkeley, God is the entity who controls everything, yet Berkeley also argued that &quot;abstract object[s] do not exist in space or time&quot;. In other words, as Warnock argues, Berkeley &quot;had recognized that he could not square with his own talk of &quot;spirits&quot;, of our minds and of God; for these are perceivers and not among objects of perception. Thus he says, rather weakly and without elucidation, that in addition to our ideas, we also have &quot;notions&quot;—we know what it means to speak of &quot;spirits&quot; and their operations.&quot;

However, the relativity argument violates the idea of immaterialism. Berkeley&#x27;s immaterialism argues that &quot;esse est percipi (aut percipere)&quot;, which in English is: to be is to be perceived (or to perceive). That is saying only what is perceived or perceived is real, and without our perception or God&#x27;s nothing can be real. Yet, if the relativity argument, also by Berkeley, argues that the perception of an object depends on the different positions, then this means that what is perceived can either be real or not because the perception does not show that whole picture and the whole picture cannot be perceived. Berkeley also believes that &quot;when one perceives mediately, one perceives one idea by means of perceiving another&quot;. By this, it can be elaborated that if the standards of what perceived at first are different, what perceived after that can be different, as well. In the heat perception described above, one hand perceived the water to be hot and the other hand perceived the water to be cold due to relativity. If applying the idea &quot;to be is to be perceived&quot;, the water should be both cold and hot because both perceptions are perceived by different hands. However, the water cannot be cold and hot at the same time for it self-contradicts, so this shows that what perceived is not always true because it sometimes can break the law of noncontradiction. In this case, &quot;it would be arbitrary anthropocentrism to claim that humans have special access to the true qualities of objects&quot;. The truth for different people can be different, and humans are limited to accessing the absolute truth due to relativity. Summing up, nothing can be absolutely true due to relativity or the two arguments, to be is to be perceived and the relativity argument, do not always work together.

===New theory of vision===
In his &quot;Essay Towards a New Theory of Vision&quot;, Berkeley frequently criticised the views of the Optic Writers, a title that seems to include Molyneux, Wallis, Malebranche and Descartes. In sections 1–51, Berkeley argued against the classical scholars of optics by holding that: &quot;spatial depth, as the distance that separates the perceiver from the perceived object is itself invisible&quot;. That is, we do not see space directly or deduce its form logically using the laws of optics. Space for Berkeley is no more than a contingent expectation that visual and tactile sensations will follow one another in regular sequences that we come to expect through habit.

Berkeley goes on to argue that visual cues, such as the perceived extension or &#x27;confusion&#x27; of an object, can only be used to indirectly judge distance, because the viewer learns to associate visual cues with tactile sensations. Berkeley gives the following analogy regarding indirect distance perception: one perceives distance indirectly just as one perceives a person&#x27;s embarrassment indirectly. When looking at an embarrassed person, we infer indirectly that the person is embarrassed by observing the red colour on the person&#x27;s face. We know through experience that a red face tends to signal embarrassment, as we&#x27;ve learned to associate the two.

The question concerning the visibility of space was central to the Renaissance perspective tradition and its reliance on classical optics in the development of pictorial representations of spatial depth. This matter has been debated by scholars since the 11th-century Arab polymath and mathematician Alhazen (Abū ʿAlī al-Ḥasan ibn al-Ḥasan ibn al-Haytham) affirmed in experimental contexts the visibility of space. This issue, which was raised in Berkeley&#x27;s theory of vision, was treated at length in the &quot;Phenomenology of Perception&quot; of Maurice Merleau-Ponty, in the context of confirming the visual perception of spatial depth (&quot;la profondeur&quot;), and by way of refuting Berkeley&#x27;s thesis.

Berkeley wrote about the perception of size in addition to that of distance. He is frequently misquoted as believing in size–distance invariance—a view held by the Optic Writers. This idea is that we scale the image size according to distance in a geometrical manner. The error may have become commonplace because the eminent historian and psychologist E. G. Boring perpetuated it. In fact, Berkeley argued that the same cues that evoke distance also evoke size, and that we do not first see size and then calculate distance. It is worth quoting Berkeley&#x27;s words on this issue (Section 53):
What inclines men to this mistake (beside the humour of making one see by geometry) is, that the same perceptions or ideas which suggest distance, do also suggest magnitude ... I say they do not first suggest distance, and then leave it to the judgement to use that as a medium, whereby to collect the magnitude; but they have as close and immediate a connexion with the magnitude as with the distance; and suggest magnitude as independently of distance, as they do distance independently of magnitude.

Berkeley claimed that his visual theories were &quot;vindicated&quot; by a 1728 report regarding the recovery of vision in a 13-year-old boy operated for congenital cataracts by surgeon William Cheselden. In 2021, the name of Cheselden&#x27;s patient was published for the first time: Daniel Dolins. Berkeley knew the Dolins family, had numerous social links to Cheselden, including the poet Alexander Pope, and Princess Caroline, to whom Cheselden&#x27;s patient was presented. The report misspelt Cheselden&#x27;s name, used language typical of Berkeley, and may even have been ghost-written by Berkeley. Unfortunately, Dolins was never able to see well enough to read, and there is no evidence that the surgery improved Dolins&#x27; vision at any point prior to his death at age 30.

===Philosophy of physics===

&quot;Berkeley&#x27;s works display his keen interest in natural philosophy [...] from his earliest writings (&quot;Arithmetica&quot;, 1707) to his latest (&quot;Siris&quot;, 1744). Moreover, much of his philosophy is shaped fundamentally by his engagement with the science of his time.&quot; The profundity of this interest can be judged from numerous entries in Berkeley&#x27;s &quot;Philosophical Commentaries&quot; (1707–1708), e.g. &quot;Mem. to Examine &amp; accurately discuss the scholium of the 8th Definition of Mr Newton&#x27;s Principia.&quot; (#316)

Berkeley argued that forces and gravity, as defined by Newton, constituted &quot;occult qualities&quot; that &quot;expressed nothing distinctly&quot;. He held that those who posited &quot;something unknown in a body of which they have no idea and which they call the principle of motion, are in fact simply stating that the principle of motion is unknown&quot;. Therefore, those who &quot;affirm that active force, action, and the principle of motion are really in bodies are adopting an opinion not based on experience&quot;. Forces and gravity existed nowhere in the phenomenal world. On the other hand, if they resided in the category of &quot;soul&quot; or &quot;incorporeal thing&quot;, they &quot;do not properly belong to physics&quot; as a matter. Berkeley thus concluded that forces lay beyond any kind of empirical observation and could not be a part of proper science. He proposed his theory of signs as a means to explain motion and matter without reference to the &quot;occult qualities&quot; of force and gravity.

===Berkeley&#x27;s razor===
Berkeley&#x27;s razor is a rule of reasoning proposed by the philosopher Karl Popper in his study of Berkeley&#x27;s key scientific work &quot;De Motu&quot;. Berkeley&#x27;s razor is considered by Popper to be similar to Ockham&#x27;s razor but &quot;more powerful&quot;. It represents an extreme, empiricist view of scientific observation that states that the scientific method provides us with no true insight into the nature of the world. Rather, the scientific method gives us a variety of partial explanations about regularities that hold in the world and that are gained through experiments. The nature of the world, according to Berkeley, is only approached through proper metaphysical speculation and reasoning. Popper summarises Berkeley&#x27;s razor as such:
A general practical result—which I propose to call &quot;Berkeley&#x27;s razor&quot;—of [Berkeley&#x27;s] analysis of physics allows us &quot;a priori&quot; to eliminate from physical science all essentialist explanations. If they have a mathematical and predictive content they may be admitted &quot;qua&quot; mathematical hypotheses (while their essentialist interpretation is eliminated). If not they may be ruled out altogether. This razor is sharper than Ockham&#x27;s: &quot;all&quot; entities are ruled out except those which are perceived.

In another essay of the same book titled &quot;Three Views Concerning Human Knowledge&quot;, Popper argues that Berkeley is to be considered as an instrumentalist philosopher, along with Robert Bellarmine, Pierre Duhem and Ernst Mach. According to this approach, scientific theories have the status of serviceable fictions, useful inventions aimed at explaining facts, and without any pretension to being true. Popper contrasts instrumentalism with the above-mentioned essentialism and his own &quot;critical rationalism&quot;.

===Philosophy of mathematics===
In addition to his contributions to philosophy, Berkeley was also very influential in the development of mathematics, although in a rather indirect sense. &quot;Berkeley was concerned with mathematics and its philosophical interpretation from the earliest stages of his intellectual life.&quot; Berkeley&#x27;s &quot;Philosophical Commentaries&quot; (1707–1708) witness to his interest in mathematics:

Axiom. No reasoning about things whereof we have no idea. Therefore no reasoning about Infinitesimals. (#354)

Take away the signs from Arithmetic &amp; Algebra, &amp; pray what remains? (#767)
These are sciences purely Verbal, &amp; entirely useless but for Practise in Societys of Men. No speculative knowledge, no comparison of Ideas in them. (#768)
In 1707, Berkeley published two treatises on mathematics. In 1734, he published &quot;The Analyst&quot;, subtitled &quot;A DISCOURSE Addressed to an Infidel Mathematician&quot;, a critique of calculus. Florian Cajori called this treatise &quot;the most spectacular event of the century in the history of British mathematics.&quot; However, a recent study suggests that Berkeley misunderstood Leibnizian calculus. The mathematician in question is believed to have been either Edmond Halley, or Isaac Newton himself—though if to the latter, then the discourse was posthumously addressed, as Newton died in 1727. &quot;The Analyst&quot; represented a direct attack on the foundations and principles of calculus and, in particular, the notion of fluxion or infinitesimal change, which Newton and Leibniz used to develop the calculus. In his critique, Berkeley coined the phrase &quot;ghosts of departed quantities&quot;, familiar to students of calculus. Ian Stewart&#x27;s book &quot;From Here to Infinity&quot; captures the gist of his criticism.

Berkeley regarded his criticism of calculus as part of his broader campaign against the religious implications of Newtonian mechanicsas a defence of traditional Christianity against deism, which tends to distance God from His worshipers. Specifically, he observed that both Newtonian and Leibnizian calculus employed infinitesimals sometimes as positive, nonzero quantities and other times as a number explicitly equal to zero. Berkeley&#x27;s key point in &quot;The Analyst&quot; was that Newton&#x27;s calculus (and the laws of motion based on calculus) lacked rigorous theoretical foundations. He claimed that:

In every other Science Men prove their Conclusions by their Principles, and not their Principles by the Conclusions. But if in yours you should allow your selves this unnatural way of proceeding, the Consequence would be that you must take up with Induction, and bid adieu to Demonstration. And if you submit to this, your Authority will no longer lead the way in Points of Reason and Science.
Berkeley did not doubt that calculus produced real-world truth; simple physics experiments could verify that Newton&#x27;s method did what it claimed to do. &quot;The cause of Fluxions cannot be defended by reason&quot;, but the results could be defended by empirical observation, Berkeley&#x27;s preferred method of acquiring knowledge at any rate. Berkeley, however, found it paradoxical that &quot;Mathematicians should deduce true Propositions from false Principles, be right in Conclusion, and yet err in the Premises.&quot; In &quot;The Analyst&quot; he endeavoured to show &quot;how Error may bring forth Truth, though it cannot bring forth Science&quot;. Newton&#x27;s science, therefore, could not on purely scientific grounds justify its conclusions, and the mechanical, deistic model of the universe could not be rationally justified.

The difficulties raised by Berkeley were still present in the work of Cauchy whose approach to calculus was a combination of infinitesimals and a notion of limit, and were eventually sidestepped by Weierstrass by means of his (ε, δ) approach, which eliminated infinitesimals altogether. More recently, Abraham Robinson restored infinitesimal methods in his 1966 book &quot;Non-standard analysis&quot; by showing that they can be used rigorously.

===Moral philosophy===

The tract &quot;A Discourse on Passive Obedience&quot; (1712) is considered Berkeley&#x27;s major contribution to moral and political philosophy.

In &quot;A Discourse on Passive Obedience&quot;, Berkeley defends the thesis that people have &quot;a moral duty to observe the negative precepts (prohibitions) of the law, including the duty not to resist the execution of punishment.&quot; However, Berkeley does make exceptions to this sweeping moral statement, stating that we need not observe precepts of &quot;usurpers or even madmen&quot; and that people can obey different supreme authorities if there are more than one claims to the highest authority.

Berkeley defends this thesis with deductive proof stemming from the laws of nature. First, he establishes that because God is perfectly good, the end to which he commands humans must also be good, and that end must not benefit just one person, but the entire human race. Because these commands—or laws—if practised, would lead to the general fitness of humankind, it follows that they can be discovered by the right reason—for example, the law to never resist supreme power can be derived from reason because this law is &quot;the only thing that stands between us and total disorder&quot;. Thus, these laws can be called the laws of nature, because they are derived from God—the creator of nature himself. &quot;These laws of nature include duties never to resist the supreme power, lie under oath ... or do evil so that good may come of it.&quot;

One may view Berkeley&#x27;s doctrine on Passive Obedience as a kind of &#x27;Theological Utilitarianism&#x27;, insofar as it states that we have a duty to uphold a moral code which presumably is working towards the ends of promoting the good of humankind. However, the concept of &#x27;ordinary&#x27; utilitarianism is fundamentally different in that it &quot;makes utility the one and only &quot;ground&quot; of obligation&quot;—that is, Utilitarianism is concerned with whether particular actions are morally permissible in specific situations, while Berkeley&#x27;s doctrine is concerned with whether or not we should follow moral rules in any and all circumstances. Whereas act utilitarianism might, for example, justify a morally impermissible act in light of the specific situation, Berkeley&#x27;s doctrine of Passive Obedience holds that it is never morally permissible to not follow a moral rule, even when it seems like breaking that moral rule might achieve the happiest ends. Berkeley holds that even though sometimes, the consequences of an action in a specific situation might be bad, the general tendencies of that action benefit humanity.

Other important sources for Berkeley&#x27;s views on morality are &quot;Alciphron&quot; (1732), especially dialogues I–III, and the &quot;Discourse to Magistrates&quot; (1738).&quot; &quot;Passive Obedience&quot; is notable partly for containing one of the earliest statements of rule utilitarianism.

===Immaterialism===
George Berkeley’s theory that matter does not exist comes from the belief that &quot;sensible things are those only which are immediately perceived by sense.&quot; Berkeley says in his book called &quot;Principles of Human Knowledge&quot; that &quot;the ideas of sense are stronger, livelier, and clearer than those of the imagination; and they are also steady, orderly and coherent.&quot; From this we can tell that the things that we are perceiving are truly real rather than it just being a dream.

All knowledge comes from perception; what we perceive are ideas, not things in themselves; a thing in itself must be outside experience; so the world only consists of ideas and minds that perceive those ideas; a thing only exists so far as it perceives or is perceived. Through this we can see that consciousness is considered something that exists to Berkeley due to its ability to perceive. &quot;&#x27;To be,&#x27; said of the object, means to be perceived, &#x27;esse est percipi&#x27;; &#x27;to be&#x27;, said of the subject, means to perceive or &#x27;percipere&#x27;.&quot; Having established this, Berkeley then attacks the &quot;opinion strangely prevailing amongst men, that houses, mountains, rivers, and in a word all sensible objects have an existence natural or real, distinct from being perceived&quot;. He believes this idea to be inconsistent because such an object with an existence independent of perception must have both sensible qualities, and thus be known (making it an idea), and also an insensible reality, which Berkeley believes is inconsistent. Berkeley believes that the error arises because people think that perceptions can imply or infer something about the material object. Berkeley calls this concept &quot;abstract ideas&quot;. He rebuts this concept by arguing that people cannot conceive of an object without also imagining the sensual input of the object. He argues in &quot;Principles of Human Knowledge&quot; that, similar to how people can only sense matter with their senses through the actual sensation, they can only conceive of matter (or, rather, ideas of matter) through the idea of sensation of matter. This implies that everything that people can conceive in regards to matter is only ideas about matter. Thus, matter, should it exist, must exist as collections of ideas, which can be perceived by the senses and interpreted by the mind. But if matter is just a collection of ideas, then Berkeley concludes that matter, in the sense of a material substance, does not exist as most philosophers of Berkeley&#x27;s time believed. Indeed, if a person visualizes something, then it must have some colour, however dark or light; it cannot just be a shape of no colour at all if a person is to visualize it.

Berkeley&#x27;s ideas raised controversy because his argument refuted Descartes&#x27; philosophy, which was expanded upon by Locke, and resulted in the rejection of Berkeley&#x27;s form of empiricism by several philosophers of the eighteenth century. In Locke&#x27;s philosophy, &quot;the world causes the perceptual ideas we have of it by the way it interacts with our senses.&quot; This contradicts with Berkeley&#x27;s philosophy because not only does it suggest the existence of physical causes in the world, but in fact, there is no physical world beyond our ideas. The only causes that exist in Berkeley&#x27;s philosophy are those that are a result of the use of the will.

Berkeley&#x27;s theory relies heavily on his form of empiricism, which in turn relies heavily on the senses. His empiricism can be defined by five propositions: all significant words stand for ideas; all knowledge of things is about ideas; all ideas come from without or from within; if from without it must be by the senses, and they are called sensations (the real things), if from within they are the operations of the mind, and are called thoughts. Berkeley clarifies his distinction between ideas by saying they &quot;are imprinted on the senses,&quot; &quot;perceived by attending to the passions and operations of the mind,&quot; or &quot;are formed by help of memory and imagination.&quot; One refutation of his idea was: if someone leaves a room and stops perceiving that room does that room no longer exist? Berkeley answers this by claiming that it is still being perceived and the consciousness that is doing the perceiving is God. (This makes Berkeley&#x27;s argument hinge upon an omniscient, omnipresent deity.) This claim is the only thing holding up his argument which is &quot;depending for our knowledge of the world, and of the existence of other minds, upon a God that would never deceive us.&quot; Berkeley anticipates a second objection, which he refutes in &quot;Principles of Human Knowledge&quot;. He anticipates that the materialist may take a representational materialist standpoint: although the senses can only perceive ideas, these ideas resemble (and thus can be compared to) the actual, existing object. Thus, through the sensing of these ideas, the mind can make inferences as to matter itself, even though pure matter is non-perceivable. Berkeley&#x27;s objection to that notion is that &quot;an idea can be like nothing but an idea; a colour or figure can be like nothing but another colour or figure&quot;. Berkeley distinguishes between an idea, which is mind-dependent, and a material substance, which is not an idea and is mind-independent. As they are not alike, they cannot be compared, just as one cannot compare the colour red to something that is invisible, or the sound of music to silence, other than that one exists and the other does not. This is called the likeness principle: the notion that an idea can only be like (and thus compared to) another idea.

Berkeley attempted to show how ideas manifest themselves into different objects of knowledge:

Berkeley also attempted to prove the existence of God throughout his beliefs in immaterialism.

==Influence==
Berkeley&#x27;s &quot;Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge&quot; was published three years before the publication of Arthur Collier&#x27;s &quot;Clavis Universalis&quot;, which made assertions similar to those of Berkeley&#x27;s. However, there seemed to have been no influence or communication between the two writers.

German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer once wrote of him: &quot;Berkeley was, therefore, the first to treat the subjective starting-point really seriously and to demonstrate irrefutably its absolute necessity. He is the father of idealism...&quot;.

Berkeley is considered one of the originators of British empiricism. A linear development is often traced from three great &quot;British Empiricists&quot;, leading from Locke through Berkeley to Hume.

Berkeley influenced many modern philosophers, especially David Hume. Thomas Reid admitted that he put forward a drastic criticism of Berkeleianism after he had been an admirer of Berkeley&#x27;s philosophical system for a long time. Berkeley&#x27;s &quot;thought made possible the work of Hume and thus Kant, notes Alfred North Whitehead&quot;. Some authors draw a parallel between Berkeley and Edmund Husserl.

When Berkeley visited America, the American educator Samuel Johnson visited him, and the two later corresponded. Johnson convinced Berkeley to establish a scholarship program at Yale and to donate a large number of books, as well as his plantation, to the college when the philosopher returned to England. It was one of Yale&#x27;s largest and most important donations; it doubled its library holdings, improved the college&#x27;s financial position and brought Anglican religious ideas and English culture into New England. Johnson also took Berkeley&#x27;s philosophy and used parts of it as a framework for his own American Practical Idealism school of philosophy. As Johnson&#x27;s philosophy was taught to about half the graduates of American colleges between 1743 and 1776, and over half of the contributors to the &quot;Declaration of Independence&quot; were connected to it, Berkeley&#x27;s ideas were indirectly a foundation of the American Mind.

Outside of America, during Berkeley&#x27;s lifetime, his philosophical ideas were comparatively uninfluential. But interest in his doctrine grew from the 1870s when Alexander Campbell Fraser, &quot;the leading Berkeley scholar of the nineteenth century&quot;, published &quot;The Works of George Berkeley&quot;. A powerful impulse to serious studies in Berkeley&#x27;s philosophy was given by A. A. Luce and Thomas Edmund Jessop, &quot;two of the twentieth century&#x27;s foremost Berkeley scholars&quot;, thanks to whom Berkeley scholarship was raised to the rank of a special area of historico-philosophical science. In addition, the philosopher Colin Murray Turbayne wrote extensively on Berkeley&#x27;s use of language as a model for visual, physiological, natural and metaphysical relationships.

The proportion of Berkeley scholarship, in literature on the history of philosophy, is increasing. This can be judged from the most comprehensive bibliographies on George Berkeley. During the period of 1709–1932, about 300 writings on Berkeley were published. That amounted to 1.5 publications per year. During the course of 1932–1979, over one thousand works were brought out, i.e., 20 works per year. Since then, the number of publications has reached 30 per annum. In 1977 publication began in Ireland of a special journal on Berkeley&#x27;s life and thought (&quot;Berkeley Studies&quot;). In 1988, the Australian philosopher Colin Murray Turbayne established the International Berkeley Essay Prize Competition at the University of Rochester in an effort to advance scholarship and research on the works of Berkeley.

Other than philosophy, Berkeley also influenced modern psychology with his work on John Locke&#x27;s theory of association and how it could be used to explain how humans gain knowledge in the physical world. He also used the theory to explain perception, stating that all qualities were, as Locke would call them, &quot;secondary qualities&quot;, therefore perception laid entirely in the perceiver and not in the object. These are both topics today studied in modern psychology.

==Appearances in literature==

Lord Byron&#x27;s &quot;Don Juan&quot; references immaterialism in the Eleventh Canto:
 When Bishop Berkeley said &#x27;there was no matter,&#x27;&lt;br&gt;
 And proved it—&#x27;t was no matter what he said:&lt;br&gt;
 They say his system &#x27;t is in vain to batter,&lt;br&gt;
 Too subtle for the airiest human head;&lt;br&gt;
 And yet who can believe it? I would shatter&lt;br&gt;
 Gladly all matters down to stone or lead,&lt;br&gt;
 Or adamant, to find the world a spirit,&lt;br&gt;
 And wear my head, denying that I wear it.
Herman Melville humorously references Berkeley in Chapter 20 of Mardi (1849), when outlining a character&#x27;s belief of being on board a ghostship:

And here be it said, that for all his superstitious misgivings about the brigantine; his imputing to her something equivalent to a purely phantom-like nature, honest Jarl was nevertheless exceedingly downright and practical in all hints and proceedings concerning her. Wherein, he resembled my Right Reverend friend, Bishop Berkeley–truly, one of your lords spiritual—who, metaphysically speaking, holding all objects to be mere optical delusions, was, notwithstanding, extremely matter-of-fact in all matters touching matter itself. Besides being pervious to the points of pins, and possessing a palate capable of appreciating plum-puddings:—which sentence reads off like a pattering of hailstones.

James Joyce references Berkeley&#x27;s philosophy in the third episode of &quot;Ulysses&quot; (1922):

Who watches me here? Who ever anywhere will read these written words? Signs on a white field. Somewhere to someone in your flutiest voice. The good bishop of Cloyne took the veil of the temple out of his shovel hat: veil of space with coloured emblems hatched on its field. Hold hard. Coloured on a flat: yes, that&#x27;s right. Flat I see, then think distance, near, far, flat I see, east, back. Ah, see now!

In commenting on a review of &quot;Ada or Ardor&quot;, author Vladimir Nabokov alludes to Berkeley&#x27;s philosophy as informing his novel:

And finally I owe no debt whatsoever (as Mr. Leonard seems to think) to the famous Argentine essayist and his rather confused compilation &quot;A New Refutation of Time.&quot; Mr. Leonard would have lost less of it had he gone straight to Berkeley and Bergson. (&quot;Strong Opinions&quot;, pp. 2892–90)

James Boswell, in the part of his &quot;Life of Samuel Johnson&quot; covering the year 1763, recorded Johnson&#x27;s opinion of one aspect of Berkeley&#x27;s philosophy:

After we came out of the church, we stood talking for some time together of Bishop Berkeley&#x27;s ingenious sophistry to prove the non-existence of matter, and that every thing in the universe is merely ideal. I observed, that though we are satisfied his doctrine is untrue, it is impossible to refute it. I shall never forget the alacrity with which Johnson answered, striking his foot with mighty force against a large stone, till he rebounded from it,– &quot;I refute it &quot;thus&quot;.&quot;

==Commemoration==

Both the University of California, Berkeley, and the city of Berkeley, California, were named after him, although the pronunciation has evolved to suit American English: ( ). The naming was suggested in 1866 by Frederick H. Billings, a trustee of what was then called the College of California. Billings was inspired by Berkeley&#x27;s &quot;Verses on the Prospect of Planting Arts and Learning in America&quot;, particularly the final stanza: &quot;Westward the course of empire takes its way; the first four Acts already past, a fifth shall close the Drama with the day; time&#x27;s noblest offspring is the last&quot;.

The Town of Berkley, currently the least populated town in Bristol County, Massachusetts, was founded on 18 April 1735 and named for George Berkeley.

A residential college and an Episcopal seminary at Yale University also bear Berkeley&#x27;s name.

&quot;Bishop Berkeley&#x27;s Gold Medals&quot; were two awards given annually at Trinity College Dublin, &quot;provided outstanding merit is shown&quot;, to candidates answering a special examination in Greek. The awards were founded in 1752 by Berkeley. However, they have not been awarded since 2011. Other elements of Berkeley&#x27;s legacy at Trinity are currently under review () due to his support of slavery. For example, the library at Trinity that was named after him in 1978 was &quot;de-named&quot; in April 2023 and renamed in October 2024 after Irish poet Eavan Boland. Another memorialization of him in the form of a stained glass window will remain, but used as part of &quot;a retain-and-explain approach&quot; where his legacy will be given further context.

An Ulster History Circle blue plaque commemorating him is located in Bishop Street Within, the city of Derry.

Berkeley&#x27;s farmhouse in Middletown, Rhode Island, is preserved as Whitehall Museum House, also known as Berkeley House, and was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1970. St. Columba&#x27;s Chapel, located in the same town, was formerly named &quot;The Berkeley Memorial Chapel&quot;, and the appellation still survives at the end of the formal name of the parish, &quot;St. Columba&#x27;s, the Berkeley Memorial Chapel&quot;.

==Writings==
===Original publications===
* &quot;Arithmetica&quot; (1707)
* &quot;Miscellanea Mathematica&quot; (1707)
* &quot;Philosophical Commentaries&quot; or &quot;Common-Place Book&quot; (1707–08, notebooks)
* &quot;&quot; (1709)
* &quot;A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge&quot;, Part I (1710)
* &quot;Passive Obedience, or the Christian doctrine of not resisting the Supreme Power&quot; (1712)
* &quot;Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous&quot; (1713)
* &quot;An Essay Towards Preventing the Ruin of Great Britain&quot; (1721)
* &quot;De Motu&quot; (1721)
* &quot;A Proposal for Better Supplying Churches in our Foreign Plantations, and for converting the Savage Americans to Christianity by a College to be erected in the Summer Islands&quot; (1725)
* &quot;A Sermon preached before the incorporated Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts&quot; (1732)
* &quot;Alciphron, or the Minute Philosopher&quot; (1732)
* &quot;The Theory of Vision, or Visual Language, shewing the immediate presence and providence of a Deity, vindicated and explained&quot; (1733)
* &quot;The Analyst: A Discourse Addressed to an Infidel Mathematician&quot; (1734)
* &quot;A Defence of Free-thinking in Mathematics, with Appendix concerning Mr. Walton&#x27;s vindication of Sir Isaac Newton&#x27;s Principle of Fluxions&quot; (1735)
* &quot;Reasons for not replying to Mr. Walton&#x27;s Full Answer&quot; (1735)
* &quot;The Querist, containing several queries proposed to the consideration of the public&quot; (three parts, 1735–37).
* &quot;A Discourse addressed to Magistrates and Men of Authority&quot; (1736)
* &quot;Siris, a chain of philosophical reflections and inquiries, concerning the virtues of tar-water&quot; (1744).
* &quot;A Letter to the Roman Catholics of the Diocese of Cloyne&quot; (1745)
* &quot;A Word to the Wise, or an exhortation to the Roman Catholic clergy of Ireland&quot; (1749)
* &quot;Maxims concerning Patriotism&quot; (1750)
* &quot;Farther Thoughts on Tar-water&quot; (1752)
* &quot;Miscellany&quot; (1752)

===Collections===
* &quot;The Works of George Berkeley, D.D. Late Bishop of Cloyne in Ireland. To which is added, an account of his life, and several of his letters to Thomas Prior, Esq. Dean Gervais, and Mr. Pope, &amp;c. &amp;c.&quot; Printed for George Robinson, Pater Noster Row, 1784. Two volumes.
* &quot;The Works of George Berkeley, D.D., formerly Bishop of Cloyne: Including Many of His Writings Hitherto Unpublished; With Prefaces, Annotations, His Life and Letters, and an Account of His Philosophy&quot;. Ed. by Alexander Campbell Fraser. In 4 Volumes. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1901.
** Vol. 1
** Vol. 2
** Vol. 3
** Vol. 4
* &quot;The Works of George Berkeley.&quot; Ed. by A. A. Luce and T. E. Jessop. Nine volumes. Edinburgh and London, 1948–1957.
* Ewald, William B., ed., 1996. &quot;From Kant to Hilbert: A Source Book in the Foundations of Mathematics&quot;, 2 vols. Oxford Uni. Press.
** 1707. &quot;Of Infinites&quot;, 16–19.
** 1709. &quot;Letter to Samuel Molyneaux&quot;, 19–21.
** 1721. &quot;De Motu&quot;, 37–54.
** 1734. &quot;The Analyst&quot;, 60–92.

==See also==
* List of people on the postage stamps of Ireland
* Solipsism
* &quot;Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius&quot;
* Yogacara and consciousness-only schools of thought

==References==
==Sources==
===Bibliographic resources===
* Jessop T. E., &quot;Luce A. A.&quot; &quot;A bibliography of George Berkeley&quot; 2 edn., Springer, 1973. 
* Turbayne C. M. &quot;A Bibliography of George Berkeley 1963–1979&quot; in: Berkeley: Critical and Interpretive Essays – via Google Books, Manchester, 1982. pp. 313–29.
* &quot;Berkeley Bibliography (1979–2010)&quot; – A Supplement to those of Jessop and Turbayne by Silvia Parigi.
* &quot;A Bibliography on George Berkeley&quot; – About 300 works from the 19th century to our days.

===Philosophical studies===
* Daniel, Stephen H. (ed.), &quot;Re-examining Berkeley&#x27;s Philosophy&quot;, Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2007.
* Daniel, Stephen H. (ed.), &quot;New Interpretations of Berkeley&#x27;s Thought&quot;, Amherst: Humanity Books, 2008.
* Dicker, Georges, &quot;Berkeley&#x27;s Idealism. A Critical Examination&quot;, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011.
*Gaustad, Edwin. &quot;George Berkeley in America&quot;. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1959.
* Pappas, George S., &quot;Berkeley&#x27;s Thought&quot;, Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2000.
*Stoneham, Tom, &quot;Berkeley&#x27;s World: An Examination of the Three Dialogues&quot;, Oxford University Press, 2002.
*Warnock, Geoffrey J., &quot;Berkeley&quot;, Penguin Books, 1953.
* Winkler, Kenneth P., &quot;The Cambridge Companion to Berkeley&quot;, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.

;Attribution

==Further reading==
* p. 349.
* 
* 
** &quot;Shows a thorough mastery of the literature on Berkeley, along with very perceptive remarks about the strength and weaknesses of most of the central commentators. ... Exhibits a mastery of all the material, both primary and secondary ...&quot; Charles Larmore, for the editorial board, &quot;Journal of Philosophy&quot;.
** R. Muehlmann is one of the Berkeley Prize Winners.
* Edward Chaney (2000), &#x27;George Berkeley&#x27;s Grand Tours: The Immaterialist as Connoisseur of Art and Architecture&#x27;, in E. Chaney, &quot;The Evolution of the Grand Tour: Anglo-Italian Cultural Relations since the Renaissance&quot;, 2nd ed. London, Routledge. 
* 
* Costica Bradatan (2006), &quot;The Other Bishop Berkeley. An Exercise in Reenchantment&quot;, Fordham University Press, New York
* New Interpretations of Berkeley&#x27;s Thought. Ed. by S. H. Daniel. New York: Humanity Books, 2008, 319 pp. .
** For reviews see:
** Reviewed by Marc A. Hight , Hampden–Sydney College
** Reviewed by Thomas M. Lennon – Berkeley Studies 19 (2008):51–56.

;Secondary literature available on the Internet
* Most sources listed below are suggested by Dr. Talia M. Bettcher in &quot;Berkeley: a Guide for the Perplexed&quot; (2008). See the textbook&#x27;s description.
* Luce, A. A. &quot;Berkeley and Malebranche. A Study in the Origins of Berkeley&#x27;s Thought&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1934 (2nd edn, with additional Preface, 1967).
* Russell B. Berkeley // Bertrand Russell A History of Western Philosophy 3:1:16 (1945)
* Turbayne, Colin Murray (1959). &quot;Berkeley&#x27;s Two Concepts of Mind&quot; – &quot;Philosophy and Phenomenological Research&quot;, Vol. 20, No. 1, Sept. 1959, pp. 85-92 on JSTOR.org
* Turbayne, Colin Murray (1962). &quot;Berkeley&#x27;s Two Concepts of Mind Part II&quot; – &quot;Philosophy and Phenomenological Research&quot;, Vol. 22, No. 3, March 1962, pp. 383-386 on JSTOR.org 
** Reviewed by: Désirée Park. &quot;Studi internazionali filosofici&quot; 3 (1971):228–30; G. J. Warnock. &quot;Journal of Philosophy&quot; 69, 15 (1972):460–62; Günter Gawlick &quot;Menschheitsglück und Wille Gottes: Neues Licht auf Berkeleys Ethik.&quot; &quot;Philosophische Rundschau&quot; 1–2 (January 1973):24–42; H. M. Bracken. &quot;Eighteenth-Century Studies&quot; 3 (1973): 396–97; and Stanley Grean. &quot;Journal of the History of Philosophy&quot; 12, 3 (1974): 398–403.
* Tipton, I. C. &quot;Berkeley, The Philosophy of Immaterialism&quot; London: Methuen, 1974. 
** &quot;Ian C. Tipton, one of the world&#x27;s great Berkeley scholars and longtime president of the International Berkeley Society. ... Of the many works about Berkeley that were published in the twentieth century, few rival in importance his &quot;Berkeley: The Philosophy of Immaterialism&quot; ... The philosophical insight, combined with the mastery of Berkeley&#x27;s texts, that Ian brought to this work make it one of the masterpieces of Berkeley scholarship. It is not surprising therefore that, when the Garland Publishing Company brought out, late in 1980s, a 15-volume collection of major works on Berkeley, Ian&#x27;s book was one of only two full-length studies of Berkeley published after 1935 to be included&quot; (Charles J. McCracken. In Memoriam: Ian C. Tipton // The Berkeley Newsletter 17 (2006), p. 4).
* Winkler, Kenneth P. &quot;Berkeley: An Interpretation&quot;. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989. 
* Berman, David. &quot;George Berkeley: Idealism and the Man&quot;. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1994.
* &quot;The Cambridge Companion to Berkeley&quot;. (EPUP, Google Books). Ed. by Kenneth P. Winkler. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005. 
* Daniel, Stephen H., ed. &quot;Reexamining Berkeley&#x27;s Philosophy&quot;. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2007. 
* Roberts, John. &quot;A Metaphysics for the Mob: The Philosophy of George Berkeley&quot; (EPUP, Google Books). New York: Oxford University Press, 2007. – 172 p. 
** Reviewed by Marc A. Hight , University of Tartu/Hampden–Sydney College

==External links==

* George Berkeley at the Eighteenth-Century Poetry Archive (ECPA)
* George Berkeley in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
* Berkeley&#x27;s Philosophy of Science in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
* International Berkeley Society
* A list of the published works by and about Berkeley as well as online links
* Berkeley&#x27;s Life and Works 
* 
* Another perspective on how Berkeley framed his immaterialism
* Original texts and discussion concerning &quot;The Analyst&quot; controversy
* Contains more easily readable versions of New Theory of Vision, Principles of Human Knowledge, Three Dialogues, and Alciphron
* An extensive compendium of online resources, including a gallery of Berkeley&#x27;s images
* Electronic Texts for philosopher Charlie Dunbar (1887–1971):
* Broad, C. D. Berkeley&#x27;s Argument About Material Substance New York: 1975 (Repr. of the 1942 ed. publ. by the British Academy, London.)
* Broad, C. D. Berkeley&#x27;s Denial of Material Substance – Published in: &quot;The Philosophical Review&quot; Vol. LXIII (1954).
* Rick Grush syllabus Empiricism (J. Locke, G. Berkeley, D. Hume)
* Berkeley&#x27;s (1734) &quot;The Analyst&quot; – digital facsimile.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q82049" start="0" end="15" title="George Berkeley" label="George Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q82049" start="61" end="76" title="George Berkeley" label="Bishop Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246744" start="78" end="94" title="Bishop of Cloyne" label="Bishop of Cloyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="102" end="110" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="111" end="128" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849692" start="139" end="150" title="Anglo-Irish" label="Anglo-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q247218" start="285" end="304" title="subjective idealism" label="subjective idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35758" start="359" end="377" title="matter" label="material substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q131841" start="448" end="452" title="idea" label="idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="454" end="463" title="perception" label="perceived"/>
<link wikidata="Q450" start="471" end="475" title="mind" label="mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q673661" start="575" end="586" title="abstraction" label="abstraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="697" end="710" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="744" end="778" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267928" start="1079" end="1134" title="A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge" label="A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110883" start="1248" end="1291" title="Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous" label="Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122538" start="1428" end="1432" title="hyle" label="hyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="1517" end="1527" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="1554" end="1566" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q19314" start="1586" end="1606" title="Absolute space and time" label="absolute space, time"/>
<link wikidata="Q79782" start="1611" end="1617" title="Motion (physics)" label="motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q171280" start="1627" end="1634" title="De Motu (Berkeley&amp;#x27;s essay)" label="De Motu"/>
<link wikidata="Q93996" start="1729" end="1739" title="Ernst Mach" label="Ernst Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="1744" end="1759" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713139" start="1789" end="1798" title="Alciphron (book)" label="Alciphron"/>
<link wikidata="Q191776" start="1818" end="1828" title="apologetics" label="apologetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q210115" start="1841" end="1854" title="free-thinkers" label="free-thinkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3223788" start="1888" end="1899" title="The Analyst" label="The Analyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q149972" start="1940" end="1948" title="calculus" label="calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2057" end="2069" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q15215556" start="2357" end="2370" title="Dysart Castle" label="Dysart Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433139" start="2377" end="2387" title="Thomastown, County Kilkenny" label="Thomastown"/>
<link wikidata="Q180231" start="2389" end="2404" title="County Kilkenny" label="County Kilkenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016400" start="2453" end="2458" title="Cadet (genealogy)" label="cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892134" start="2482" end="2490" title="Berkeley family" label="Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q784963" start="2532" end="2550" title="Anglo-Saxon England" label="Anglo-Saxon period"/>
<link wikidata="Q170497" start="2604" end="2614" title="Gloucester" label="Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407035" start="2675" end="2691" title="Kilkenny College" label="Kilkenny College"/>
<link wikidata="Q258464" start="2705" end="2727" title="Trinity College Dublin" label="Trinity College Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q24196528" start="2742" end="2759" title="List of Scholars of Trinity College Dublin" label="elected a Scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267928" start="3337" end="3390" title="Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge" label="Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110883" start="3569" end="3612" title="Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous" label="Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081" start="3960" end="3971" title="materialism" label="materialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q381073" start="4057" end="4070" title="Samuel Clarke" label="Samuel Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q452091" start="4075" end="4090" title="William Whiston" label="William Whiston"/>
<link wikidata="Q206384" start="4325" end="4332" title="Joseph Addison" label="Addison"/>
<link wikidata="Q164047" start="4334" end="4338" title="Alexander Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q333148" start="4343" end="4349" title="Richard Steele" label="Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q662862" start="4589" end="4600" title="Holy orders" label="Holy orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="4608" end="4625" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379405" start="4652" end="4660" title="divinity" label="divinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="4759" end="4765" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246615" start="4789" end="4804" title="Dean of Dromore" label="Dean of Dromore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5246612" start="4819" end="4832" title="Dean of Derry" label="Dean of Derry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401315" start="4874" end="4891" title="Esther Vanhomrigh" label="Esther Vanhomrigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347374" start="4918" end="4933" title="Robert Marshall (Irish judge)" label="Robert Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q41166" start="4995" end="5009" title="Jonathan Swift" label="Jonathan Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="5570" end="5577" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q536866" start="5752" end="5769" title="St Mary le Strand" label="St Mary le Strand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233695" start="5822" end="5834" title="John Forster (Chief Justice)" label="John Forster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096815" start="5836" end="5875" title="Chief Justice of the Irish Common Pleas" label="Chief Justice of the Irish Common Pleas"/>
<link wikidata="Q54264" start="5992" end="6013" title="Newport, Rhode Island" label="Newport, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q188913" start="6033" end="6043" title="plantation" label="plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013038" start="6047" end="6057" title="Middletown, Rhode Island" label="Middletown"/>
<link wikidata="Q14709477" start="6074" end="6083" title="Whitehall Museum House" label="Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539285" start="6118" end="6135" title="Slavery in the colonial history of the United States" label="enslaved Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q264649" start="6362" end="6374" title="Palladianism" label="Palladianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182482" start="6568" end="6580" title="John Smybert" label="John Smibert"/>
<link wikidata="Q104190" start="7040" end="7047" title="Robert Walpole" label="Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246744" start="7510" end="7526" title="Bishop of Cloyne" label="Bishop of Cloyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="7534" end="7551" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439887" start="7875" end="7893" title="Foundling Hospital" label="Foundling Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="7909" end="7922" title="royal charter" label="royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q732279" start="8278" end="8286" title="Pine tar" label="Pine tar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685008" start="8459" end="8468" title="tar water" label="tar-water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736208" start="8750" end="8781" title="Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford" label="Christ Church Cathedral, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="9508" end="9520" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q247218" start="10247" end="10266" title="subjective idealism" label="subjective idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q677734" start="11529" end="11551" title="problem of other minds" label="problem of other minds"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="12181" end="12186" title="Causality" label="cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="12356" end="12365" title="Isaac Newton" label="Newtonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q450" start="12674" end="12678" title="mind" label="mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="12718" end="12728" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647485" start="12833" end="12842" title="A.A. Luce" label="A.A. Luce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562978" start="13155" end="13165" title="volte-face" label="volte-face"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145447" start="13175" end="13196" title="Colin Murray Turbayne" label="Colin Murray Turbayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534" start="14363" end="14375" title="metaphor" label="metaphorical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="14565" end="14575" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q217789" start="14658" end="14689" title="Primary/secondary quality distinction" label="primary and secondary qualities"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="17556" end="17567" title="rationalism" label="rationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="17594" end="17604" title="empiricism" label="empiricism"/>
<link wikidata="Q247218" start="17621" end="17640" title="Subjective idealism" label="subjective idealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096504" start="21504" end="21512" title="William Molyneux" label="Molyneux"/>
<link wikidata="Q309818" start="21522" end="21533" title="Nicolas Malebranche" label="Malebranche"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="21538" end="21547" title="René Descartes" label="Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900281" start="22788" end="22799" title="Perspective (graphical)" label="perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q11104" start="23009" end="23016" title="Alhazen" label="Alhazen"/>
<link wikidata="Q212639" start="23262" end="23283" title="Maurice Merleau-Ponty" label="Maurice Merleau-Ponty"/>
<link wikidata="Q719209" start="23783" end="23795" title="Edwin Boring" label="E. G. Boring"/>
<link wikidata="Q81244" start="27040" end="27051" title="Karl Popper" label="Karl Popper"/>
<link wikidata="Q131012" start="27188" end="27207" title="Ockham&amp;#x27;s razor" label="Ockham&amp;#x27;s razor"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="27265" end="27275" title="Empiricism" label="empiricist"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="27647" end="27659" title="Metaphysics" label="metaphysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q391156" start="27932" end="27944" title="Essentialism" label="essentialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q856063" start="28432" end="28447" title="Instrumentalism" label="instrumentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q298664" start="28472" end="28489" title="Robert Bellarmine" label="Robert Bellarmine"/>
<link wikidata="Q314172" start="28491" end="28503" title="Pierre Duhem" label="Pierre Duhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q93996" start="28508" end="28518" title="Ernst Mach" label="Ernst Mach"/>
<link wikidata="Q868608" start="28785" end="28805" title="critical rationalism" label="critical rationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="28951" end="28962" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3223788" start="29688" end="29699" title="The Analyst" label="The Analyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q149972" start="29794" end="29802" title="calculus" label="calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q122323" start="29804" end="29818" title="Florian Cajori" label="Florian Cajori"/>
<link wikidata="Q47434" start="30077" end="30090" title="Edmond Halley" label="Edmond Halley"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="30095" end="30107" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q149972" start="30301" end="30309" title="calculus" label="calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074567" start="30344" end="30351" title="Method of Fluxions" label="fluxion"/>
<link wikidata="Q193885" start="30355" end="30368" title="infinitesimal" label="infinitesimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="30394" end="30401" title="Gottfried Leibniz" label="Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3223788" start="30482" end="30511" title="ghosts of departed quantities" label="ghosts of departed quantities"/>
<link wikidata="Q372182" start="30553" end="30564" title="Ian Stewart (mathematician)" label="Ian Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505444" start="30577" end="30610" title="From Here to Infinity (book)" label="&amp;quot;From Here to Infinity&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q620629" start="30830" end="30835" title="deism" label="deism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8814" start="32574" end="32580" title="Cauchy" label="Cauchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q57103" start="32702" end="32713" title="Weierstrass" label="Weierstrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q33540" start="32730" end="32736" title="(ε, δ)-definition of limit" label="(ε, δ)"/>
<link wikidata="Q330567" start="32806" end="32822" title="Abraham Robinson" label="Abraham Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503766" start="32877" end="32898" title="Non-standard analysis" label="Non-standard analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="34259" end="34273" title="Natural law" label="laws of nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q160590" start="34785" end="34799" title="utilitarianism" label="utilitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738092" start="35162" end="35180" title="Act Utilitarianism" label="act utilitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713139" start="35712" end="35721" title="Alciphron (book)" label="Alciphron"/>
<link wikidata="Q651440" start="35920" end="35939" title="rule utilitarianism" label="rule utilitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="38787" end="38796" title="René Descartes" label="Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="39451" end="39461" title="empiricism" label="empiricism"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="40337" end="40340" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424662" start="40393" end="40403" title="Omniscience" label="omniscient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062803" start="40405" end="40416" title="Omnipresence" label="omnipresent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267928" start="41931" end="41984" title="Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge" label="Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960921" start="42043" end="42057" title="Arthur Collier" label="Arthur Collier"/>
<link wikidata="Q38193" start="42266" end="42285" title="Arthur Schopenhauer" label="Arthur Schopenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q33442" start="42477" end="42485" title="idealism" label="idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="42554" end="42564" title="empiricism" label="empiricism"/>
<link wikidata="Q860746" start="42724" end="42743" title="Modern philosophy" label="modern philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="42756" end="42766" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q316347" start="42768" end="42779" title="Thomas Reid" label="Thomas Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="43002" end="43006" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q183372" start="43014" end="43036" title="Alfred North Whitehead" label="Alfred North Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q58586" start="43094" end="43108" title="Edmund Husserl" label="Edmund Husserl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791832" start="43164" end="43178" title="Samuel Johnson (American educator)" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718531" start="44233" end="44258" title="Alexander Campbell Fraser" label="Alexander Campbell Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44461" end="44471" title="A. A. Luce" label="A. A. Luce"/>
<link wikidata="Q55540441" start="44476" end="44496" title="Thomas Edmund Jessop" label="Thomas Edmund Jessop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145447" start="44716" end="44737" title="Colin Murray Turbayne" label="Colin Murray Turbayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939165" start="45439" end="45455" title="Berkeley Studies" label="Berkeley Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145447" start="45500" end="45521" title="Colin Murray Turbayne" label="Colin Murray Turbayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q149990" start="45592" end="45615" title="University of Rochester" label="University of Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="46204" end="46214" title="Lord Byron" label="Lord Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245187" start="46228" end="46236" title="Don Juan (poem)" label="Don Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985" start="46735" end="46750" title="Herman Melville" label="Herman Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290324" start="46799" end="46804" title="Mardi" label="Mardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="47587" end="47598" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6511" start="47667" end="47674" title="Ulysses (novel)" label="Ulysses"/>
<link wikidata="" start="48136" end="48148" title="Ada or Ardor: A Family Chronicle" label="Ada or Ardor"/>
<link wikidata="Q36591" start="48163" end="48179" title="Vladimir Nabokov" label="Vladimir Nabokov"/>
<link wikidata="Q909" start="48315" end="48344" title="Jorge Luis Borges" label="the famous Argentine essayist"/>
<link wikidata="Q335060" start="48548" end="48561" title="James Boswell" label="James Boswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218644" start="48588" end="48610" title="Life of Samuel Johnson" label="Life of Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="49247" end="49281" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="49291" end="49319" title="Berkeley, California" label="city of Berkeley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="49390" end="49406" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49449" end="49470" title="Frederick H. Billings" label="Frederick H. Billings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146658" start="49510" end="49531" title="College of California" label="College of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113265" start="49873" end="49880" title="Berkley, Massachusetts" label="Berkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q54082" start="49920" end="49949" title="Bristol County, Massachusetts" label="Bristol County, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897183" start="50014" end="50033" title="Berkeley College (Yale)" label="residential college"/>
<link wikidata="Q4089774" start="50041" end="50059" title="Berkeley Divinity School" label="Episcopal seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="50063" end="50078" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q258464" start="50193" end="50215" title="Trinity College Dublin" label="Trinity College Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="50519" end="50526" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879966" start="50891" end="50912" title="Ulster History Circle" label="Ulster History Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q14709477" start="51070" end="51092" title="Whitehall Museum House" label="Whitehall Museum House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="51146" end="51182" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587649" start="51192" end="51217" title="St. Columba&amp;#x27;s Chapel (Middletown, Rhode Island)" label="St. Columba&amp;#x27;s Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267928" start="51693" end="51748" title="A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge" label="A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110883" start="51879" end="51922" title="Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous" label="Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous"/>
<link wikidata="Q171280" start="52019" end="52026" title="De Motu (Berkeley&amp;#x27;s essay)" label="De Motu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713139" start="52365" end="52401" title="Alciphron (book)" label="Alciphron, or the Minute Philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3223788" start="52569" end="52631" title="The Analyst" label="The Analyst: A Discourse Addressed to an Infidel Mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q18810734" start="53770" end="53785" title="George Robinson (1737–1801)" label="George Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718531" start="54045" end="54070" title="Alexander Campbell Fraser" label="Alexander Campbell Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244413" start="54618" end="54665" title="List of people on the postage stamps of Ireland" label="List of people on the postage stamps of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q181020" start="54668" end="54677" title="Solipsism" label="Solipsism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673835" start="54686" end="54712" title="Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius" label="Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius"/>
<link wikidata="Q847493" start="54721" end="54729" title="Yogacara" label="Yogacara"/>
<link wikidata="Q847493" start="54734" end="54752" title="consciousness-only" label="consciousness-only"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647485" start="54852" end="54862" title="A. A. Luce" label="Luce A. A."/>
<link wikidata="Q206033" start="55066" end="55078" title="Google Books" label="Google Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346440" start="55724" end="55738" title="Edwin Gaustad" label="Gaustad, Edwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817702" start="55919" end="55932" title="Tom Stoneham" label="Stoneham, Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534962" start="56040" end="56060" title="Geoffrey Warnock" label="Warnock, Geoffrey J."/>
<link wikidata="Q93233708" start="56107" end="56126" title="Winkler, Kenneth P." label="Winkler, Kenneth P."/>
<link wikidata="Q1797609" start="57227" end="57249" title="Hampden–Sydney College" label="Hampden–Sydney College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939165" start="57284" end="57300" title="Berkeley Studies" label="Berkeley Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="57715" end="57725" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Russell B."/>
<link wikidata="Q133740" start="57755" end="57786" title="A History of Western Philosophy" label="A History of Western Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534962" start="58281" end="58294" title="Geoffrey Warnock" label="G. J. Warnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939165" start="59551" end="59574" title="Berkeley Studies" label="The Berkeley Newsletter"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="59664" end="59679" title="Clarendon Press" label="Clarendon Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q206033" start="59845" end="59857" title="Google Books" label="Google Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q93233708" start="59867" end="59885" title="Kenneth P. Winkler" label="Kenneth P. Winkler"/>
<link wikidata="Q206033" start="60153" end="60165" title="Google Books" label="Google Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q204181" start="60250" end="60269" title="University of Tartu" label="University of Tartu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797609" start="60270" end="60292" title="Hampden–Sydney College" label="Hampden–Sydney College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022453" start="61100" end="61112" title="C. D. Broad" label="Broad, C. D."/>
<link wikidata="Q1022453" start="61242" end="61254" title="C. D. Broad" label="Broad, C. D."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11959" wikidata="Q295386" url="?curid=11959" title="G. E. Moore">
<text>George Edward Moore (4 November 1873 – 24 October 1958) was an English philosopher, who with Bertrand Russell, Ludwig Wittgenstein and earlier Gottlob Frege was among the initiators of analytic philosophy. He and Russell began de-emphasizing the idealism which was then prevalent among British philosophers and became known for advocating common-sense concepts and contributing to ethics, epistemology and metaphysics. He was said to have had an &quot;exceptional personality and moral character&quot;. Ray Monk dubbed him &quot;the most revered philosopher of his era&quot;. 

As Professor of Philosophy at the University of Cambridge, he influenced but abstained from the Bloomsbury Group, an informal set of intellectuals. He edited the journal &quot;Mind&quot;. He was a member of the Cambridge Apostles from 1894 to 1901, a fellow of the British Academy from 1918, and was chairman of the Cambridge University Moral Sciences Club in 1912–1944. A humanist, he presided over the British Ethical Union (now Humanists UK) in 1935–1936.

==Life==

George Edward Moore was born in Upper Norwood, in south-east London, on 4 November 1873, the middle child of seven of Daniel Moore, a medical doctor, and Henrietta Sturge. His grandfather was the author George Moore. His eldest brother was Thomas Sturge Moore, a poet, writer and engraver.

He was educated at Dulwich College and, in 1892, began attending Trinity College, Cambridge, to learn classics and moral sciences. He became a Fellow of Trinity in 1898 and was later University of Cambridge Professor of Mental Philosophy and Logic from 1925 to 1939.

Moore is known best now for defending ethical non-naturalism, his emphasis on common sense for philosophical method, and the paradox that bears his name. He was admired by and influenced by other philosophers and some of the Bloomsbury Group. But unlike his colleague and admirer Bertrand Russell, who for some years thought Moore fulfilled his &quot;ideal of genius&quot;, he is mostly unknown presently except among academic philosophers. Moore&#x27;s essays are known for their clarity and circumspection of writing style and methodical and patient treatment of philosophical problems. He was critical of modern philosophy for lack of progress, which he saw as a stark contrast to the dramatic advances in the natural sciences since the Renaissance. Among Moore&#x27;s most famous works are his &quot;Principia Ethica&quot;, and his essays, &quot;The Refutation of Idealism&quot;, &quot;A Defence of Common Sense&quot;, and &quot;A Proof of the External World&quot;.

Moore was an important and admired member of the secretive Cambridge Apostles, a discussion group drawn from the British intellectual elite. At the time another member, 22-year-old Bertrand Russell, wrote &quot;I almost worship him as if he were a god. I have never felt such an extravagant admiration for anybody&quot;, and would later write that &quot;for some years he fulfilled my ideal of genius. He was in those days beautiful and slim, with a look almost of inspiration as deeply passionate as Spinoza&#x27;s&quot;.

From 1918 to 1919, Moore was chairman of the Aristotelian Society, a group committed to the systematic study of philosophy, its historical development and its methods and problems. He was appointed to the Order of Merit in 1951.

Moore died in England in the Evelyn Nursing Home on 24 October 1958. He was cremated at Cambridge Crematorium on 28 October 1958 and his ashes interred at the Parish of the Ascension Burial Ground in the city. His wife, Dorothy Ely (1892–1977), was buried there. Together, they had two sons, the poet Nicholas Moore and the composer Timothy Moore.

==Philosophy==
===Ethics===

His influential work &quot;Principia Ethica&quot; is one of the main inspirations of the reaction against ethical naturalism (see ethical non-naturalism) and is partly responsible for the twentieth-century concern with meta-ethics.

====The naturalistic fallacy====

Moore asserted that philosophical arguments can suffer from a confusion between the use of a term in a particular argument and the definition of that term (in all arguments). He named this confusion the naturalistic fallacy. For example, an ethical argument may claim that if an item has certain properties, then that item is &#x27;good.&#x27; A hedonist may argue that &#x27;pleasant&#x27; items are &#x27;good&#x27; items. Other theorists may argue that &#x27;complex&#x27; things are &#x27;good&#x27; things. Moore contends that, even if such arguments are correct, they do not provide definitions for the term &#x27;good&#x27;. The property of &#x27;goodness&#x27; cannot be defined. It can only be shown and grasped. Any attempt to define it (X is good if it has property Y) will simply shift the problem (Why is Y-ness good in the first place?).

====Open-question argument====

Moore&#x27;s argument for the indefinability of &#x27;good&#x27; (and thus for the fallaciousness in the &quot;naturalistic fallacy&quot;) is often termed the open-question argument; it is presented in §13 of &quot;Principia Ethica&quot;. The argument concerns the nature of statements such as &quot;Anything that is pleasant is also good&quot; and the possibility of asking questions such as &quot;Is it &quot;good&quot; that x is pleasant?&quot;. According to Moore, these questions are &quot;open&quot; and these statements are &quot;significant&quot;; and they will remain so no matter what is substituted for &quot;pleasure&quot;. Moore concludes from this that any analysis of value is bound to fail. In other words, if value could be analysed, then such questions and statements would be trivial and obvious. Since they are anything but trivial and obvious, value must be indefinable.

Critics of Moore&#x27;s arguments sometimes claim that he is appealing to general puzzles concerning analysis (cf. the paradox of analysis), rather than revealing anything special about value. The argument clearly depends on the assumption that if &#x27;good&#x27; were definable, it would be an analytic truth about &#x27;good&#x27;, an assumption that many contemporary moral realists like Richard Boyd and Peter Railton reject. Other responses appeal to the Fregean distinction between sense and reference, allowing that value concepts are special and &quot;sui generis&quot;, but insisting that value properties are nothing but natural properties (this strategy is similar to that taken by non-reductive materialists in philosophy of mind).

====Good as indefinable====
Moore contended that goodness cannot be analysed in terms of any other property. In &quot;Principia Ethica&quot;, he writes:

: It may be true that all things which are good are also something else, just as it is true that all things which are yellow produce a certain kind of vibration in the light. And it is a fact, that Ethics aims at discovering what are those other properties belonging to all things which are good. But far too many philosophers have thought that when they named those other properties they were actually defining good; that these properties, in fact, were simply not &quot;other,&quot; but absolutely and entirely the same with goodness. (&quot;Principia&quot;, § 10 ¶ 3)

Therefore, we cannot define &#x27;good&#x27; by explaining it in other words. We can only indicate a &quot;thing&quot; or an &quot;action&quot; and say &quot;That is good&quot;. Similarly, we cannot describe to a person born totally blind exactly what yellow is. We can only show a sighted person a piece of yellow paper or a yellow scrap of cloth and say &quot;That is yellow&quot;.

====Good as a non-natural property====
In addition to categorising &#x27;good&#x27; as indefinable, Moore also emphasized that it is a non-natural property. This means that it cannot be empirically or scientifically tested or verifiedit is not analyzable by &quot;natural science&quot;.

====Moral knowledge====
Moore argued that, once arguments based on the naturalistic fallacy had been discarded, questions of intrinsic goodness could be settled only by appeal to what he (following Sidgwick) termed &quot;moral intuitions&quot;: self-evident propositions which recommend themselves to moral thought, but which are not susceptible to either direct proof or disproof (&quot;Principia&quot;, § 45). As a result of his opinion, he has often been described by later writers as an advocate of ethical intuitionism. Moore, however, wished to distinguish his opinions from the opinions usually described as &quot;Intuitionist&quot; when &quot;Principia Ethica&quot; was written:

Moore distinguished his view from the opinion of deontological intuitionists, who claimed that &quot;intuitions&quot; could determine questions about what &quot;actions&quot; are right or required by duty. Moore, as a consequentialist, argued that &quot;duties&quot; and moral rules could be determined by investigating the &quot;effects&quot; of particular actions or kinds of actions (&quot;Principia&quot;, § 89), and so were matters for empirical investigation rather than direct objects of intuition (&quot;Principia&quot;, § 90). According to Moore, &quot;intuitions&quot; revealed not the rightness or wrongness of specific actions, but only what items were good in themselves, as &quot;ends to be pursued&quot;.

==== Right action, duty and virtue ====
Moore holds that are those producing the most good. The difficulty with this is that the consequences of most actions are too complex for us to properly take into account, especially the long-term consequences. Because of this, Moore suggests that the definition of duty is limited to what generally produces better results than probable alternatives in a comparatively near future. Whether a given rule of action is also a &quot;duty&quot; depends to some extent on the conditions of the corresponding society but &quot;duties&quot; agree mostly with what common-sense recommends. Virtues, like honesty, can in turn be defined as &quot;permanent dispositions&quot; to perform duties.
===Proof of an external world===

One of the most important parts of Moore&#x27;s philosophical development was his differing with the idealism that dominated British philosophy (as represented by the works of his former teachers F. H. Bradley and John McTaggart), and his defence of what he regarded as a &quot;common sense&quot; type of realism. In his 1925 essay &quot;A Defence of Common Sense&quot;, he argued against idealism and scepticism toward the external world, on the grounds that they could not give reasons to accept that their metaphysical premises were more plausible than the reasons we have for accepting the common sense claims about our knowledge of the world, which sceptics and idealists must deny. He famously put the point into dramatic relief with his 1939 essay &quot;Proof of an External World&quot;, in which he gave a common sense argument against scepticism by raising his right hand and saying &quot;Here is one hand&quot; and then raising his left and saying &quot;And here is another&quot;, then concluding that there are at least two external objects in the world, and therefore that he knows (by this argument) that an external world exists. Not surprisingly, not everyone preferring sceptical doubts found Moore&#x27;s method of argument entirely convincing; Moore, however, defends his argument on the grounds that sceptical arguments seem invariably to require an appeal to &quot;philosophical intuitions&quot; that we have considerably less reason to accept than we have for the common sense claims that they supposedly refute. The &quot;Here is one hand&quot; argument also influenced Ludwig Wittgenstein, who spent his last years working out a new method for Moore&#x27;s argument in the remarks that were published posthumously as &quot;On Certainty&quot;.)

===Moore&#x27;s paradox===
Moore is also remembered for drawing attention to the peculiar inconsistency involved in uttering a sentence such as &quot;It is raining, but I do not believe it is raining&quot;, a puzzle now commonly termed &quot;Moore&#x27;s paradox&quot;. The puzzle is that it seems inconsistent for anyone to &quot;assert&quot; such a sentence; but there doesn&#x27;t seem to be any &quot;logical contradiction&quot; between &quot;It is raining&quot; and &quot;I don&#x27;t believe that it is raining&quot;, because the former is a statement about the weather and the latter a statement about a person&#x27;s belief about the weather, and it is perfectly logically possible that it may rain whilst a person does not believe that it is raining.

In addition to Moore&#x27;s own work on the paradox, the puzzle also inspired a great deal of work by Ludwig Wittgenstein, who described the paradox as the most impressive philosophical insight that Moore had ever introduced. It is said that when Wittgenstein first heard this paradox one evening (which Moore had earlier stated in a lecture), he rushed round to Moore&#x27;s lodgings, got him out of bed and insisted that Moore repeat the entire lecture to him.

===Organic wholes===
Moore&#x27;s description of the principle of the organic whole is extremely straightforward, nonetheless, and a variant on a pattern that began with Aristotle:

: The value of a whole must not be assumed to be the same as the sum of the values of its parts (&quot;Principia&quot;, § 18).

According to Moore, a moral actor cannot survey the &#x27;goodness&#x27; inherent in the various parts of a situation, assign a value to each of them, and then generate a sum in order to get an idea of its total value. A moral scenario is a complex assembly of parts, and its total value is often created by the relations between those parts, and not by their individual value. The organic metaphor is thus very appropriate: biological organisms seem to have emergent properties which cannot be found anywhere in their individual parts. For example, a human brain seems to exhibit a capacity for thought when none of its neurons exhibit any such capacity. In the same way, a moral scenario can have a value different than the sum of its component parts.

To understand the application of the organic principle to questions of value, it is perhaps best to consider Moore&#x27;s primary example, that of a consciousness experiencing a beautiful object. To see how the principle works, a thinker engages in &quot;reflective isolation&quot;, the act of isolating a given concept in a kind of null context and determining its intrinsic value. In our example, we can easily see that, of themselves, beautiful objects and consciousnesses are not particularly valuable things. They might have some value, but when we consider the total value of a consciousness experiencing a beautiful object, it seems to exceed the simple sum of these values. Hence the value of a whole must not be assumed to be the same as the sum of the values of its parts.

==Works==

* G. E. Moore, &quot;The Nature of Judgment&quot; (1899)
* G. E. Moore, &quot;&quot; (1903)
* G. E. Moore, &quot;Review of Franz Brentano&#x27;s &quot;The Origin of the Knowledge of Right and Wrong&quot;&quot; (1903)
* G. E. Moore, &quot;The Refutation of Idealism&quot; (1903)
* G. E. Moore, &quot;The Nature and Reality of the Objects of Perception&quot; (1905–6)
* 
* G. E. Moore, &quot;&quot; (1912)
* G. E. Moore, &quot;Some Judgments of Perception&quot; (1918)
* G. E. Moore, &quot;&quot; (1922) [papers published 1903–21]
** G. E. Moore, &quot;The Conception of Intrinsic Value&quot;
** G. E. Moore, &quot;The Nature of Moral Philosophy&quot;
* G. E. Moore, &quot;Are the Characteristics of Things Universal or Particular?&quot; (1923)
* G. E. Moore, &quot;A Defence of Common Sense&quot; (1925)
* G. E. Moore and F. P. Ramsey, &quot;Facts and Proposition (Symposium)&quot; (1927)
* W. Kneale and G. E. Moore, &quot;Symposium: Is Existence a Predicate?&quot; (1936)
* G. E. Moore, and in: &quot;The Philosophy Of G. E. Moore&quot;. ed. Schilpp, Paul Arthur (1942).
* G. E. Moore, &quot;&quot; (1953) [lectures delivered 1910–11]
** G. E. Moore, Ch. 3, &quot;Propositions&quot;
* G. E. Moore, &quot;&quot; (1959)
** G. E. Moore, Ch. 7: &quot;Proof of an External World&quot;
* &quot;Margin Notes by G. E. Moore on The Works of Thomas Reid (1849: With Notes by Sir William Hamilton)&quot;.
* G. E. Moore, &quot;&quot;, edited by Tom Regan, Temple University Press (1986).
* G. E. Moore, , edited and with an introduction by Tom Regan, Temple University Press, (1991).
* G. E. Moore, in &quot;Analytic Philosophy: Classic Readings,&quot; Stamford, CT: Wadsworth, 2002, pp. 1–10. .

==See also==
* &quot;The Right and the Good&quot;

==References==
==Further reading==
* White, Alan R. (1958) &quot;&quot;, Blackwell 
* Klemke, E. D. (1969) &quot;The Epistemology of G. E. Moore&quot;, Northwestern University Press. 
* O’Connor, David (1982) &quot;&quot;. D. Reidel 
* Regan, Tom (1986). &quot;Bloomsbury&#x27;s Prophet: G.E. Moore and the Development of His Moral Philosophy&quot;, Temple University Press. 
* Sosa, Ernest (2001). &quot;G. E. Moore (1873–1958)&quot; in &quot;A Companion to Analytic Philosophy&quot; (eds A.P. Martinich and D. Sosa). 

==External links==
* George Edward Moore – philosophypages.com
* The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
** George Edward Moore
** Moore&#x27;s Moral Philosophy
* 
* 
* Trinity College Chapel
* &quot;G. E. Moore and the Cambridge School of Analysis,&quot; Thomas Baldwin, &quot;The Oxford Handbook of The History of Analytic Philosophy&quot;
* Open Access papers by Moore published in &quot;Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society&quot; and &quot;Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume.&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q295386" start="0" end="19" title="G. E. Moore" label="George Edward Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="93" end="109" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="111" end="130" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Ludwig Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q60028" start="143" end="156" title="Gottlob Frege" label="Gottlob Frege"/>
<link wikidata="Q183216" start="185" end="204" title="analytic philosophy" label="analytic philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q33442" start="246" end="254" title="idealism" label="idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q332880" start="339" end="351" title="common sense" label="common-sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="381" end="387" title="ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="389" end="401" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="406" end="417" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5991701" start="503" end="511" title="Ray Monk" label="Ray Monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="612" end="635" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q603529" start="674" end="690" title="Bloomsbury Group" label="Bloomsbury Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936338" start="754" end="758" title="Mind (journal)" label="Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028290" start="789" end="807" title="Cambridge Apostles" label="Cambridge Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q723551" start="843" end="858" title="British Academy" label="British Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q312226" start="951" end="959" title="secular humanist" label="humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q656542" start="1009" end="1021" title="Humanists UK" label="Humanists UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q123292" start="1080" end="1093" title="Upper Norwood" label="Upper Norwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542606" start="1251" end="1263" title="George Moore (physician)" label="George Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q506813" start="1288" end="1307" title="Thomas Sturge Moore" label="Thomas Sturge Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264867" start="1358" end="1373" title="Dulwich College" label="Dulwich College"/>
<link wikidata="Q332342" start="1404" end="1430" title="Trinity College, Cambridge" label="Trinity College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="1441" end="1449" title="classics" label="classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587903" start="1454" end="1468" title="moral sciences" label="moral sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="1522" end="1545" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429044" start="1546" end="1586" title="Faculty of Philosophy, University of Cambridge" label="Professor of Mental Philosophy and Logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403415" start="1645" end="1667" title="ethical non-naturalism" label="ethical non-naturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q332880" start="1685" end="1697" title="common sense" label="common sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q588504" start="1732" end="1759" title="Moore&amp;#x27;s paradox" label="paradox that bears his name"/>
<link wikidata="Q603529" start="1832" end="1848" title="Bloomsbury Group" label="Bloomsbury Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q596284" start="2245" end="2253" title="Philosophical progress" label="progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991" start="2320" end="2335" title="natural science" label="natural science"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="2347" end="2358" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344885" start="2411" end="2427" title="Principia Ethica" label="Principia Ethica"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118915" start="2497" end="2522" title="A Defence of Common Sense" label="A Defence of Common Sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028290" start="2637" end="2655" title="Cambridge Apostles" label="Cambridge Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q35802" start="3079" end="3086" title="Spinoza" label="Spinoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355816" start="3147" end="3167" title="Aristotelian Society" label="Aristotelian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q94056" start="3307" end="3321" title="Order of Merit" label="Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q42851410" start="3361" end="3380" title="Nuffield Health Cambridge Hospital" label="Evelyn Nursing Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q4803837" start="3491" end="3528" title="Ascension Parish Burial Ground, Cambridge" label="Parish of the Ascension Burial Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984955" start="3633" end="3647" title="Nicholas Moore" label="Nicholas Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344885" start="3737" end="3753" title="Principia Ethica" label="Principia Ethica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495350" start="3816" end="3834" title="ethical naturalism" label="ethical naturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403415" start="3840" end="3862" title="ethical non-naturalism" label="ethical non-naturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q56003" start="3929" end="3940" title="meta-ethics" label="meta-ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q376789" start="4180" end="4200" title="naturalistic fallacy" label="naturalistic fallacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064" start="4323" end="4331" title="hedonism" label="hedonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q186619" start="4875" end="4883" title="argument" label="argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095717" start="5021" end="5043" title="open-question argument" label="open-question argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134449" start="5874" end="5893" title="paradox of analysis" label="paradox of analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311695" start="6051" end="6065" title="Logical truth" label="analytic truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q974723" start="6147" end="6159" title="Richard Boyd" label="Richard Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q429743" start="6164" end="6177" title="Peter Railton" label="Peter Railton"/>
<link wikidata="Q60028" start="6216" end="6221" title="Frege" label="Frege"/>
<link wikidata="Q330955" start="6244" end="6263" title="sense and reference" label="sense and reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q269114" start="6449" end="6475" title="physicalism" label="non-reductive materialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q23407" start="6479" end="6497" title="philosophy of mind" label="philosophy of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344885" start="6619" end="6635" title="Principia Ethica" label="Principia Ethica"/>
<link wikidata="Q376789" start="7971" end="7991" title="naturalistic fallacy" label="naturalistic fallacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q433076" start="8098" end="8106" title="Henry Sidgwick" label="Sidgwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q11303017" start="8145" end="8157" title="self-evidence" label="self-evident"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632427" start="8403" end="8423" title="ethical intuitionism" label="ethical intuitionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q221373" start="8637" end="8650" title="deontological ethics" label="deontological"/>
<link wikidata="Q878070" start="8788" end="8792" title="duty" label="duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q646102" start="8806" end="8822" title="consequentialist" label="consequentialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q33442" start="10169" end="10177" title="idealism" label="idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q350236" start="10264" end="10277" title="F. H. Bradley" label="F. H. Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q463553" start="10282" end="10296" title="J. M. E. McTaggart" label="John McTaggart"/>
<link wikidata="Q735590" start="10373" end="10380" title="Philosophical realism" label="realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118915" start="10406" end="10431" title="A Defence of Common Sense" label="A Defence of Common Sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395219" start="10470" end="10480" title="scepticism" label="scepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="11660" end="11679" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Ludwig Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q330929" start="11814" end="11826" title="On Certainty" label="On Certainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q588504" start="12078" end="12098" title="Moore&amp;#x27;s paradox" label="Moore&amp;#x27;s paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="12699" end="12718" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Ludwig Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101870" start="13131" end="13144" title="organic unity" label="organic whole"/>
<link wikidata="Q315387" start="15742" end="15754" title="Frank P. Ramsey" label="F. P. Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q994761" start="15811" end="15820" title="W. Kneale" label="W. Kneale"/>
<link wikidata="Q314146" start="16355" end="16364" title="Tom Regan" label="Tom Regan"/>
<link wikidata="Q105061759" start="16628" end="16650" title="The Right and the Good" label="The Right and the Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q18810571" start="16695" end="16709" title="Alan R. White" label="White, Alan R."/>
<link wikidata="Q314146" start="16894" end="16904" title="Tom Regan" label="Regan, Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356547" start="17036" end="17048" title="Ernest Sosa" label="Sosa, Ernest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734711" start="17148" end="17162" title="Aloysius Martinich" label="A.P. Martinich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239956" start="17167" end="17174" title="David Sosa" label="D. Sosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q10996085" start="17435" end="17449" title="Thomas Baldwin (philosopher)" label="Thomas Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355816" start="17589" end="17609" title="Aristotelian Society" label="Aristotelian Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11964" wikidata="Q488677" url="?curid=11964" title="Genus–differentia definition">
<text>A genus–differentia [[definition]] is a type of intensional definition, and it is composed of two parts:

# a [[Genus (philosophy)|genus]] (or family): An existing definition that serves as a portion of the new definition; all definitions with the same genus are considered members of that genus.
# the [[differentia]]: The portion of the definition that is not provided by the genus.
For example, consider these two definitions:
* &quot;a triangle&quot;: A plane figure that has 3 straight bounding sides.
* &quot;a quadrilateral&quot;: A plane figure that has 4 straight bounding sides.
Those definitions can be expressed as one genus and two &quot;differentiae&quot;:
# &quot;one genus&quot;:
#* &quot;the genus for both a triangle and a quadrilateral&quot;: &quot;A plane figure&quot;
# &quot;two differentiae&quot;:
#* &quot;the differentia for a triangle&quot;: &quot;that has 3 straight bounding sides.&quot;
#* &quot;the differentia for a quadrilateral&quot;: &quot;that has 4 straight bounding sides.&quot;

The use of a genus (Greek: &quot;genos&quot;) and a differentia (Greek: &quot;diaphora&quot;) in constructing a definition goes back at least as far as Aristotle (384–322 BCE). Furthermore, a genus may fulfill certain characteristics (described below) that qualify it to be referred to as &quot;a species&quot;, a term derived from the Greek word &quot;eidos&quot;, which means &quot;form&quot; in Plato&#x27;s dialogues but should be taken to mean &quot;species&quot; in Aristotle&#x27;s corpus.

== Differentiation and abstraction ==
The process of producing new definitions by &quot;extending&quot; existing definitions is commonly known as differentiation (and also as derivation). The reverse process, by which just part of an existing definition is used itself as a new definition, is called abstraction; the new definition is called &quot;an abstraction&quot; and it is said to have been &quot;abstracted away from&quot; the existing definition.

For instance, consider the following:
* &quot;a square&quot;: a quadrilateral that has interior angles which are all right angles, and that has bounding sides which all have the same length.
A part of that definition may be singled out (using parentheses here):
* &quot;a square&quot;: (a quadrilateral that has interior angles which are all right angles), and that has bounding sides which all have the same length.
and with that part, an abstraction may be formed:
* &quot;a rectangle&quot;: a quadrilateral that has interior angles which are all right angles.
Then, the definition of &quot;a square&quot; may be recast with that abstraction as its genus:
* &quot;a square&quot;: a rectangle that has bounding sides which all have the same length.

Similarly, the definition of &quot;a square&quot; may be rearranged and another portion singled out:
* &quot;a square&quot;: (a quadrilateral that has bounding sides which all have the same length), and that has interior angles which are all right angles.
leading to the following abstraction:
* &quot;a rhombus&quot;: a quadrilateral that has bounding sides which all have the same length.
Then, the definition of &quot;a square&quot; may be recast with that abstraction as its genus:
* &quot;a square&quot;: a rhombus that has interior angles which are all right angles.

In fact, the definition of &quot;a square&quot; may be recast in terms of both of the abstractions, where one acts as the genus and the other acts as the differentia:
* &quot;a square&quot;: a rectangle that is a rhombus.
* &quot;a square&quot;: a rhombus that is a rectangle.
Hence, abstraction is a means of simplifying definitions.

== Multiplicity ==
When multiple definitions could serve equally well, then all such definitions apply simultaneously. Thus, &quot;a square&quot; is a member of both the genus &quot;[a] rectangle&quot; and the genus &quot;[a] rhombus&quot;. In such a case, it is notationally convenient to consolidate the definitions into one definition that is expressed with multiple genera (and possibly no differentia, as in the following):
* &quot;a square&quot;: a rectangle and a rhombus.
or completely equivalently:
* &quot;a square&quot;: a rhombus and a rectangle.

More generally, a collection of formula_1 equivalent definitions (each of which is expressed with one unique genus) can be recast as one definition that is expressed with formula_2 genera. Thus, the following:
* &quot;a Definition&quot;: a Genus1 that is a Genus2 and that is a Genus3 and that is a... and that is a Genusn-1 and that is a Genusn, which has some non-genus Differentia.
* &quot;a Definition&quot;: a Genus2 that is a Genus1 and that is a Genus3 and that is a... and that is a Genusn-1 and that is a Genusn, which has some non-genus Differentia.
* &quot;a Definition&quot;: a Genus3 that is a Genus1 and that is a Genus2 and that is a... and that is a Genusn-1 and that is a Genusn, which has some non-genus Differentia.
* &quot;a Definition&quot;: a Genusn-1 that is a Genus1 and that is a Genus2 and that is a Genus3 and that is a... and that is a Genusn, which has some non-genus Differentia.
* &quot;a Definition&quot;: a Genusn that is a Genus1 and that is a Genus2 and that is a Genus3 and that is a... and that is a Genusn-1, which has some non-genus Differentia.
could be recast as:
* &quot;a Definition&quot;: a Genus1 and a Genus2 and a Genus3 and a... and a Genusn-1 and a Genusn, which has some non-genus Differentia.

== Structure ==

A genus of a definition provides a means by which to specify an &quot;is-a relationship&quot;:
* A square is a rectangle, which is a quadrilateral, which is a plane figure, which is a...
* A square is a rhombus, which is a quadrilateral, which is a plane figure, which is a...
* A square is a quadrilateral, which is a plane figure, which is a...
* A square is a plane figure, which is a...
* A square is a...
The non-genus portion of the differentia of a definition provides a means by which to specify a &quot;has-a relationship&quot;:
* A square has an interior angle that is a right angle.
* A square has a straight bounding side.
* A square has a...

When a system of definitions is constructed with genera and differentiae, the definitions can be thought of as nodes forming a hierarchy or—more generally—a directed acyclic graph; a node that has no predecessor is &quot;a most general definition&quot;; each node along a directed path is &quot;more differentiated (or &quot;more derived) than any one of its predecessors, and a node with no successor is &quot;a most differentiated&quot; (or &quot;a most derived&quot;) definition.

When a definition, &quot;S&quot;, is the tail of each of its successors (that is, &quot;S&quot; has at least one successor and each direct successor of &quot;S&quot; is a most differentiated definition), then &quot;S&quot; is often called &quot;the species of each of its successors, and each direct successor of &quot;S&quot; is often called &quot;an individual (or &quot;an &quot;) of the species &quot;S&quot;; that is, the genus of an individual is synonymously called &quot;the species&quot; of that individual. Furthermore, the differentia of an individual is synonymously called &quot;the identity&quot; of that individual. For instance, consider the following definition:
* &quot;[the] John Smith&quot;: a human that has the name &#x27;John Smith&#x27;.
In this case:
* The whole definition is &quot;an individual&quot;; that is, &quot;[the] John Smith&quot; is an individual.
* The genus of &quot;[the] John Smith&quot; (which is &quot;a human&quot;) may be called synonymously &quot;the species&quot; of &quot;[the] John Smith&quot;; that is, &quot;[the] John Smith&quot; is an individual of the species &quot;[a] human&quot;.
* The differentia of &quot;[the] John Smith&quot; (which is &quot;that has the name &#x27;John Smith&#x27;&quot;) may be called synonymously &quot;the identity&quot; of &quot;[the] John Smith&quot;; that is, &quot;[the] John Smith&quot; is identified among other individuals of the same species by the fact that &quot;[the] John Smith&quot; is the one &quot;that has the name &#x27;John Smith&#x27;&quot;.

As in that example, the identity itself (or some part of it) is often used to refer to the entire individual, a phenomenon that is known in linguistics as a &quot;pars pro toto synecdoche&quot;.

==See also==
* Hyponymy and hypernymy

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q488677" start="2" end="34" title="Genus–differentia definition" label="genus–differentia [[definition]]"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48" end="70" title="Extensional and intensional definitions#Intensional definition" label="intensional definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q488677" start="108" end="138" title="Genus–differentia definition" label="a [[Genus (philosophy)|genus]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q488677" start="299" end="318" title="Genus–differentia definition" label="the [[differentia]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q19821" start="440" end="448" title="triangle" label="triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q36810" start="517" end="530" title="quadrilateral" label="quadrilateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="1169" end="1178" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068658" start="1401" end="1405" title="Platonic form" label="form"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="1415" end="1420" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="1489" end="1498" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q673661" start="1815" end="1826" title="abstraction" label="abstraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q164" start="2019" end="2025" title="square (geometry)" label="square"/>
<link wikidata="Q164" start="2243" end="2249" title="square (geometry)" label="square"/>
<link wikidata="Q209" start="2448" end="2457" title="rectangle" label="rectangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q164" start="2639" end="2645" title="square (geometry)" label="square"/>
<link wikidata="Q164" start="2833" end="2839" title="square (geometry)" label="square"/>
<link wikidata="Q41159" start="3026" end="3033" title="rhombus" label="rhombus"/>
<link wikidata="Q164" start="3218" end="3224" title="square (geometry)" label="square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101080" start="5524" end="5541" title="is-a" label="is-a relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985787" start="5966" end="5984" title="has-a" label="has-a relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q188619" start="6237" end="6246" title="hierarchy" label="hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195339" start="6267" end="6289" title="directed acyclic graph" label="directed acyclic graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137726" start="6310" end="6321" title="Directed graph" label="predecessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137726" start="6502" end="6511" title="Directed graph" label="successor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137726" start="6635" end="6639" title="Directed graph" label="tail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137726" start="6726" end="6742" title="Directed graph" label="direct successor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="6843" end="6850" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q795052" start="6946" end="6956" title="individual" label="individual"/>
<link wikidata="Q254474" start="7190" end="7198" title="Identity (philosophy)" label="identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="8278" end="8289" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q736444" start="8301" end="8314" title="pars pro toto" label="pars pro toto"/>
<link wikidata="Q190068" start="8315" end="8325" title="synecdoche" label="synecdoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q43201039" start="8349" end="8371" title="Hyponymy and hypernymy" label="Hyponymy and hypernymy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11966" wikidata="Q12796" url="?curid=11966" title="Firearm">
<text>A firearm is any type of gun that uses an explosive charge and is designed to be readily carried and operated by an individual. The term is legally defined further in different countries (see legal definitions).

The first firearms originated in 10th-century China, when bamboo tubes containing gunpowder and pellet projectiles were mounted on spears to make the portable fire lance, operable by a single person, which was later used effectively as a shock weapon in the siege of De&#x27;an in 1132. In the 13th century, fire lance barrels were replaced with metal tubes and transformed into the metal-barreled hand cannon. The technology gradually spread throughout Eurasia during the 14th century. Older firearms typically used black powder as a propellant, but modern firearms use smokeless powder or other explosive propellants. Most modern firearms (with the notable exception of smoothbore shotguns) have rifled barrels to impart spin to the projectile for improved flight stability.

Modern firearms can be described by their caliber (i.e. bore diameter). For pistols and rifles this is given in millimeters or inches (e.g. 7.62mm or .308 in.); in the case of shotguns, gauge or bore (e.g. 12 ga. or .410 bore.). They are also described by the type of action employed (e.g. muzzleloader, breechloader, lever, bolt, pump, revolver, semi-automatic, fully automatic, etc.), together with the usual means of deportment (i.e. hand-held or mechanical mounting). Further classification may make reference to the type of barrel used (i.e. rifled) and to the barrel length (e.g. 24 inches), to the firing mechanism (e.g. matchlock, wheellock, flintlock, or percussion lock), to the design&#x27;s primary intended use (e.g. hunting rifle), or to the commonly accepted name for a particular variation (e.g. Gatling gun).

Shooters aim firearms at their targets with hand-eye coordination, using either iron sights or optical sights. The accurate range of pistols generally does not exceed , while most rifles are accurate to using iron sights, or to longer ranges whilst using optical sights. Purpose-built sniper rifles and anti-materiel rifles are accurate to ranges of more than . (Firearm rounds may be dangerous or lethal well beyond their accurate range; the minimum distance for safety is much greater than the specified range for accuracy.)

== Types ==

A firearm is a barreled weapon that inflicts damage on targets by launching one or more projectiles driven by rapidly expanding high-pressure gas produced by exothermic combustion (deflagration) of a chemical propellant, historically black powder, now smokeless powder.

In the military, firearms are categorized into &quot;heavy&quot; and &quot;light&quot; weapons regarding their portability by infantry. Light firearms are those that can be readily carried by individual foot soldier, though they might still require more than one individual (crew-served) to achieve optimal operational capacity. Heavy firearms are those that are too large and heavy to be transported on foot, or too unstable against recoil, and thus require the support of a weapons platform (e.g. a fixed mount, wheeled carriage, vehicle, aircraft or water vessel) to be tactically mobile or useful.

The subset of light firearms that only use kinetic projectiles and are compact enough to be operated to full capacity by a single infantryman (individual-served) are also referred to as small arms. Such firearms include handguns such as pistols, revolvers, and derringers; and long guns such as rifles (and their subtypes), shotguns, submachine guns, and machine guns.

Among the world&#x27;s arms manufacturers, the top firearms manufacturers are Browning, Remington, Colt, Ruger, Smith &amp; Wesson, Savage, Mossberg (United States), Heckler &amp; Koch, SIG Sauer, Walther (Germany), ČZUB (Czech Republic), Glock, Steyr Arms (Austria), FN Herstal (Belgium), Beretta (Italy), Norinco (China), Rostec, and Kalashnikov (Russia). Former top producers included the Springfield Armory (United States), the Royal Small Arms Factory (United Kingdom), Mauser (Germany), Steyr-Daimler-Puch (Austria), and Rock Island Armory under Armscor (Philippines).

 the Small Arms Survey reported that there were over one billion firearms distributed globally, of which 857 million (about 85 percent) were in civilian hands. U.S. civilians alone account for 393 million (about 46 percent) of the worldwide total of civilian-held firearms. This amounts to &quot;120.5 firearms for every 100 residents&quot;. The world&#x27;s armed forces control about 133 million (about 13 percent) of the global total of small arms, of which over 43 percent belong to two countries: the Russian Federation (30.3 million) and China (27.5 million). Law enforcement agencies control about 23 million (about 2 percent) of the global total of small arms.

=== Handguns ===


A handgun is, as defined generally and in many gun laws, a firearm that can be used with a single hand. They are the smallest of all firearms, and are common as sidearms, concealed carry weapons, or as backup weapons for self-defense.

Handguns can be categorized into two broad types: pistols, which have a single fixed firing chamber machined into the rear of the barrel, and are often loaded using magazines of varying capacities; revolvers, which have a number of firing chambers or &quot;charge holes&quot; in a revolving cylinder, each one loaded with a single cartridge or charge; and derringers, broadly defined as any handgun that is not a traditional pistol nor a revolver.

There are various types of the aforementioned handguns designed for different mechanisms or purposes, such as single-shot, manual repeating, semi-automatic, or automatic pistols; single-action, double-action, or double-action/single-action revolvers; and small, compact handguns for concealed carry such as pocket pistols and &quot;Saturday night specials&quot;.

Examples of pistols include the Glock, Browning Hi-Power, M1911 pistol, Makarov pistol, Walther PP, Luger pistol, Mauser C96, and Beretta 92. Examples of revolvers include the Colt Single Action Army, Smith &amp; Wesson Model 10, Colt Official Police, Colt Python, New Nambu M60, and Mateba Autorevolver. Examples of derringers include the Remington Model 95, FP-45 Liberator, and COP .357 Derringer.

=== Long guns ===
A long gun is any firearm with a notably long barrel, typically a length of (there are restrictions on minimum barrel length in many jurisdictions; maximum barrel length is usually a matter of practicality). Unlike a handgun, long guns are designed to be held and fired with both hands, while braced against either the hip or the shoulder for better stability. The receiver and trigger group is mounted into a stock made of wood, plastic, metal, or composite material, which has sections that form a foregrip, rear grip, and optionally (but typically) a shoulder mount called the &quot;butt&quot;. Early long arms, from the Renaissance up to the mid-19th century, were generally smoothbore firearms that fired one or more ball shot, called muskets or arquebuses depending on caliber and firing mechanism. Since the 19th and 20th centuries, various types of long guns have been created for different purposes.

==== Rifles ====

A rifle is a long gun that has riflings (spiral grooves) machined into the bore (inner) surface of its barrel, imparting a gyroscopically stabilizing spin to the bullets that it fires. A descendant of the musket, rifles produce a single point of impact with each firing with a long range and high accuracy. For this reason, as well as for their ubiquity, rifles are very popular among militaries as service rifles, police as accurate long-range alternatives to their traditional shotgun long guns, and civilians for hunting, shooting sports, and self-defense.

Many types of rifles exist owing to their wide adoption and versatility, ranging from mere barrel length differences as in short-barreled rifles and carbines, to classifications per the rifle&#x27;s function and purpose as in semi-automatic rifles, automatic rifles and sniper rifles, to differences in the rifle&#x27;s action as in single-shot, break-action, bolt-action, and lever-action rifles.

Examples of rifles of various types include the Henry rifle, Winchester rifle, Lee–Enfield, Gewehr 98, M1 Garand, MAS-36 rifle, AKM, Ruger 10/22, Heckler &amp; Koch G3, Remington Model 700, and Heckler &amp; Koch HK417.

==== Shotguns ====

A shotgun is a long gun that has a predominantly smoothbore barrel—meaning it lacks rifling—designed to fire a number of shot pellets in each discharge. These shot pellet sizes commonly range between 2 mm #9 birdshot and 8.4 mm #00 (double-aught) buckshot, and produce a cluster of impact points with considerably less range and accuracy, since shot spreads during flight. Shotguns are also capable of firing single solid projectiles called slugs, or specialty (often &quot;less lethal&quot;) munitions such as bean bags or tear gas to function as a riot gun or breaching rounds to function as a door breaching shotgun. Shotgun munitions, regardless of type, are packed into shotgun shells (cartridges designed specifically for shotguns) that are loaded into the shotgun for use; these shells are commonly loose and manually loaded one-by-one, though some shotguns accept magazines.

Shotguns share many qualities with rifles, such as both being descendants of early long guns such as the musket; both having single-shot, break-action, bolt-action, lever-action, pump-action, semi-automatic, and automatic variants; and both being popular with militaries, police, and civilians for largely the same reasons. However, unlike rifles, shotguns are less favored in combat roles due to their low accuracy and limited effectiveness in modern warfare, with combat shotguns often only used for breaching or close-quarters combat and sometimes limited to underbarrel attachments such as the M26 Modular Accessory Shotgun System. Shotguns are still popular with civilians for the suitability of their shot spread in hunting, clay pigeon shooting, and home defense.

Double-barreled shotguns are break-action shotguns with two parallel barrels (horizontal side-by-side or vertical over-and-under), allowing two single shots that can be loaded and fired in quick succession.

Examples of shotguns include the Winchester Model 1897, Browning Auto-5, Ithaca 37, Remington Model 870, Mossberg 500, Benelli M4, Franchi SPAS-12, Atchisson AA-12, and Knight&#x27;s Armament Company Masterkey.

==== Carbines ====


A carbine is a long gun, usually a rifle, that has had its barrel shortened from its original length or is of a certain size smaller than standard rifles, but is still large enough to be considered a long gun. How considerable the difference is between a rifle and a carbine varies; for example, the standard Heckler &amp; Koch G36&#x27;s barrel has a length of 480 mm (18.9 in), the G36K carbine variant&#x27;s barrel is 318 mm (12.5 in), and the G36C compact variant&#x27;s barrel is 228 mm (9.0 in). Some carbines are also redesigned compared to their rifle counterparts, such as the aforementioned G36/G36K and G36C, or the AK-74 and AKS-74U. However, some carbines, such as the M1 carbine, are not a variant of any existing design and are their own firearm model. Carbines are regardless very similar to rifles and often have the same actions (single-shot, lever-action, bolt-action, semi-automatic, automatic, etc.). This similarity has given carbines the alternate name of &quot;short barreled rifle&quot; (SBR), though this more accurately describes a full-size rifle with a shortened carbine-style barrel for close-quarters use.

The small size of a carbine provides lighter weight and better maneuverability, making them ideal for close-quarters combat and storage in compact areas. This makes them popular firearms among special forces and police tactical units alongside submachine guns, considerably so since the late 1990s due to the familiarity and better stopping power of carbines compared to submachine guns. They are also popular with (and were originally mostly intended for) military personnel in roles that are expected to engage in combat, but where a full-size rifle would be an impediment to the primary duties of that soldier (logistical personnel, airborne forces, military engineers, officers, etc.), though since the turn of the millennium these have been superseded to a degree in some roles by personal defense weapons. Carbines are also common among civilian firearm owners who have size, space, and power concerns similar to military and police users.

Examples of carbines include the Winchester Model 1892, Rifle No. 5 Mk I, SKS, M1 carbine, Ruger Mini-14, M4 carbine, and Kel-Tec SUB-2000.

==== Assault rifles ====

An assault rifle is commonly defined as a selective-fire rifle chambered in an intermediate cartridge (such as 5.56×45mm NATO, 7.62×39mm, 5.45×39mm, and .300 AAC Blackout) and fed with a detachable magazine. Assault rifles are also usually smaller than full-sized rifles such as battle rifles.

Originating with the StG 44 produced by Nazi Germany during World War II, assault rifles have since become extremely popular among militaries and other armed groups due to their universal versatility, and they have made up the vast majority of standard-issue military service rifles since the mid-20th century. Various configurations of assault rifle exist, such as the bullpup, in which the firing grip is located in front of the breech instead of behind it.

Examples of assault rifles include the Kalashnikov rifles of Soviet and Russian origin (such as the AK-47, AKM, and AK-74), as well as the American M4 carbine and M16 rifle.

==== Battle rifles ====

A battle rifle is commonly defined as a semi-automatic or selective-fire rifle that is larger or longer than an assault rifle and is chambered in a &quot;full-power&quot; cartridge (e.g. 7.62×51mm NATO, 7.92×57mm Mauser, 7.62×54mmR). The term originated as a retronym to differentiate older full-powered rifles of these configurations like the M1 Garand, from newer assault rifles using intermediate cartridges like the Heckler &amp; Koch HK33, but it is sometimes used to describe similar modern rifles such as the FN SCAR.

Battle rifles serve similar purposes as assault rifles, as they both are usually employed by ground infantry for essentially the same purposes. However, some prefer battle rifles for their more powerful cartridge, despite the added recoil. Some designated marksman rifles are configured from battle rifles, such as the Mk 14 Enhanced Battle Rifle and United States Marine Corps Designated Marksman Rifle, both essentially heavily modified and modernized variants of the M14 rifle.

Examples of rifles considered to be battle rifles include the FG 42, Gewehr 43, FN FAL, Howa Type 64, and Desert Tech MDR.

==== Sniper rifles ====


A sniper rifle is, per widespread definition, a high-powered precision rifle, often bolt-action or semi-automatic, with an effective range farther than that of a standard rifle. Though any rifle in a sniper configuration (usually with a telescopic sight and bipod) can be considered a sniper rifle, most sniper rifles are purpose-built for their applications, or are variants of existing rifles that have been modified to function as sniper rifles, such as the Type 97 sniper rifle, which was essentially a standard Type 38 rifle that was modified to be lighter and come with a telescopic sight.

Related developments are anti-materiel rifles, large-caliber rifles designed to destroy enemy materiel such as vehicles, supplies, or hardware; anti-tank rifles, anti-materiel rifles that were designed specifically to combat early armoured fighting vehicles, but are now largely obsolete due to advances in vehicle armour; scout rifles, a broad class of rifles generally summed up as short, lightweight, portable sniper rifles; and designated marksman rifles, semi-automatic high-precision rifles, usually chambered in intermediate or full-power cartridges, that fill the range gap between sniper rifles and regular rifles and are designed for designated marksmen in squads.

Examples of sniper and scout rifles include the M40 rifle, Heckler &amp; Koch PSG1, Walther WA 2000, Accuracy International AWM, M24 Sniper Weapon System, Steyr Scout, Sako TRG, and CheyTac Intervention. Examples of anti-materiel and anti-tank rifles include the Mauser Tankgewehr M1918, Boys anti-tank rifle, PTRS-41, Barrett M82, Gepárd anti-materiel rifle, and McMillan TAC-50. Examples of designated marksman rifles include the SVD, SR-25, Dragunov SVU, Marine Scout Sniper Rifle, Mk 14 Enhanced Battle Rifle, and M110 Semi-Automatic Sniper System.

==== Automatic rifles ====

An automatic rifle is a magazine-fed rifle that is capable of automatic fire. They include most assault rifles and battle rifles, but originated as their own category of rifles capable of automatic fire, as opposed to the bolt-action and semi-automatic rifles commonly issued to infantry at the time of their invention. They usually have smaller magazine capacities than machine guns; the French Chauchat had a 20-round box magazine, while the Hotchkiss Mle 1914 machine gun, the French Army&#x27;s standard machine gun at the time, was fed by a 250-round ammunition belt.

Though automatic rifles are sometimes considered to be their own category, they are also occasionally considered to be other types of firearms that postdated their invention, usually as light machine guns. Automatic rifles are sometimes confused with machine guns or vice versa, or are defined as such by law; the National Firearms Act and Firearm Owners Protection Act define a &quot;machine gun&quot; in United States Code &quot;Title 26, Subtitle E, Chapter 53, Subchapter B, Part 1, § 5845&quot; as &quot;... any firearm which shoots ... automatically more than one shot, without manual reloading, by a single function of the trigger&quot;. &quot;Machine gun&quot; is therefore largely synonymous with &quot;automatic weapon&quot; in American civilian parlance, covering all automatic firearms. In most jurisdictions, automatic rifles, as well as automatic firearms in general, are prohibited from civilian purchase or are at least heavily restricted; in the U.S. for instance, most automatic rifles are Title II weapons that require certain licenses and are greatly regulated.

Examples of automatic rifles include the Cei-Rigotti, Lewis gun, Fedorov Avtomat, and M1918 Browning automatic rifle.

==== Machine guns ====

A machine gun is a fully-automatic firearm, chambered in intermediate or full-power rifle cartridges, designed to provide sustained automatic direct fire as opposed to the semi-automatic or burst fire of standard rifles. They are commonly associated with being belt-fed, though many machine guns are also fed by box, drum, pan, or hopper magazines. They generally have a high rate of fire and a large ammunition capacity, and are often used for suppressive fire to support infantry advances or defend positions from enemy assaults. Owing to their versatility and firepower, they are also commonly installed on military vehicles and military aircraft, either as main or ancillary weapons. Many machine guns are individual-served and can be operated by a single soldier, though some are crew-served weapons that require a dedicated crew of soldiers to operate, usually between two and six soldiers depending on the machine gun&#x27;s operation and the crew members&#x27; roles (ammunition bearers, spotters, etc.).

Machine guns can be divided into three categories: light machine guns, individual-served machine guns of an intermediate cartridge that are usually magazine-fed; medium machine guns, belt-fed machine guns of a full-power caliber and a certain weight that can be operated by an individual but tend to work best with a crew; and heavy machine guns, machine guns that are too large and heavy to be carried and are thus mounted to something (like a tripod or military vehicle), and require a crew to operate. A general-purpose machine gun combines these categories under a single flexible machine gun platform, often one that is most suitable as a light or medium machine gun but fares well as a heavy machine gun. A closely related concept is the squad automatic weapon, a portable light machine gun or even a modified rifle that is designed and fielded to provide a squad with rapid direct fire.

Examples of machine guns include the Maxim gun, M2 Browning, Bren light machine gun, MG 42, PK machine gun, FN MAG, M249 light machine gun, RPK, IWI Negev, and M134 Minigun.

==== Submachine guns ====

A submachine gun is a magazine-fed carbine chambered in a small-caliber handgun cartridge (such as 9×19mm Parabellum, .45 ACP, .22 Long Rifle, and .40 S&amp;W). They cannot be considered machine guns due to their small-caliber, hence the prefix &quot;&quot; to differentiate them from proper machine guns. Submachine guns are commonly associated with high rates of fire, automatic fire capabilities, and low recoil, though many submachine guns differentiate from this in various ways, such as having fairly low rates of fire or including burst and semi-automatic modes available through selective fire. Most submachine guns are the size of carbines and short-barreled rifles, and use similar configurations. Many are designed to take as little space as possible for use in close-quarters or for easy storage in vehicles and cases. Some submachine guns are designed and configured similar to pistols even down to size, and are thus occasionally classed as machine pistols, even if they are not actually a handgun (i.e. designed to require two hands to use).

Submachine guns are considered ideal for close-quarters combat and are cheap to mass-produce. They were very common in military service through much of the 20th century, but have since been superseded in most combat roles by rifles, carbines, and personal defense weapons due to their low effective range and poor penetration against most body armor developed since the late 20th century. However, they remain popular among special forces and police for their effectiveness in close-quarters and low likelihood to overpenetrate targets.

Examples of submachine guns include the MP 18, MP 40, Thompson submachine gun, M3 submachine gun, Uzi, Heckler &amp; Koch MP5, Spectre M4, Steyr TMP, Heckler &amp; Koch UMP, PP-2000, KRISS Vector, and SIG MPX.

==== Personal defense weapons ====

A personal defense weapon is, in simplest terms, a submachine gun that is designed to fire ammunition with ballistic performance that is similar to (but not actually a type of) rifle cartridges, often called &quot;sub-intermediate&quot; cartridges. In this way, it combines the high automatic rate of fire, reliable low recoil, and lightweight compact maneuverability of submachine guns with the versatility, penetration, and effective range of rifles, effectively making them an &quot;in-between&quot; of submachine guns and carbines.

Personal defense weapons were developed to provide rear and &quot;second-line&quot; personnel not otherwise armed with high-caliber firearms (vehicle and weapon crews, engineers, logistical personnel, etc.) with a method of effective self-defense against skirmishers and infiltrators who cannot effectively be defeated by low-powered submachine guns and handguns, often the only firearms suitable for those personnel (while they could be issued rifles or carbines, those would become unnecessary burdens in their normal duties, during which the likelihood of hostility is fairly rare regardless, making their issuance questionable). Thus, per their name, personal defense weapons allow these personnel to effectively defend themselves from enemies and repel attacks themselves or at least until support can arrive. They are not intended for civilian self-defense due to their nature as automatic firearms (which are usually prohibited from civilian purchase), though some semi-automatic PDWs exist for the civilian market, albeit often with longer barrels.

Examples of personal defense weapons include the FN P90, Heckler &amp; Koch MP7, AAC Honey Badger, and ST Kinetics CPW.

== Action ==

Types aside, firearms are also categorized by their &quot;action&quot;, which describes their loading, firing, and unloading cycle.

=== Manual ===
&quot;Manual action&quot; or &quot;manual operation&quot; is essentially any type of firearm action that is loaded, and usually also fired, one cartridge at a time by the user, rather than automatically. Manual action firearms can be divided into two basic categories: single-shot firearms that can only be fired once per barrel before it must be reloaded or charged via an external mechanism or series of steps; and repeating firearms that can be fired multiple times per barrel, but can only be fired once with each subsequent pull of the trigger or ignite, and the firearm&#x27;s action must be reloaded or charged via an internal mechanism between trigger pulls.

Types of manual actions include lever action, bolt action, and pump action.

==== Lever action ====

&quot;Lever action&quot; is a repeating action that is operated by using a cocking handle (the &quot;lever&quot;) located around the trigger guard area (often incorporating it) that is pulled down then back up to move the bolt via internal linkages and cock the firing pin mechanism, expelling the old cartridge and loading a new one.

==== Bolt action ====

&quot;Bolt action&quot; is a repeating (and rarely single-shot) action that is operated by directly manipulating the bolt via a bolt handle. The bolt is unlocked from the receiver, then pulled back to open the breech, ejecting a cartridge, and cocking the striker and engaging it against the sear; when the bolt is returned to the forward position, a new cartridge, if loaded, is pushed out of the magazine and into the barrel chamber, and the breech is re-locked.

Two designs of bolt action exist: &quot;rotating bolt&quot;, where the bolt must be axially rotated to unlock and lock the receiver; and &quot;straight pull&quot;, which does not require the bolt to be rotated, simplifying the bolt action mechanism and allowing for a greater rate of fire.

==== Pump action ====

&quot;Pump action&quot; or &quot;slide action&quot; is a repeating action that is operated by moving a sliding handguard (the &quot;pump&quot;) on the gun&#x27;s forestock rearward (frontward on some models), ejecting any spent cartridges and cocking the hammer or striker, then moving the handguard forward to load a new cartridge into the chamber. It is most common on shotguns, though pump action rifles and grenade launchers also exist.

=== Semi-automatic ===
&quot;Semi-automatic&quot;, &quot;self-loading&quot;, or &quot;autoloading&quot; is a firearm action that, after a single discharge, automatically performs the feeding and ignition procedures necessary to prepare the firearm for a subsequent discharge. Semi-automatic firearms only discharge once with each trigger actuation, and the trigger must be actuated again to fire another cartridge.

Types of semi-automatic actions and modes include automatic, burst, and selective.

==== Automatic ====
&quot;Automatic&quot; is a firearm action that uses the same automated action cycling as semi-automatic, but continues to do so for as long as the trigger is actuated, until the trigger is let go of or the firearm is depleted of available ammunition. The excess energy released from a discharged cartridge is used to load a new cartridge into the chamber, then igniting the propellant and discharging said new cartridge by delivering a hammer or striker impact on the primer. Automatic firearms are further defined by the type of cycling principles used, such as recoil operation (uses energy from the recoil to cycle the action), blowback (uses energy from the cartridge case as it is pushed by expanding gas), blow forward (use propellant gas pressure to open the breech), or gas operation (uses high-pressure gas from a fired cartridge to dispose of the spent case and load a new cartridge).

==== Burst ====
&quot;Burst&quot; is a fire mode of some semi-automatic and automatic firearms that fires a predetermined amount of rounds—usually two or three—in the same manner as automatic fire. Depending on the firearm, a single trigger actuation may fire the full burst of rounds, or it must be depressed for the entire discharge, with a single pull of the trigger firing a single round or an incomplete burst. Most firearms with burst capabilities have it as a fire mode secondary to semi-automatic and automatic.

==== Selective fire ====
&quot;Selective fire&quot; or &quot;select fire&quot; is the capability of a firearm to have its fire mode adjusted between semi-automatic, burst, or automatic. The modes are chosen by means of a fire mode selector, which varies depending on the weapon&#x27;s design. The presence of selective-fire modes on firearms allows more efficient use of ammunition for specific tactical needs, either precision-aimed or suppressive fire. Selective fire is most commonly found on assault rifles and submachine guns.

==Use as a blunt weapon==
Firearms can be used as blunt weapons, for instance to conserve limited ammunition or when ammunition has run out entirely.

New recruits of the Israel Defense Forces undergo training on the safe practice of using the M16 rifle as a blunt weapon, mainly so that in close-quarter fighting, the weapon cannot be pulled away from them. Other training includes the recruit learning how to jab parts of the body with the muzzle and using the butt stock as a weapon.

Forensic medicine recognizes evidence for various types of blunt-force injuries produced by firearms. For example, &quot;pistol-whipping&quot; typically leaves semicircular or triangular lacerations of skin produced by the butt of a pistol.

In armed robberies, beating the victims with firearms is a more common way to complete the robbery, rather than shooting or stabbing them.

Examples include:

* Buttstroking, striking with the butt stock of a firearm.
* Pistol-whipping, striking someone with a handgun.
* Striking with the muzzle end of a firearm without a bayonet attached.

==History==


The first firearms were invented in 10th century China when the man-portable fire lance (a bamboo or metal tube that could shoot ignited gunpowder) was combined with projectiles such as scrap metal, broken porcelain, or darts/arrows.

An early depiction of a firearm is a sculpture from a cave in Sichuan, China. The sculpture dates to the 12th century and represents a figure carrying a vase-shaped bombard, with flames and a cannonball coming out of it. The oldest surviving gun, a hand cannon made of bronze, has been dated to 1288 because it was discovered at a site in modern-day Acheng District, Heilongjiang, China, where the &quot;Yuan Shi&quot; records that battles were fought at that time. The firearm had a barrel of a diameter, a chamber for the gunpowder and a socket for the firearm&#x27;s handle. It is long and without the handle, which would have been made of wood.

The Arabs and Mamluks had firearms in the late-13th century. Europeans obtained firearms in the 14th century. The Koreans adopted firearms from the Chinese in the 14th century. The Iranians (first Aq Qoyunlu and Safavids) and Indians (first Mughals) all got them no later than the 15th century, from the Ottoman Turks. The people of the Nusantara archipelago of Southeast Asia used the long arquebus at least by the last quarter of the 15th century.

Even though the knowledge of making gunpowder-based weapons in the Nusantara archipelago had been known after the failed Mongol invasion of Java (1293), and the predecessor of firearms, the pole gun (bedil tombak), was recorded as being used by Java in 1413, the knowledge of making &quot;true&quot; firearms came much later, after the middle of 15th century. It was brought by the Islamic nations of West Asia, most probably the Arabs. The precise year of introduction is unknown, but it may be safely concluded to be no earlier than 1460. Before the arrival of the Portuguese in Southeast Asia, the natives already possessed firearms, the Java arquebus.

The technology of firearms in Southeast Asia further improved after the Portuguese capture of Malacca (1511). Starting in the 1513, the traditions of German-Bohemian gun-making merged with Turkish gun-making traditions. This resulted in the Indo-Portuguese tradition of matchlocks. Indian craftsmen modified the design by introducing a very short, almost pistol-like buttstock held against the cheek, not the shoulder, when aiming. They also reduced the caliber and made the gun lighter and more balanced. This was a hit with the Portuguese who did a lot of fighting aboard ship and on river craft, and valued a more compact gun. The Malaccan gunfounders, compared as being in the same level with those of Germany, quickly adapted these new firearms, and thus a new type of arquebus, the istinggar, appeared. The Japanese did not acquire firearms until the 16th century, and then from the Portuguese rather than from the Chinese.

Developments in firearms accelerated during the 19th and 20th centuries. Breech-loading became more or less a universal standard for the reloading of most hand-held firearms and continues to be so with some notable exceptions (such as mortars). Instead of loading individual rounds into weapons, magazines holding multiple munitions were adopted—these aided rapid reloading. Automatic and semi-automatic firing mechanisms meant that a single soldier could fire many more rounds in a minute than a vintage weapon could fire over the course of a battle. Polymers and alloys in firearm construction made weaponry progressively lighter and thus easier to deploy. Ammunition changed over the centuries from simple metallic ball-shaped projectiles that rattled down the barrel to bullets and cartridges manufactured to high precision. Especially in the past century particular attention has focused on accuracy and sighting to make firearms altogether far more accurate than ever before. More than any single factor though, firearms have proliferated due to the advent of mass production—enabling arms-manufacturers to produce large quantities of weaponry to a consistent standard.

Velocities of bullets increased with the use of a &quot;jacket&quot; of metals such as copper or copper alloys that covered a lead core and allowed the bullet to glide down the barrel more easily than exposed lead. Such bullets are known as &quot;full metal jacket&quot; (FMJ). Such FMJ bullets are less likely to fragment on impact and are more likely to traverse through a target while imparting less energy. Hence, FMJ bullets impart less tissue damage than non-jacketed bullets that expand. This led to their adoption for military use by countries adhering to the Hague Convention of 1899.

That said, the basic principle behind firearm operation remains unchanged to this day. A musket of several centuries ago is still similar in principle to a modern-day rifle—using the expansion of gases to propel projectiles over long distances—albeit less accurately and rapidly.

===Early firearm models===
====Fire lances====
The Chinese fire lance from the 10th century was the direct predecessor to the modern concept of the firearm. It was not a gun itself, but an addition to soldiers&#x27; spears. Originally it consisted of paper or bamboo barrels that would contain incendiary gunpowder that could be lit one time and which would project flames at the enemy. Sometimes Chinese troops would place small projectiles within the barrel that would also be projected when the gunpowder was lit, but most of the explosive force would create flames. Later, the barrel was changed to be made of metal, so that more explosive gunpowder could be used and put more force into the propulsion of projectiles.

====Hand cannons====
The original predecessor of all firearms, the Chinese hand cannon from the 13th century, was loaded with gunpowder and the projectile (initially lead shot, later replaced by cast iron) through the muzzle, while a fuse was placed at the rear. This fuse was lit, causing the gunpowder to ignite and propel the projectiles. In military use, the Chinese hand cannon was tremendously powerful, while also being somewhat erratic due to the relative inability of the gunner to aim the weapon, or to control the ballistic properties of the projectile. Recoil could be absorbed by bracing the barrel against the ground using a wooden support, the forerunner of the stock. Neither the quality nor amount of gunpowder, nor the consistency in projectile dimensions was controlled, with resulting inaccuracy in firing due to windage, variance in gunpowder composition, and the difference in diameter between the bore and the shot. Hand cannons were replaced around the 15th century by lighter carriage-mounted artillery pieces, and ultimately by the arquebus.

In the 1420s, gunpowder was used to propel missiles from hand-held tubes during the Hussite revolt in Bohemia.

====Arquebuses====

The arquebus is a long gun that appeared in Europe and the Ottoman Empire during the 15th Century. The term &quot;arquebus&quot; is derived from the Dutch word &quot;haaqbus&quot; (literally meaning &quot;hook gun&quot;). The term arquebus was applied to many different types of guns. In their earliest form they were defensive weapon mounts on German city walls in the 15th Century. The addition of a shoulder stock, priming pan and matchlock mechanism in the late 15th century turned the arquebus into a handheld firearm, and also first firearm equipped with a trigger. Heavy arquebuses mounted on war wagons were called &quot;arquebus a croc&quot;. These heavy arquebuses fired a lead ball of about 3.5 ounces (100g).

====Muskets====
Muzzle-loading muskets (smooth-bored long guns) were among the first firearms developed. The firearm was loaded through the muzzle with gunpowder, optionally with some wadding, and then with a bullet (usually a solid lead ball, but musketeers could shoot stones when they ran out of bullets). Greatly improved muzzleloaders (usually rifled instead of smooth-bored) are manufactured today and have many enthusiasts, many of whom hunt large and small game with their guns. Muzzleloaders have to be manually reloaded after each shot; a skilled archer could fire multiple arrows faster than most early muskets could be reloaded and fired, although by the mid-18th century when muzzleloaders became the standard small-armament of the military, a well-drilled soldier could fire six rounds in a minute using prepared cartridges in his musket. Before then, the effectiveness of muzzleloaders was hindered both by the low reloading speed and, before the firing mechanism was perfected, by the very high risk posed by the firearm to the person attempting to fire it.

One interesting solution to the reloading problem was the &quot;Roman Candle Gun&quot; with superposed loads. This was a muzzleloader in which multiple charges and balls were loaded one on top of the other, with a small hole in each ball to allow the subsequent charge to be ignited after the one ahead of it was ignited. It was neither a very reliable nor popular firearm, but it enabled a form of &quot;automatic&quot; fire long before the advent of the machine gun.

===Firing mechanisms===
====Matchlock====
Matchlocks were the first and simplest firearms-firing mechanisms developed. In the matchlock mechanism, the powder in the gun barrel was ignited by a piece of burning cord called a &quot;match&quot;. The match was wedged into one end of an S-shaped piece of steel. When the trigger (often actually a lever) was pulled, the match was brought into the open end of a &quot;touch hole&quot; at the base of the gun barrel, which contained a very small quantity of gunpowder, igniting the main charge of gunpowder in the gun barrel. The match usually had to be relit after each firing. The main parts of the matchlock firing mechanism are the pan, match, arm, and trigger. A benefit of the pan and arm swivel being moved to the side of the gun was it gave a clear line of fire. An advantage to the matchlock firing mechanism is that it did not misfire. However, it also came with some disadvantages. One disadvantage involved weather: in rain, the match could not be kept lit to fire the weapon. Another issue with the match was it could give away the position of soldiers because of the glow, sound, and smell. While European pistols were equipped with wheellock and flintlock mechanisms, Asian pistols used matchlock mechanisms.

====Wheellock====
The wheellock action, a successor to the matchlock, predated the flintlock. Despite its many faults, the wheellock was a significant improvement over the matchlock in terms of both convenience and safety, since it eliminated the need to keep a smoldering match in proximity to loose gunpowder. It operated using a small wheel (much like that on a cigarette lighter) which was wound up with a key before use and which, when the trigger was pulled, spun against a flint, creating the shower of sparks that ignited the powder in the touch hole. Supposedly invented by Leonardo da Vinci (1452–1519), the Italian Renaissance man, the wheellock action was an innovation that was not widely adopted due to the high cost of the clockwork mechanism.

====Flintlock====
The flintlock action represented a major innovation in firearm design. The spark used to ignite the gunpowder in the touch hole came from a sharpened piece of flint clamped in the jaws of a &quot;cock&quot; which, when released by the trigger, struck a piece of steel called the &quot;frizzen&quot; to generate the necessary sparks. (The spring-loaded arm that holds a piece of flint or pyrite is referred to as a cock because of its resemblance to a rooster.) The cock had to be manually reset after each firing, and the flint had to be replaced periodically due to wear from striking the frizzen. (See also flintlock mechanism, snaphance, Miquelet lock.) The flintlock was widely used during the 17th, 18th, and 19th centuries in both muskets and rifles.

====Percussion cap====

Percussion caps (caplock mechanisms), coming into wide service in the early 19th century, offered a dramatic improvement over flintlocks. With the percussion-cap mechanism, the small primer charge of gunpowder used in all preceding firearms was replaced by a completely self-contained explosive charge contained in a small brass &quot;cap&quot;. The cap was fastened to the touch hole of the gun (extended to form a &quot;nipple&quot;) and ignited by the impact of the gun&#x27;s &quot;hammer&quot;. (The hammer is roughly the same as the cock found on flintlocks except that it does not clamp onto anything.) In the case of percussion caps the hammer was hollow on the end to fit around the cap in order to keep the cap from fragmenting and injuring the shooter.

Once struck, the flame from the cap, in turn, ignited the main charge of gunpowder, as with the flintlock, but there was no longer any need to charge the touch hole with gunpowder, and even better, the touch hole was no longer exposed to the elements. As a result, the percussion-cap mechanism was considerably safer, far more weatherproof, and vastly more reliable (cloth-bound cartridges containing a pre-measured charge of gunpowder and a ball had been in regular military service for many years, but the exposed gunpowder in the entry to the touch hole had long been a source of misfires). All muzzleloaders manufactured since the second half of the 19th-century use percussion caps except those built as replicas of the flintlock or earlier firearms.

===Loading techniques===
Most early firearms were muzzle-loading. This form of loading has several disadvantages, such as a slow rate of fire and having to expose oneself to enemy fire to reload—as the weapon had to be pointed upright so the powder could be poured through the muzzle into the breech, followed by the ramming the projectile into the breech. As effective methods of sealing the breech developed along with sturdy, weatherproof, self-contained metallic cartridges, muzzle-loaders were replaced by single-shot breech loaders. Eventually, single-shot weapons were replaced by the following repeater-type weapons.

====Internal magazines====

Many firearms made from the late-19th century through the 1950s used internal magazines to load the cartridge into the chamber of the weapon. The most notable and revolutionary weapons of this period appeared during the U.S. Civil War of 1861–1865: the Spencer and Henry repeating rifles. Both used fixed tubular magazines, the former having the magazine in the buttstock and the latter under the barrel, which allowed a larger capacity. Later weapons used fixed box magazines that could not be removed from the weapon without disassembling the weapon itself. Fixed magazines permitted the use of larger cartridges and eliminated the hazard of having the bullet of one cartridge butting next to the primer or rim of another cartridge. These magazines are loaded while they are in the weapon, often using a stripper clip. A clip is used to transfer cartridges into the magazine. Some notable weapons that use internal magazines include the Mosin–Nagant, the Mauser Kar 98k, the Springfield M1903, the M1 Garand, and the SKS. Firearms that have internal magazines are usually, but not always, rifles. Some exceptions to this include the Mauser C96 pistol, which uses an internal magazine, and the Breda 30, an Italian light machine gun.

====Detachable magazines====
Many modern firearms use what are called detachable or box magazines as their method of chambering a cartridge. Detachable magazines can be removed from the weapon without disassembling the firearms, usually by pushing a magazine release.

====Belt-fed weapons====

A belt or ammunition belt, a device used to retain and feed cartridges into a firearm, is commonly used with machine guns. Belts were originally composed of canvas or cloth with pockets spaced evenly to allow the belt to be mechanically fed into the gun. These designs were prone to malfunctions due to the effects of oil and other contaminants altering the belt. Later belt-designs used permanently-connected metal links to retain the cartridges during feeding. These belts were more tolerant to exposure to solvents and oil. Notable weapons that use belts include the M240, the M249, the M134 Minigun, and the PK Machine Gun.

===Cartridges===
Frenchman Louis-Nicolas Flobert invented the first rimfire metallic cartridge in 1845. His cartridge consisted of a percussion cap with a bullet attached to the top. Flobert then made what he called &quot;parlor guns&quot; for this cartridge, as these rifles and pistols were designed to be shot in indoor shooting-parlors in large homes. These 6mm Flobert cartridges do not contain any powder, the only propellant substance contained in the cartridge is the percussion cap. In English-speaking countries, the 6mm Flobert cartridge corresponds to .22 BB Cap and .22 CB Cap ammunition. These cartridges have a relatively low muzzle-velocity of around 700 ft/s (210 m/s).

Cartridges represented a major innovation: firearms ammunition, previously delivered as separate bullets and powder, was combined in a single metallic (usually brass) cartridge containing a percussion cap, powder, and a bullet in one weatherproof package. The main technical advantage of the brass cartridge case was the effective and reliable sealing of high-pressure gasses at the breech, as the gas pressure forces the cartridge case to expand outward, pressing it firmly against the inside of the gun-barrel chamber. This prevents the leakage of hot gas which could injure the shooter. The brass cartridge also opened the way for modern repeating arms, by uniting the bullet, gunpowder, and primer into one assembly that could be fed reliably into the breech by mechanical action in the firearm.

Before this, a &quot;cartridge&quot; was simply a pre-measured quantity of gunpowder together with a ball in a small cloth bag (or rolled paper cylinder), which also acted as wadding for the charge and ball. This early form of cartridge had to be rammed into the muzzleloader&#x27;s barrel, and either a small charge of gunpowder in the touch hole or an external percussion cap mounted on the touch hole ignited the gunpowder in the cartridge. Cartridges with built-in percussion caps (called &quot;primers&quot;) continue to this day to be the standard in firearms. In cartridge-firing firearms, a hammer (or a firing pin struck by the hammer) strikes the cartridge primer, which then ignites the gunpowder within. The primer charge is at the base of the cartridge, either within the rim (a &quot;rimfire&quot; cartridge) or in a small percussion cap embedded in the center of the base (a &quot;centerfire&quot; cartridge). As a rule, centerfire cartridges are more powerful than rimfire cartridges, operating at considerably higher pressures than rimfire cartridges. Centerfire cartridges are also safer, as a dropped rimfire cartridge has the potential to discharge if its rim strikes the ground with sufficient force to ignite the primer. This is practically impossible with most centerfire cartridges.

Nearly all contemporary firearms load cartridges directly into their breech. Some additionally or exclusively load from a magazine that holds multiple cartridges. A magazine is a part of the firearm which exists to store ammunition and to assist in its feeding by the action into the breech (such as through the rotation of a revolver&#x27;s cylinder or by spring-loaded platforms in most pistol and rifle designs). Some magazines, such as that of most centerfire hunting rifles and all revolvers, are internal to and inseparable from the firearm, and are loaded by using a &quot;clip&quot;. A clip (the term often mistakenly refers to a detachable &quot;magazine&quot;) is a device that holds the ammunition by the rim of the case and is designed to assist the shooter in reloading the firearm&#x27;s magazine. Examples include revolver speedloaders, the stripper clip used to aid loading rifles such as the Lee–Enfield or Mauser 98, and the en-bloc clip used in loading the M1 Garand. In this sense, &quot;magazines&quot; and &quot;clips&quot;, though often used synonymously, refer to different types of devices.

===Repeating firearms===


Many firearms are &quot;single shot&quot;: i.e., each time a cartridge is fired, the operator must manually re-cock the firearm and load another cartridge. The classic single-barreled shotgun offers a good example. A firearm that can load multiple cartridges as the firearm is re-cocked is considered a &quot;repeating firearm&quot; or simply a &quot;repeater&quot;. A lever-action rifle, a pump-action shotgun, and most bolt-action rifles are good examples of repeating firearms. A firearm that automatically re-cocks and reloads the next round with each trigger-pull is considered a semi-automatic or autoloading firearm.

The first &quot;rapid firing&quot; firearms were usually similar to the 19th-century Gatling gun, which would fire cartridges from a magazine as fast as and as long as the operator turned a crank. Eventually, the &quot;rapid&quot; firing mechanism was perfected and miniaturized to the extent that either the recoil of the firearm or the gas pressure from firing could be used to operate it, thus the operator needed only to pull a trigger—this made the firing mechanisms truly &quot;automatic&quot;. An automatic (or &quot;fully automatic&quot;) firearm automatically re-cocks, reloads, and fires as long as the trigger is depressed. An automatic firearm is capable of firing multiple rounds with one pull of the trigger. The Gatling gun may have been the first automatic weapon, though the modern trigger-actuated machine gun was not widely introduced until the First World War (1914–1918) with the German &quot;Spandau&quot; (adopted in 1908) and the British Lewis gun (in service from 1914). Automatic rifles such as the Browning automatic rifle were in common use by the military during the early part of the 20th century, and automatic rifles that fired handgun rounds, known as submachine guns, also appeared at this time. Many modern military firearms have a selective fire option, which is a mechanical switch that allows the firearm to be fired either in the semi-automatic or fully automatic mode. In the current M16A2 and M16A4 variants of the U.S.-made M16, continuous fully-automatic fire is not possible, having been replaced by an automatic burst of three cartridges (this conserves ammunition and increases controllability).

==Health hazards==
Firearm hazard is quite notable, with a significant impact on the health system. In 2001, for quantification purposes, it was estimated that the cost of fatalities and injuries was US$4700 million per year in Canada (US$170 per Canadian) and US$100,000 million per year in the U.S. (US$300 per American).

===Death===
From 1990 to 2015, global deaths from assault by firearm rose from 128,000 to 173,000, however this represents a drop in rate from 2.41/100,000 to 2.35/100,000, as world population has increased by more than two billion.

In 2017, there were 39,773 gun-related deaths in the United States; over 60% were suicides from firearms. In 2001, firearms were involved in cases constituting the second leading cause of &quot;mechanism of injury deaths&quot; (which are deaths which occur as a direct, identifiable, and immediate consequence of an event, such as a shooting or poisoning, and do not include deaths due to &quot;natural causes&quot; or &quot;indirect causes&quot; such as chronic alcohol abuse or tobacco use) after motor vehicle accidents, which comprised the majority of deaths in this category. The most recent, complete data, from 2017, shows gunshot related homicides as having been the 31st most common cause of death in the US, while gunshot related suicides was the 21st most common cause of death. Accidental discharge of a firearm accounted for the 59th most common cause of death, with 486 deaths in 2017, while 616 individuals were killed by law enforcement, comprising the 58th most common cause of death. The total number of deaths related to firearms in 2017 was 38,882 (not including incidents of deaths resulting from lethal force when used by law enforcement), while the most common cause of death, heart disease, claimed 647,457 lives, over sixteen times that of firearms, including suicides. The most recent data from the CDC, from 2020, shows that deaths involving firearms accounted for about 0.2% of all deaths nationwide in 2020, of which about two-thirds were suicides.

In the 52 high- and middle-income countries, with a combined population of 1,400 million and not engaged in civil conflict, fatalities due to firearm injuries were estimated at 115,000 people per annum, in the 1990s.
In those 52 countries, a firearm is the first method used for homicide (two-thirds) but only the second method for suicide (20%.

To prevent unintentional injury, gun safety training includes education on proper firearm storage and firearm-handling etiquette.

===Injury===
Based on US data, it is estimated that three people are injured for one killed.

A 2017 study found that attacks account for more than half (50.2%) of all nonfatal gun injuries, while unintentional injuries make up more than one-third (36.7%).

=== PTSD (Post-traumatic stress disorder) ===
PTSD or Post-traumatic stress disorder is extremely prevalent in the aftermath of different firearm-related events, such as mass shootings, injuries, and police-involved incidents. In particular, military Veterans are especially at high risk for the development of PTSD. In 2004, Hoge et al. found that soldiers that fought in Iraq or Afghanistan who significantly engaged in firefights had a linear association with the risk of PTSD. Hoge found that the rates of PTSD ranged from 4.5% from those who had not been involved in firefights to 19.3% to those involved in five or more firefights, displaying an apparent correlation between risk of PTSD and firefights. Additionally, school shootings are often studied and exhibit a connection between PTSD and the involvement with firearms. It was found that rates of PTSD were highest in students that were in direct exposure, which was around 9.7% of the recorded population. Rates would be as low as 3.4% in those with no exposure.

=== Lead exposure ===
Many bullets used with firearms are made of lead. If lead reaches the bloodstream, which can occur when handling ammunition, it can lead to kidney damage and issues with brain development. Extremely high levels can lead to seizures, unconsciousness, and even death.

===Noise===
A common hazard of repeated firearm use is noise-induced hearing loss (NIHL). NIHL can result from long-term exposure to noise or from high intensity impact noises such as gunshots. Individuals who shoot guns often have a characteristic pattern of hearing loss referred to as &quot;shooters ear&quot;. They often have a high-frequency loss with better hearing in the low frequencies and one ear is typically worse than the other. The ear on the side the shooter is holding the gun will receive protection from the sound wave from the shoulder while the other ear remains unprotected and more susceptible to the full impact of the sound wave.

The intensity of a gunshot does vary; lower caliber guns are typically on the softer side while higher caliber guns are often louder. The intensity of a gunshot though typically ranges from 140 dB to 175 dB. Indoor shooting also causes loud reverberations which can also be as damaging as the actual gunshot itself. According to the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, noise above 85 dB can begin to cause hearing loss. While many sounds cause damage over time, at the intensity level of a gunshot (140 dB or louder), damage to the ear can occur instantly.

Shooters use custom hearing protection such as electronic type hearing protection for hunters which can amplify soft sounds like leaves crunching while reducing the intensity of the gunshot and custom hearing protection for skeet shooting.

Even with hearing protection, due to the high intensity of the noise guns produce shooters still develop hearing loss over time.

==Legal definitions==
Firearms include a variety of ranged weapons and there is no agreed-upon definition. For instance, English language laws of big legal entities such as the United States, India, the European Union and Canada use different definitions. Other English language definitions are provided by international treaties.

===United States===
In the United States, under 26 USC § 5845 (a), the term &quot;firearm&quot; means

This is the ATF definition of a title II &quot;NFA firearm&quot;, as defined by the National Firearms Act, and not the definition of a title I firearm, which includes firearms not restricted by the NFA. ATF forms dealing with Title II weapons all state the above-mentioned information, however, the above information is only applicable for the purposes of those forms. For practical purposes, a firearm, in the U.S., is defined as the part of a weapon- designed to use expanded gas caused by the combustion of explosive material, to propel a projectile- which houses the fire control group (trigger &amp; sear).

According to the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, if gas pressurization is achieved through &quot;mechanical&quot; gas compression rather than through chemical propellant combustion, then the device is technically an air gun, not a firearm.

===India===
In India, the arms act, 1959, provides a definition of firearms where &quot;firearms&quot; means arms of any description designed or adapted to discharge a projectile or projectiles of any kind by the action of any explosive or other forms of energy, and includes:

===European Union===
In the European Union, a European Directive amended by EU directive 2017/853 set minimum standards regarding civilian firearms acquisition and possession that EU member states must implement into their national legal systems. In this context, since 2017, firearms are considered as &quot;any portable barrelled weapon that expels, is designed to expel or may be converted to expel a shot, bullet or projectile by the action of a combustible propellant&quot;. For legal reasons, objects can be considered a firearm if they have the appearance of a firearm or are made in a way that makes it possible to convert them to a firearm. Member states may be allowed to exclude from their gun control law items such as antique weapons, or specific purposes items that can only be used for that sole purpose.

===United Kingdom===
In the UK, a firearm does not have to use a combustible propellant, as explained by Crown Prosecution Service Guidance Firearms The Firearms Act 1968 Section 57(1B), uses the definition of a firearm as a &quot;lethal barrelled weapon&quot; as a &quot;barrelled weapon of any description from which a shot, bullet or other missile, with kinetic energy of more than one joule as measured at the muzzle of the weapon, can be discharged&quot;. As such, low-energy air rifles and pistols also fall under UK firearm legislation, although the licensing requirements of low-energy weapons are more relaxed.

===Canada===
In Canada, firearms are defined by the Criminal Code:

===Australia===
Australia has a definition of firearms in its 1996 legal act:

===South Africa===
In South Africa, Firearms Control Act [No. 60 of 2000] defines firearms since June 2001, with a 2006 amendment of the definition:

===International treaties===
An inter-American convention defines firearms as:

An international UN protocol on firearms considers that

==See also==
==References==
===Sources===
* 
* 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="2" end="9" title="Firearm" label="firearm"/>
<link wikidata="Q110155210" start="25" end="28" title="gun" label="gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="42" end="51" title="explosive" label="explosive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="192" end="209" title="#Legal_definitions" label="legal definitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q747986" start="259" end="264" title="History of science and technology in China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="271" end="277" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="295" end="304" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q278938" start="309" end="315" title="Lead shot" label="pellet"/>
<link wikidata="Q44475" start="344" end="350" title="Spear" label="spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826688" start="372" end="382" title="fire lance" label="fire lance"/>
<link wikidata="Q27627848" start="471" end="490" title="siege of De&amp;#x27;an" label="siege of De&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430251" start="611" end="622" title="hand cannon" label="hand cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="667" end="674" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364934" start="748" end="758" title="propellant" label="propellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q901722" start="784" end="800" title="smokeless powder" label="smokeless powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064392" start="885" end="895" title="smoothbore" label="smoothbore"/>
<link wikidata="Q486396" start="896" end="903" title="shotgun" label="shotgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q228268" start="911" end="917" title="rifling" label="rifled"/>
<link wikidata="Q49393" start="948" end="958" title="projectile" label="projectile"/>
<link wikidata="Q170417" start="1033" end="1040" title="caliber" label="caliber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330873" start="1177" end="1190" title="Gauge (bore diameter)" label="gauge or bore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461850" start="1281" end="1293" title="muzzleloader" label="muzzleloader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933955" start="1295" end="1307" title="breechloader" label="breechloader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075546" start="1309" end="1314" title="Lever action" label="lever"/>
<link wikidata="Q870863" start="1316" end="1320" title="Bolt action" label="bolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203713" start="1322" end="1326" title="Pump action" label="pump"/>
<link wikidata="Q170382" start="1328" end="1336" title="revolver" label="revolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752049" start="1338" end="1352" title="Semi-automatic firearm" label="semi-automatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9180311" start="1354" end="1369" title="Automatic firearm" label="fully automatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q487192" start="1520" end="1526" title="Gun barrel" label="barrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q228268" start="1538" end="1544" title="Rifling" label="rifled"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243678" start="1619" end="1628" title="matchlock" label="matchlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967985" start="1630" end="1639" title="wheellock" label="wheellock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403171" start="1641" end="1650" title="flintlock" label="flintlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q614853" start="1655" end="1670" title="percussion lock" label="percussion lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="1721" end="1728" title="hunting" label="hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q272975" start="1803" end="1814" title="Gatling gun" label="Gatling gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q565578" start="1862" end="1883" title="hand-eye coordination" label="hand-eye coordination"/>
<link wikidata="Q280136" start="1898" end="1909" title="iron sights" label="iron sights"/>
<link wikidata="Q198982" start="1913" end="1927" title="Telescopic sight" label="optical sights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907525" start="1951" end="1957" title="pistol" label="pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q124072" start="1998" end="2003" title="rifle" label="rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q190570" start="2103" end="2115" title="sniper rifle" label="sniper rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770971" start="2121" end="2140" title="anti-materiel rifle" label="anti-materiel rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q487192" start="2374" end="2382" title="Gun barrel" label="barreled"/>
<link wikidata="Q49393" start="2447" end="2457" title="projectile" label="projectile"/>
<link wikidata="Q205949" start="2517" end="2527" title="Exothermic reaction" label="exothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182714" start="2540" end="2552" title="deflagration" label="deflagration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364934" start="2568" end="2578" title="propellant" label="propellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="2593" end="2605" title="black powder" label="black powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q901722" start="2611" end="2627" title="smokeless powder" label="smokeless powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="2756" end="2764" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="2833" end="2845" title="foot soldier" label="foot soldier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862123" start="2905" end="2916" title="Crew-served weapon" label="crew-served"/>
<link wikidata="Q749601" start="3064" end="3070" title="recoil" label="recoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978115" start="3106" end="3122" title="weapons platform" label="weapons platform"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3131" end="3142" title="Weapon mount#Static mount" label="fixed mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163915" start="3144" end="3160" title="Gun carriage" label="wheeled carriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q42889" start="3162" end="3169" title="vehicle" label="vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="3171" end="3179" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229765" start="3183" end="3195" title="water vessel" label="water vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887290" start="3214" end="3220" title="Mobility (military)" label="mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="3237" end="3243" title="subset" label="subset"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3276" end="3294" title="projectile#Kinetic projectiles" label="kinetic projectile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574963" start="3453" end="3460" title="handgun" label="handgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907525" start="3470" end="3476" title="pistol" label="pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q170382" start="3479" end="3487" title="revolver" label="revolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q477207" start="3494" end="3503" title="derringer" label="derringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046481" start="3510" end="3518" title="long gun" label="long gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q124072" start="3528" end="3533" title="rifle" label="rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q486396" start="3557" end="3564" title="shotgun" label="shotgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q178550" start="3567" end="3581" title="submachine gun" label="submachine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800" start="3588" end="3599" title="machine gun" label="machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767600" start="3626" end="3643" title="List of modern armament manufacturers" label="arms manufacturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q991188" start="3681" end="3689" title="Browning Arms" label="Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122504" start="3691" end="3700" title="Remington Arms" label="Remington"/>
<link wikidata="Q16827494" start="3702" end="3706" title="Colt Defense" label="Colt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508526" start="3708" end="3713" title="Sturm, Ruger &amp;amp; Co." label="Ruger"/>
<link wikidata="Q463090" start="3715" end="3733" title="Smith &amp;amp; Wesson" label="Smith &amp;amp; Wesson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346872" start="3735" end="3741" title="Savage Arms" label="Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528553" start="3743" end="3751" title="O.F. Mossberg &amp;amp; Sons" label="Mossberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q152815" start="3769" end="3787" title="Heckler &amp;amp; Koch" label="Heckler &amp;amp; Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280505" start="3789" end="3798" title="SIG Sauer" label="SIG Sauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q705706" start="3800" end="3807" title="Carl Walther GmbH" label="Walther"/>
<link wikidata="Q14545884" start="3819" end="3823" title="Česká zbrojovka Uherský Brod" label="ČZUB"/>
<link wikidata="Q702135" start="3842" end="3847" title="Glock Ges.m.b.H." label="Glock"/>
<link wikidata="Q591359" start="3849" end="3859" title="Steyr Arms" label="Steyr Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q747353" start="3871" end="3881" title="FN Herstal" label="FN Herstal"/>
<link wikidata="Q324782" start="3893" end="3900" title="Beretta" label="Beretta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538336" start="3910" end="3917" title="Norinco" label="Norinco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840188" start="3927" end="3933" title="Rostec" label="Rostec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427495" start="3939" end="3950" title="Kalashnikov Concern" label="Kalashnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193204" start="3995" end="4013" title="Springfield Armory" label="Springfield Armory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432129" start="4035" end="4059" title="Royal Small Arms Factory" label="Royal Small Arms Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q166203" start="4078" end="4084" title="Mauser" label="Mauser"/>
<link wikidata="Q694450" start="4096" end="4114" title="Steyr-Daimler-Puch" label="Steyr-Daimler-Puch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793867" start="4155" end="4162" title="Armscor (Philippines)" label="Armscor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542649" start="4184" end="4201" title="Small Arms Survey" label="Small Arms Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q206887" start="4323" end="4331" title="civilian" label="civilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="4538" end="4550" title="armed forces" label="armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="4685" end="4703" title="Russian Federation" label="Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="4723" end="4728" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q732717" start="4745" end="4769" title="Law enforcement agency" label="Law enforcement agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144663" start="4915" end="4923" title="gun laws" label="gun laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q46944" start="5029" end="5036" title="Sidearm (weapon)" label="sidearm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158280" start="5039" end="5054" title="concealed carry" label="concealed carry"/>
<link wikidata="Q40283" start="5089" end="5101" title="self-defense" label="self-defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907525" start="5154" end="5160" title="pistol" label="pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q170382" start="5302" end="5310" title="revolver" label="revolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364476" start="5385" end="5403" title="Cylinder (firearms)" label="revolving cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q37144" start="5435" end="5444" title="Cartridge (firearms)" label="cartridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q477207" start="5460" end="5469" title="derringer" label="derringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310130" start="5663" end="5674" title="single-shot" label="single-shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075546" start="5676" end="5692" title="Lever action" label="manual repeating"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389302" start="5694" end="5708" title="Semi-automatic pistol" label="semi-automatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140161" start="5713" end="5722" title="Machine pistol" label="automatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q336751" start="5732" end="5745" title="single-action" label="single-action"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5747" end="5760" title="Trigger (firearms)#Double-action only" label="double-action"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5765" end="5792" title="Trigger (firearms)#Double-action/single-action" label="double-action/single-action"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215416" start="5860" end="5873" title="pocket pistol" label="pocket pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426759" start="5885" end="5907" title="Saturday night special" label="Saturday night special"/>
<link wikidata="Q739882" start="5949" end="5954" title="Glock" label="Glock"/>
<link wikidata="Q248874" start="5956" end="5973" title="Browning Hi-Power" label="Browning Hi-Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q201419" start="5975" end="5987" title="M1911 pistol" label="M1911 pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q513478" start="5989" end="6003" title="Makarov pistol" label="Makarov pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q311237" start="6005" end="6015" title="Walther PP" label="Walther PP"/>
<link wikidata="Q154199" start="6017" end="6029" title="Luger pistol" label="Luger pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q159527" start="6031" end="6041" title="Mauser C96" label="Mauser C96"/>
<link wikidata="Q211333" start="6047" end="6057" title="Beretta 92" label="Beretta 92"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112183" start="6093" end="6116" title="Colt Single Action Army" label="Colt Single Action Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q172509" start="6118" end="6145" title="Smith &amp;amp; Wesson Model 10" label="Smith &amp;amp; Wesson Model 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806384" start="6147" end="6167" title="Colt Official Police" label="Colt Official Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q15726" start="6169" end="6180" title="Colt Python" label="Colt Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q11324909" start="6182" end="6195" title="New Nambu M60" label="New Nambu M60"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811311" start="6201" end="6220" title="Mateba Autorevolver" label="Mateba Autorevolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311873" start="6257" end="6275" title="Remington Model 95" label="Remington Model 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q935636" start="6277" end="6292" title="FP-45 Liberator" label="FP-45 Liberator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931844" start="6298" end="6316" title="COP .357 Derringer" label="COP .357 Derringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="6961" end="6972" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q178243" start="7077" end="7083" title="musket" label="musket"/>
<link wikidata="Q168289" start="7088" end="7096" title="arquebus" label="arquebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q228268" start="7296" end="7303" title="rifling" label="rifling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330873" start="7340" end="7344" title="Gauge (firearms)" label="bore"/>
<link wikidata="Q174583" start="7427" end="7433" title="bullet" label="bullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718623" start="7664" end="7677" title="service rifle" label="service rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q486396" start="7744" end="7751" title="shotgun" label="shotgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="7781" end="7788" title="hunting" label="hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q206989" start="7790" end="7805" title="shooting sports" label="shooting sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q40283" start="7811" end="7823" title="self-defense" label="self-defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501547" start="7949" end="7969" title="short-barreled rifle" label="short-barreled rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q183302" start="7975" end="7982" title="carbine" label="carbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291248" start="8052" end="8072" title="semi-automatic rifle" label="semi-automatic rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075561" start="8075" end="8090" title="automatic rifle" label="automatic rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q190570" start="8096" end="8108" title="sniper rifle" label="sniper rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310130" start="8159" end="8170" title="single-shot" label="single-shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730414" start="8172" end="8184" title="break-action" label="break-action"/>
<link wikidata="Q870863" start="8186" end="8197" title="bolt-action" label="bolt-action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075546" start="8203" end="8215" title="lever-action" label="lever-action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606404" start="8273" end="8284" title="Henry rifle" label="Henry rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570235" start="8286" end="8302" title="Winchester rifle" label="Winchester rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q723346" start="8304" end="8315" title="Lee–Enfield" label="Lee–Enfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q166313" start="8317" end="8326" title="Gewehr 98" label="Gewehr 98"/>
<link wikidata="Q204046" start="8328" end="8337" title="M1 Garand" label="M1 Garand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451315" start="8339" end="8351" title="MAS-36 rifle" label="MAS-36 rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q432662" start="8353" end="8356" title="AKM" label="AKM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378526" start="8358" end="8369" title="Ruger 10/22" label="Ruger 10/22"/>
<link wikidata="Q211791" start="8371" end="8392" title="Heckler &amp;amp; Koch G3" label="Heckler &amp;amp; Koch G3"/>
<link wikidata="Q857562" start="8394" end="8413" title="Remington Model 700" label="Remington Model 700"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064917" start="8419" end="8443" title="Heckler &amp;amp; Koch HK417" label="Heckler &amp;amp; Koch HK417"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064392" start="8515" end="8525" title="smoothbore" label="smoothbore"/>
<link wikidata="Q278938" start="8587" end="8599" title="Shot (pellet)" label="shot pellets"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8811" end="8823" title="Shotgun shell#Spread" label="shot spreads"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387938" start="8907" end="8912" title="Shotgun slug" label="slugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q911881" start="8940" end="8951" title="Non-lethal weapon" label="less lethal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876263" start="8977" end="8986" title="Bean bag round" label="bean bags"/>
<link wikidata="Q190512" start="8990" end="8998" title="tear gas" label="tear gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862119" start="9016" end="9024" title="riot gun" label="riot gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959119" start="9028" end="9043" title="breaching round" label="breaching round"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002137" start="9062" end="9076" title="door breaching" label="door breaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763371" start="9141" end="9154" title="shotgun shell" label="shotgun shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310130" start="9475" end="9486" title="single-shot" label="single-shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730414" start="9488" end="9500" title="break-action" label="break-action"/>
<link wikidata="Q870863" start="9502" end="9513" title="bolt-action" label="bolt-action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075546" start="9515" end="9527" title="lever-action" label="lever-action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203713" start="9529" end="9540" title="pump-action" label="pump-action"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000423" start="9542" end="9556" title="semi-automatic shotgun" label="semi-automatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300818" start="9562" end="9571" title="automatic shotgun" label="automatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348131" start="9795" end="9809" title="modern warfare" label="modern warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753913" start="9816" end="9830" title="combat shotgun" label="combat shotgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102423" start="9865" end="9886" title="close-quarters combat" label="close-quarters combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142694" start="9948" end="9984" title="M26 Modular Accessory Shotgun System" label="M26 Modular Accessory Shotgun System"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130059" start="10081" end="10101" title="clay pigeon shooting" label="clay pigeon shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q545385" start="10122" end="10145" title="Double-barreled shotgun" label="Double-barreled shotgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085180" start="10363" end="10384" title="Winchester Model 1897" label="Winchester Model 1897"/>
<link wikidata="Q991165" start="10386" end="10401" title="Browning Auto-5" label="Browning Auto-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675292" start="10403" end="10412" title="Ithaca 37" label="Ithaca 37"/>
<link wikidata="Q171908" start="10414" end="10433" title="Remington Model 870" label="Remington Model 870"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949466" start="10435" end="10447" title="Mossberg 500" label="Mossberg 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076688" start="10449" end="10459" title="Benelli M4" label="Benelli M4"/>
<link wikidata="Q634756" start="10461" end="10476" title="Franchi SPAS-12" label="Franchi SPAS-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q753977" start="10478" end="10493" title="Atchisson AA-12" label="Atchisson AA-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066349" start="10499" end="10539" title="Knight&amp;#x27;s Armament Company Masterkey" label="Knight&amp;#x27;s Armament Company Masterkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q172295" start="10872" end="10894" title="Heckler &amp;amp; Koch G36" label="Heckler &amp;amp; Koch G36"/>
<link wikidata="Q156229" start="11191" end="11196" title="AK-74" label="AK-74"/>
<link wikidata="Q156229" start="11201" end="11208" title="AKS-74U" label="AKS-74U"/>
<link wikidata="Q695988" start="11246" end="11256" title="M1 carbine" label="M1 carbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102423" start="11804" end="11825" title="close-quarters combat" label="close-quarters combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q234497" start="11895" end="11909" title="special forces" label="special forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209526" start="11914" end="11934" title="police tactical unit" label="police tactical unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q178550" start="11946" end="11960" title="submachine gun" label="submachine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q201332" start="12034" end="12048" title="stopping power" label="stopping power"/>
<link wikidata="Q163059" start="12316" end="12326" title="Military logistics" label="logistical"/>
<link wikidata="Q864306" start="12338" end="12353" title="airborne forces" label="airborne forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q158797" start="12355" end="12373" title="military engineers" label="military engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="12375" end="12383" title="Officer (armed forces)" label="officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q738009" start="12488" end="12511" title="personal defense weapon" label="personal defense weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6324018" start="12682" end="12703" title="Winchester Model 1892" label="Winchester Model 1892"/>
<link wikidata="Q3228829" start="12705" end="12721" title="Rifle No. 5 Mk I" label="Rifle No. 5 Mk I"/>
<link wikidata="Q482594" start="12723" end="12726" title="SKS" label="SKS"/>
<link wikidata="Q695988" start="12728" end="12738" title="M1 carbine" label="M1 carbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322733" start="12740" end="12753" title="Ruger Mini-14" label="Ruger Mini-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q214688" start="12755" end="12765" title="M4 carbine" label="M4 carbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738129" start="12771" end="12787" title="Kel-Tec SUB-2000" label="Kel-Tec SUB-2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637214" start="12858" end="12872" title="selective fire" label="selective-fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076124" start="12895" end="12917" title="intermediate cartridge" label="intermediate cartridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q238456" start="12927" end="12941" title="5.56×45mm NATO" label="5.56×45mm NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q259196" start="12943" end="12952" title="7.62×39mm" label="7.62×39mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q238437" start="12954" end="12963" title="5.45×39mm" label="5.45×39mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579701" start="12969" end="12986" title=".300 AAC Blackout" label=".300 AAC Blackout"/>
<link wikidata="Q148958" start="13014" end="13022" title="Magazine (firearms)" label="magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194268" start="13095" end="13107" title="battle rifle" label="battle rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q151877" start="13132" end="13138" title="StG 44" label="StG 44"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="13151" end="13163" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="13171" end="13183" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718623" start="13379" end="13392" title="service rifle" label="service rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q825648" start="13481" end="13488" title="bullpup" label="bullpup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068543" start="13542" end="13548" title="Chamber (firearms)" label="breech"/>
<link wikidata="Q6026802" start="13611" end="13628" title="Kalashnikov rifle" label="Kalashnikov rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q37116" start="13672" end="13677" title="AK-47" label="AK-47"/>
<link wikidata="Q432662" start="13679" end="13682" title="AKM" label="AKM"/>
<link wikidata="Q156229" start="13688" end="13693" title="AK-74" label="AK-74"/>
<link wikidata="Q214688" start="13720" end="13730" title="M4 carbine" label="M4 carbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q170318" start="13735" end="13744" title="M16 rifle" label="M16 rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q259210" start="13959" end="13973" title="7.62×51mm NATO" label="7.62×51mm NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q259287" start="13975" end="13991" title="7.92×57mm Mauser" label="7.92×57mm Mauser"/>
<link wikidata="Q259199" start="13993" end="14003" title="7.62×54mmR" label="7.62×54mmR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130239" start="14031" end="14039" title="retronym" label="retronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q204046" start="14116" end="14125" title="M1 Garand" label="M1 Garand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076124" start="14159" end="14181" title="intermediate cartridge" label="intermediate cartridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142081" start="14192" end="14215" title="Heckler &amp;amp; Koch HK33" label="Heckler &amp;amp; Koch HK33"/>
<link wikidata="Q27671" start="14288" end="14295" title="FN SCAR" label="FN SCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184636" start="14617" end="14644" title="Mk 14 Enhanced Battle Rifle" label="Mk 14 Enhanced Battle Rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267852" start="14649" end="14701" title="United States Marine Corps Designated Marksman Rifle" label="United States Marine Corps Designated Marksman Rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q15082" start="14768" end="14777" title="M14 rifle" label="M14 rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q158441" start="14842" end="14847" title="FG 42" label="FG 42"/>
<link wikidata="Q161170" start="14849" end="14858" title="Gewehr 43" label="Gewehr 43"/>
<link wikidata="Q329844" start="14860" end="14866" title="FN FAL" label="FN FAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190940" start="14868" end="14880" title="Howa Type 64" label="Howa Type 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q67935435" start="14886" end="14901" title="Desert Tech MDR" label="Desert Tech MDR"/>
<link wikidata="Q870863" start="15014" end="15025" title="bolt-action" label="bolt-action"/>
<link wikidata="Q96377031" start="15053" end="15068" title="effective range" label="effective range"/>
<link wikidata="Q198982" start="15167" end="15183" title="telescopic sight" label="telescopic sight"/>
<link wikidata="Q232287" start="15188" end="15193" title="bipod" label="bipod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151779" start="15391" end="15411" title="Type 97 sniper rifle" label="Type 97 sniper rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q663662" start="15446" end="15459" title="Type 38 rifle" label="Type 38 rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770971" start="15552" end="15571" title="anti-materiel rifle" label="anti-materiel rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359118" start="15621" end="15629" title="materiel" label="materiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131614" start="15671" end="15686" title="anti-tank rifle" label="anti-tank rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q130368" start="15758" end="15783" title="armoured fighting vehicle" label="armoured fighting vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937453" start="15834" end="15848" title="vehicle armour" label="vehicle armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438338" start="15850" end="15861" title="scout rifle" label="scout rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q15055203" start="15959" end="15984" title="designated marksman rifle" label="designated marksman rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065338" start="16171" end="16190" title="designated marksmen" label="designated marksmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145242" start="16251" end="16260" title="M40 rifle" label="M40 rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q309370" start="16262" end="16285" title="Heckler &amp;amp; Koch PSG1" label="Heckler &amp;amp; Koch PSG1"/>
<link wikidata="Q42257" start="16287" end="16302" title="Walther WA 2000" label="Walther WA 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484379" start="16304" end="16330" title="Accuracy International AWM" label="Accuracy International AWM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054077" start="16332" end="16356" title="M24 Sniper Weapon System" label="M24 Sniper Weapon System"/>
<link wikidata="Q696603" start="16358" end="16369" title="Steyr Scout" label="Steyr Scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q167911" start="16371" end="16379" title="Sako TRG" label="Sako TRG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071406" start="16385" end="16405" title="CheyTac Intervention" label="CheyTac Intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q428119" start="16466" end="16489" title="Mauser Tankgewehr M1918" label="Mauser Tankgewehr M1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q573059" start="16491" end="16511" title="Boys anti-tank rifle" label="Boys anti-tank rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060271" start="16513" end="16520" title="PTRS-41" label="PTRS-41"/>
<link wikidata="Q505226" start="16522" end="16533" title="Barrett M82" label="Barrett M82"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009592" start="16535" end="16561" title="Gepárd anti-materiel rifle" label="Gepárd anti-materiel rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q660141" start="16567" end="16582" title="McMillan TAC-50" label="McMillan TAC-50"/>
<link wikidata="Q159509" start="16635" end="16638" title="SVD (rifle)" label="SVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154523" start="16640" end="16645" title="SR-25" label="SR-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047546" start="16647" end="16659" title="Dragunov SVU" label="Dragunov SVU"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204443" start="16661" end="16686" title="Marine Scout Sniper Rifle" label="Marine Scout Sniper Rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184636" start="16688" end="16715" title="Mk 14 Enhanced Battle Rifle" label="Mk 14 Enhanced Battle Rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718366" start="16721" end="16754" title="M110 Semi-Automatic Sniper System" label="M110 Semi-Automatic Sniper System"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800" start="17156" end="17167" title="machine gun" label="machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068348" start="17181" end="17189" title="Chauchat" label="Chauchat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055967" start="17229" end="17259" title="Hotchkiss Mle 1914 machine gun" label="Hotchkiss Mle 1914 machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="17265" end="17276" title="French Army" label="French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853245" start="17341" end="17356" title="ammunition belt" label="ammunition belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q720711" start="17545" end="17562" title="light machine gun" label="light machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972688" start="17673" end="17694" title="National Firearms Act" label="National Firearms Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451681" start="17699" end="17728" title="Firearm Owners Protection Act" label="Firearm Owners Protection Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196092" start="17765" end="17783" title="United States Code" label="United States Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810112" start="18367" end="18383" title="Title II weapons" label="Title II weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q351863" start="18483" end="18494" title="Cei-Rigotti" label="Cei-Rigotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q373396" start="18496" end="18505" title="Lewis gun" label="Lewis gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q205691" start="18507" end="18522" title="Fedorov Avtomat" label="Fedorov Avtomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q60642" start="18528" end="18558" title="M1918 Browning automatic rifle" label="M1918 Browning automatic rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097241" start="18727" end="18738" title="direct fire" label="direct fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241297" start="18775" end="18785" title="burst fire" label="burst fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853245" start="18846" end="18854" title="belt-fed" label="belt-fed"/>
<link wikidata="Q753454" start="18961" end="18973" title="rate of fire" label="rate of fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164253" start="19030" end="19046" title="suppressive fire" label="suppressive fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184840" start="19195" end="19211" title="military vehicle" label="military vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q216916" start="19217" end="19234" title="military aircraft" label="military aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862123" start="19370" end="19388" title="crew-served weapon" label="crew-served weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q720711" start="19650" end="19667" title="light machine gun" label="light machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076124" start="19707" end="19729" title="intermediate cartridge" label="intermediate cartridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192819" start="19761" end="19779" title="medium machine gun" label="medium machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195448" start="19926" end="19943" title="heavy machine gun" label="heavy machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700804" start="20015" end="20022" title="Weapon mount" label="mounted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444534" start="20044" end="20050" title="tripod" label="tripod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184840" start="20054" end="20070" title="military vehicle" label="military vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060532" start="20106" end="20133" title="general-purpose machine gun" label="general-purpose machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q904510" start="20343" end="20365" title="squad automatic weapon" label="squad automatic weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207063" start="20463" end="20468" title="squad" label="squad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097241" start="20480" end="20491" title="direct fire" label="direct fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q282352" start="20531" end="20540" title="Maxim gun" label="Maxim gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q218932" start="20542" end="20553" title="M2 Browning" label="M2 Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q482428" start="20555" end="20577" title="Bren light machine gun" label="Bren light machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q153596" start="20579" end="20584" title="MG 42" label="MG 42"/>
<link wikidata="Q159495" start="20586" end="20600" title="PK machine gun" label="PK machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q842066" start="20602" end="20608" title="FN MAG" label="FN MAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q690620" start="20610" end="20632" title="M249 light machine gun" label="M249 light machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q741087" start="20634" end="20637" title="RPK" label="RPK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078239" start="20639" end="20648" title="IWI Negev" label="IWI Negev"/>
<link wikidata="Q864060" start="20654" end="20666" title="M134 Minigun" label="M134 Minigun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046449" start="20768" end="20785" title="handgun cartridge" label="handgun cartridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q135550" start="20795" end="20812" title="9×19mm Parabellum" label="9×19mm Parabellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q158803" start="20814" end="20821" title=".45 ACP" label=".45 ACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q158715" start="20823" end="20837" title=".22 Long Rifle" label=".22 Long Rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q158782" start="20843" end="20854" title=".40 S&amp;amp;W" label=".40 S&amp;amp;W"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140161" start="21651" end="21665" title="machine pistol" label="machine pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102423" start="21795" end="21816" title="close-quarters combat" label="close-quarters combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q485027" start="22093" end="22103" title="body armor" label="body armor"/>
<link wikidata="Q201332" start="22268" end="22281" title="Overpenetrating" label="overpenetrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q696172" start="22332" end="22337" title="MP 18" label="MP 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q151044" start="22339" end="22344" title="MP 40" label="MP 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q269593" start="22346" end="22369" title="Thompson submachine gun" label="Thompson submachine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q865005" start="22371" end="22388" title="M3 submachine gun" label="M3 submachine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q155644" start="22390" end="22393" title="Uzi" label="Uzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q155901" start="22395" end="22417" title="Heckler &amp;amp; Koch MP5" label="Heckler &amp;amp; Koch MP5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372186" start="22419" end="22429" title="Spectre M4" label="Spectre M4"/>
<link wikidata="Q10568180" start="22431" end="22440" title="Steyr TMP" label="Steyr TMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q461510" start="22442" end="22464" title="Heckler &amp;amp; Koch UMP" label="Heckler &amp;amp; Koch UMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q730669" start="22466" end="22473" title="PP-2000" label="PP-2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q969971" start="22475" end="22487" title="KRISS Vector" label="KRISS Vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q17904966" start="22493" end="22500" title="SIG MPX" label="SIG MPX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788694" start="23127" end="23131" title="Rear (military)" label="rear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481555" start="23331" end="23341" title="skirmisher" label="skirmisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q460942" start="23347" end="23358" title="Infiltration tactics" label="infiltrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q318588" start="24183" end="24189" title="FN P90" label="FN P90"/>
<link wikidata="Q815469" start="24191" end="24213" title="Heckler &amp;amp; Koch MP7" label="Heckler &amp;amp; Koch MP7"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164333" start="24215" end="24231" title="AAC Honey Badger" label="AAC Honey Badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039363" start="24237" end="24252" title="ST Kinetics CPW" label="ST Kinetics CPW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310130" start="24686" end="24697" title="single-shot" label="single-shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q9180323" start="24834" end="24843" title="Repeating firearm" label="repeating"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139614" start="25261" end="25275" title="cocking handle" label="cocking handle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089351" start="25319" end="25332" title="trigger guard" label="trigger guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q15107531" start="25408" end="25412" title="Bolt (firearms)" label="bolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153014" start="25426" end="25434" title="Linkage (mechanical)" label="linkages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412977" start="25448" end="25458" title="firing pin" label="firing pin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37144" start="25488" end="25497" title="Cartridge (firearms)" label="cartridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139614" start="25673" end="25684" title="Cocking handle" label="bolt handle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11741880" start="25716" end="25724" title="Receiver (firearms)" label="receiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933955" start="25755" end="25761" title="Breech-loading weapon" label="breech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412977" start="25801" end="25808" title="Firing pin" label="striker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986994" start="25837" end="25841" title="Sear (firearm)" label="sear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068543" start="25972" end="25979" title="Chamber (firearms)" label="chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863346" start="26436" end="26445" title="handguard" label="handguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468147" start="26487" end="26496" title="forestock" label="forestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333657" start="26580" end="26586" title="Hammer (firearms)" label="hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364934" start="27661" end="27671" title="propellant" label="propellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243398" start="27755" end="27761" title="Primer (firearms)" label="primer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27817" end="27835" title="Action (firearms)#Autoloading operation" label="cycling principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2203443" start="27850" end="27866" title="recoil operation" label="recoil operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q749601" start="27889" end="27895" title="recoil" label="recoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q166034" start="27918" end="27926" title="Blowback (firearms)" label="blowback"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952333" start="27999" end="28011" title="blow forward" label="blow forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144155" start="28065" end="28078" title="gas operation" label="gas operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47471313" start="28925" end="28943" title="fire mode selector" label="fire mode selector"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164253" start="29141" end="29157" title="suppressive fire" label="suppressive fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q339828" start="29287" end="29299" title="Blunt instrument" label="blunt weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q185785" start="29354" end="29364" title="ammunition" label="ammunition"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="29408" end="29429" title="Israel Defense Forces" label="Israel Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q487192" start="29679" end="29685" title="Muzzle (firearm)" label="muzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q909380" start="29700" end="29710" title="Stock (firearm)" label="butt stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q106670003" start="29725" end="29742" title="Forensic medicine" label="Forensic medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q770709" start="29784" end="29804" title="blunt-force injuries" label="blunt-force injuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003147" start="30128" end="30140" title="Buttstroking" label="Buttstroking"/>
<link wikidata="Q909380" start="30160" end="30170" title="Stock (firearm)" label="butt stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198467" start="30187" end="30202" title="Pistol-whipping" label="Pistol-whipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574963" start="30228" end="30235" title="handgun" label="handgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q487192" start="30257" end="30263" title="Gun barrel" label="muzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q173366" start="30291" end="30298" title="bayonet" label="bayonet"/>
<link wikidata="Q747986" start="30373" end="30378" title="History of science and technology in China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826688" start="30401" end="30411" title="fire lance" label="fire lance"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="30461" end="30470" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="30621" end="30628" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q317939" start="30724" end="30731" title="Bombard (weapon)" label="bombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723884" start="30751" end="30761" title="Round shot" label="cannonball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430251" start="30808" end="30819" title="hand cannon" label="hand cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q145263" start="30909" end="30924" title="Acheng District" label="Acheng District"/>
<link wikidata="Q19206" start="30926" end="30938" title="Heilongjiang" label="Heilongjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q947784" start="31223" end="31229" title="Mamluk" label="Mamluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q555994" start="31406" end="31416" title="Aq Qoyunlu" label="Aq Qoyunlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18234383" start="31421" end="31429" title="Safavids" label="Safavids"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="31450" end="31457" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughals"/>
<link wikidata="Q49332" start="31546" end="31555" title="Nusantara (archipelago)" label="Nusantara"/>
<link wikidata="Q84934955" start="31595" end="31608" title="Java arquebus" label="long arquebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q49332" start="31727" end="31736" title="Nusantara (archipelago)" label="Nusantara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672432" start="31781" end="31804" title="Mongol invasion of Java" label="Mongol invasion of Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430251" start="31850" end="31858" title="Hand cannon" label="pole gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q94578444" start="31860" end="31872" title="bedil tombak" label="bedil tombak"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="32042" end="32047" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="32090" end="32095" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q84934955" start="32301" end="32314" title="Java arquebus" label="Java arquebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="32347" end="32361" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4110453" start="32389" end="32418" title="Capture of Malacca (1511)" label="Portuguese capture of Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q46652" start="32951" end="32959" title="Malacca Sultanate" label="Malaccan"/>
<link wikidata="Q84937094" start="33105" end="33114" title="istinggar" label="istinggar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566316" start="34993" end="35017" title="Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907" label="Hague Convention of 1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826688" start="35360" end="35370" title="fire lance" label="fire lance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430251" start="36100" end="36111" title="hand cannon" label="hand cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q278938" start="36191" end="36200" title="lead shot" label="lead shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q909380" start="36702" end="36707" title="Stock (firearms)" label="stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346098" start="36858" end="36865" title="windage" label="windage"/>
<link wikidata="Q170417" start="36945" end="36949" title="Caliber" label="bore"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="37043" end="37052" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q168289" start="37083" end="37091" title="arquebus" label="arquebus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37174" end="37192" title="History of Czech civilian firearms possession#Origins of civilian firearms possession" label="the Hussite revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q168289" start="37230" end="37238" title="arquebus" label="arquebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="37285" end="37299" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7968749" start="37826" end="37835" title="war wagon" label="war wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="37909" end="37913" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461850" start="37964" end="37978" title="Muzzleloader" label="Muzzle-loading"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644106" start="39115" end="39130" title="superposed load" label="superposed load"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243678" start="39535" end="39544" title="Matchlock" label="Matchlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967985" start="40784" end="40793" title="wheellock" label="wheellock"/>
<link wikidata="Q20459" start="41127" end="41144" title="Lighter" label="cigarette lighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="41345" end="41362" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q270141" start="41388" end="41403" title="polymath" label="Renaissance man"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403171" start="41544" end="41553" title="flintlock" label="flintlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505083" start="41825" end="41832" title="frizzen" label="frizzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q369555" start="42149" end="42168" title="flintlock mechanism" label="flintlock mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9386593" start="42170" end="42179" title="snaphance" label="snaphance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505175" start="42181" end="42194" title="Miquelet lock" label="Miquelet lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q614853" start="42322" end="42336" title="Percussion cap" label="Percussion cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q614853" start="42339" end="42356" title="caplock mechanism" label="caplock mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461850" start="43685" end="43697" title="muzzleloader" label="muzzleloader"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095719" start="44751" end="44758" title="Spencer repeating rifle" label="Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606404" start="44763" end="44768" title="Henry rifle" label="Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q154321" start="45437" end="45449" title="Mosin–Nagant" label="Mosin–Nagant"/>
<link wikidata="Q60134" start="45455" end="45469" title="Mauser Kar 98k" label="Mauser Kar 98k"/>
<link wikidata="Q217153" start="45475" end="45492" title="Springfield M1903" label="Springfield M1903"/>
<link wikidata="Q204046" start="45498" end="45507" title="M1 Garand" label="M1 Garand"/>
<link wikidata="Q482594" start="45517" end="45520" title="SKS" label="SKS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028879" start="45693" end="45701" title="Breda 30" label="Breda 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019288" start="46685" end="46706" title="Louis-Nicolas Flobert" label="Louis-Nicolas Flobert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289462" start="46726" end="46752" title="rimfire ammunition" label="rimfire metallic cartridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519007" start="46880" end="46890" title="parlor gun" label="parlor gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545196" start="47020" end="47031" title="6mm Flobert" label="6mm Flobert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364934" start="47079" end="47089" title="propellant" label="propellant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4545196" start="47222" end="47232" title=".22 BB Cap" label=".22 BB Cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q357474" start="47237" end="47247" title=".22 CB Cap" label=".22 CB Cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q37144" start="47513" end="47522" title="Cartridge (firearms)" label="cartridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="48222" end="48231" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q281560" start="48322" end="48329" title="wadding" label="wadding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289462" start="48939" end="48958" title="Rimfire ammunition" label="&amp;quot;rimfire&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q190476" start="49043" end="49053" title="centerfire" label="centerfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933955" start="49524" end="49530" title="Breechloader" label="breech"/>
<link wikidata="Q148958" start="49577" end="49585" title="Magazine (firearms)" label="magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300560" start="50049" end="50053" title="Clip (ammunition)" label="clip"/>
<link wikidata="Q5945606" start="50293" end="50304" title="speedloader" label="speedloader"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141273" start="50311" end="50324" title="stripper clip" label="stripper clip"/>
<link wikidata="Q723346" start="50364" end="50375" title="Lee–Enfield" label="Lee–Enfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q166313" start="50379" end="50388" title="Mauser 98" label="Mauser 98"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50398" end="50410" title="En-bloc clip#En bloc" label="en-bloc clip"/>
<link wikidata="Q204046" start="50431" end="50440" title="M1 Garand" label="M1 Garand"/>
<link wikidata="Q272975" start="51309" end="51320" title="Gatling gun" label="Gatling gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q9180311" start="51728" end="51737" title="Automatic firearm" label="automatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q272975" start="51951" end="51962" title="Gatling gun" label="Gatling gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="52088" end="52103" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q573994" start="52132" end="52151" title="MG 08" label="&amp;quot;Spandau&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q373396" start="52186" end="52195" title="Lewis gun" label="Lewis gun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52249" end="52273" title="Browning automatic rifle" label="Browning automatic rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637214" start="52491" end="52505" title="selective fire" label="selective fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q170318" start="52690" end="52693" title="M16 rifle" label="M16"/>
<link wikidata="Q621961" start="53925" end="53948" title="Transportation safety in the United States" label="motor vehicle accidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475712" start="57012" end="57038" title="noise-induced hearing loss" label="noise-induced hearing loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="58930" end="58943" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810112" start="59038" end="59046" title="Title II weapons" label="title II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972688" start="59090" end="59111" title="National Firearms Act" label="National Firearms Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q434371" start="59641" end="59692" title="Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives" label="Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives"/>
<link wikidata="Q178898" start="59759" end="59774" title="gas compression" label="gas compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q193427" start="59861" end="59868" title="air gun" label="air gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q326124" start="60210" end="60228" title="European Directive" label="European Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991240" start="61986" end="62023" title="Protocol against the Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms" label="international UN protocol on firearms"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11968" wikidata="Q23" url="?curid=11968" title="George Washington">
<text>George Washington (, 1799) was a Founding Father and the first president of the United States, serving from 1789 to 1797. As commander of the Continental Army, Washington led Patriot forces to victory in the American Revolutionary War against the British Empire. He is commonly known as the Father of His Country for his role in bringing about American independence.

Born in the Colony of Virginia, Washington became the commander of the Virginia Regiment during the French and Indian War (1754–1763). He was later elected to the Virginia House of Burgesses, and opposed the perceived oppression of the American colonists by the British Crown. When the American Revolutionary War against the British began in 1775, Washington was appointed commander-in-chief of the Continental Army. He directed a poorly organized and equipped force against disciplined British troops. Washington and his army achieved an early victory at the Siege of Boston in March 1776 but were forced to retreat from New York City in November. Washington crossed the Delaware River and won the battles of Trenton in late 1776 and Princeton in early 1777, then lost the battles of Brandywine and Germantown later that year. He faced criticism of his command, low troop morale, and a lack of provisions for his forces as the war continued. Ultimately Washington led a combined French and American force to a decisive victory over the British at Yorktown in 1781. In the resulting Treaty of Paris in 1783, the British acknowledged the sovereign independence of the United States. Washington then served as president of the Constitutional Convention in 1787, which drafted the current Constitution of the United States.

Washington was elected president unanimously by the Electoral College in 1788 and again in 1792. As the first U.S. president, he implemented a strong, well-financed national government while remaining impartial in the fierce rivalry that emerged within his cabinet between Thomas Jefferson and Alexander Hamilton. During the French Revolution, he proclaimed a policy of neutrality while supporting the Jay Treaty with Britain. Washington set enduring precedents for the office of president, including republicanism, a peaceful transfer of power, the use of the title &quot;Mr. President&quot;, and the two-term tradition. His 1796 farewell address became a preeminent statement on republicanism: Washington wrote about the importance of national unity and the dangers that regionalism, partisanship, and foreign influence pose to it. As a planter of tobacco and wheat at Mount Vernon, Washington owned many slaves. He began opposing slavery near the end of his life, and provided in his will for the manumission of his slaves.

Washington&#x27;s image is an icon of American culture and he has been extensively memorialized; his namesakes include the national capital and the State of Washington. In both popular and scholarly polls, he is consistently considered one of the greatest presidents in American history.

==Early life (1732–1752)==


George Washington was born on February 22, 1732, at Popes Creek in Westmoreland County, Virginia. He was the first of six children of Augustine and Mary Ball Washington. His father was a justice of the peace and a prominent public figure who had four additional children from his first marriage to Jane Butler. Washington was not close to his father and rarely mentioned him in later years; he had a fractious relationship with his mother. Among his siblings, he was particularly close to his older half-brother Lawrence.

The family moved to a plantation on Little Hunting Creek in 1735 before settling at Ferry Farm near Fredericksburg, Virginia, in 1738. When Augustine died in 1743, Washington inherited Ferry Farm and ten slaves; Lawrence inherited Little Hunting Creek and renamed it Mount Vernon. Because of his father&#x27;s death, Washington did not have the formal education his elder half-brothers had received at Appleby Grammar School in England; he instead attended the Lower Church School in Hartfield. He learned mathematics and land surveying, and became a talented draftsman and mapmaker. By early adulthood, he was writing with what his biographer Ron Chernow described as &quot;considerable force&quot; and &quot;precision&quot;. As a teenager, Washington compiled over a hundred rules for social interaction styled &quot;The Rules of Civility&quot;, copied from an English translation of a French guidebook.

Washington often visited Belvoir, the plantation of William Fairfax, Lawrence&#x27;s father-in-law, and Mount Vernon. Fairfax became Washington&#x27;s patron and surrogate father. In 1748, Washington spent a month with a team surveying Fairfax&#x27;s Shenandoah Valley property. The following year, he received a surveyor&#x27;s license from the College of William &amp; Mary. Even though Washington had not served the customary apprenticeship, Thomas Fairfax (William&#x27;s cousin) appointed him surveyor of Culpeper County, Virginia. Washington took his oath of office on July 20, 1749, and resigned in 1750. By 1752, he had bought almost in the Shenandoah Valley and owned .

In 1751, Washington left mainland North America for the first and only time, when he accompanied Lawrence to Barbados, hoping the climate would cure his brother&#x27;s tuberculosis. Washington contracted smallpox during the trip, which left his face slightly scarred. Lawrence died in 1752, and Washington leased Mount Vernon from his widow, Anne; he inherited it outright after her death in 1761.

==Colonial military career (1752–1758)==
Lawrence Washington&#x27;s service as adjutant general of the Virginia militia inspired George to seek a militia commission. Virginia&#x27;s lieutenant governor, Robert Dinwiddie, appointed Washington as a major and commander of one of the four militia districts. The British and French were competing for control of the Ohio River Valley: the British were constructing forts along the river, and the French between the river and Lake Erie.

In October 1753, Dinwiddie appointed Washington as a special envoy to demand the French forces vacate land that was claimed by the British. Washington was also directed to make peace with the Iroquois Confederacy and to gather intelligence about the French forces. Washington met with Iroquois leader Tanacharison at Logstown. Washington said that at this meeting Tanacharison named him Conotocaurius. This name, meaning &quot;devourer of villages&quot;, had previously been given to his great-grandfather John Washington in the late 17th century by the Susquehannock.

Washington&#x27;s party reached the Ohio River in November 1753 and was intercepted by a French patrol. The party was escorted to Fort Le Boeuf, where Washington was received in a friendly manner. He delivered the British demand to vacate to the French commander Jacques Legardeur de Saint-Pierre, but the French refused to leave. Saint-Pierre gave Washington his official answer after a few days&#x27; delay, as well as food and winter clothing for his party&#x27;s journey back to Virginia. Washington completed the precarious mission in difficult winter conditions, achieving a measure of distinction when his report was published in Virginia and London.

===French and Indian War===


In February 1754, Dinwiddie promoted Washington to lieutenant colonel and second-in-command of the 300-strong Virginia Regiment, with orders to confront the French at the Forks of the Ohio. Washington set out with half the regiment in April and was soon aware that a French force of 1,000 had begun construction of Fort Duquesne there. In May, having established a defensive position at Great Meadows, Washington learned that the French had made camp away; he decided to take the offensive. The French detachment proved to be only about 50 men, so on May 28 Washington commanded an ambush. His small force of Virginians and Indian allies killed the French, including their commander Joseph Coulon de Jumonville, who had been carrying a diplomatic message for the British. The French later found their countrymen dead and scalped, blaming Washington, who had retreated to Fort Necessity.

The rest of the Virginia Regiment joined Washington the following month with news that he had been promoted to the rank of colonel and given command of the full regiment. They were reinforced by an independent company of a hundred South Carolinians led by Captain James Mackay; his royal commission outranked Washington&#x27;s and a conflict of command ensued. On July 3, 900 French soldiers attacked Fort Necessity, and the ensuing battle ended in Washington&#x27;s surrender. Washington did not speak French, but signed a surrender document in which he unwittingly took responsibility for &quot;assassinating&quot; Jumonville, later blaming the translator for not properly translating it. The Virginia Regiment was divided and Washington was offered a captaincy in one of the newly formed regiments. He refused, as it would have been a demotion—the British had ordered that &quot;colonials&quot; could not be ranked any higher than captain—and instead resigned his commission. The Jumonville affair became the incident which ignited the French and Indian War.

In 1755, Washington volunteered as an aide to General Edward Braddock, who led a British expedition to expel the French from Fort Duquesne and the Ohio Country. On Washington&#x27;s recommendation, Braddock split the army into one main column and a smaller &quot;flying column&quot;. Washington was suffering from severe dysentery so did not initially travel with the expedition forces. When he rejoined Braddock at Monongahela, still very ill, the French and their Indian allies ambushed the divided army. Two-thirds of the British force became casualties in the ensuing Battle of the Monongahela, and Braddock was killed. Under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Gage, Washington rallied the survivors and formed a rear guard, allowing the remnants of the force to retreat. During the engagement, Washington had two horses shot out from under him, and his hat and coat were pierced by bullets. His conduct redeemed his reputation among critics of his command in the Battle of Fort Necessity, but he was not included by the succeeding commander (Colonel Thomas Dunbar) in planning subsequent operations.

The Virginia Regiment was reconstituted in August 1755, and Dinwiddie appointed Washington its commander, again with the rank of colonel. Washington clashed over seniority almost immediately, this time with Captain John Dagworthy, who commanded a detachment of Marylanders at the regiment&#x27;s headquarters in Fort Cumberland. Washington, impatient for an offensive against Fort Duquesne, was convinced Braddock would have granted him a royal commission and pressed his case in February 1756 with Braddock&#x27;s successor as Commander-in-Chief, William Shirley, and again in January 1757 with Shirley&#x27;s successor, Lord Loudoun. Loudoun humiliated Washington, refused him a royal commission, and agreed only to relieve him of the responsibility of manning Fort Cumberland.

In 1758, the Virginia Regiment was assigned to the British Forbes Expedition to capture Fort Duquesne. General John Forbes took Washington&#x27;s advice on some aspects of the expedition but rejected his opinion on the best route to the fort. Forbes nevertheless made Washington a brevet brigadier general and gave him command of one of the three brigades that was assigned to assault the fort. The French had abandoned the fort and the valley before the assault, however, and Washington only saw a friendly fire incident which left 14 dead and 26 injured. Frustrated, he resigned his commission soon afterwards and returned to Mount Vernon.

Under Washington, the Virginia Regiment had defended of frontier against twenty Indian attacks in ten months. He increased the professionalism of the regiment as it grew from 300 to 1,000 men. Though he failed to realize a royal commission, which made him hostile towards the British, he gained self-confidence, leadership skills, and knowledge of British military tactics. The destructive competition Washington witnessed among colonial politicians fostered his later support of a strong central government.

==Marriage, civilian and political life (1759–1775)==

On January 6, 1759, Washington, at age 26, married Martha Dandridge Custis, the 27-year-old widow of wealthy plantation owner Daniel Parke Custis. Martha was intelligent, gracious, and experienced in managing a planter&#x27;s estate, and the couple had a happy marriage. They lived at Mount Vernon, where Washington cultivated tobacco and wheat. The marriage gave Washington control over Martha&#x27;s one-third dower interest in the Custis estate, and he managed the remaining two-thirds for Martha&#x27;s children. As a result, he became one of the wealthiest men in Virginia, which increased his social standing.

At Washington&#x27;s urging, Governor Lord Botetourt fulfilled Dinwiddie&#x27;s 1754 promise to grant land bounties to those who served with volunteer militias during the French and Indian War. In late 1770, Washington inspected the lands in the Ohio and Great Kanawha regions, and he engaged surveyor William Crawford to subdivide it. Crawford allotted to Washington, who told the veterans that their land was unsuitable for farming and agreed to purchase , leaving some feeling that they had been duped. He also doubled the size of Mount Vernon to and, by 1775, had more than doubled its slave population to over one hundred.

As a respected military hero and large landowner, Washington held local offices and was elected to the Virginia provincial legislature, representing Frederick County in the Virginia House of Burgesses for seven years beginning in 1758. Early in his legislative career, Washington rarely spoke at or even attended legislative sessions, but was more politically active starting in the 1760s, becoming a prominent critic of Britain&#x27;s taxation and mercantilist policies towards the American colonies. Washington imported luxury goods from England, paying for them by exporting tobacco. His profligate spending combined with low tobacco prices left him £1,800 in debt by 1764. Washington&#x27;s complete reliance on London tobacco buyer and merchant Robert Cary also threatened his economic security. Between 1764 and 1766, he sought to diversify his holdings: he changed Mount Vernon&#x27;s primary cash crop from tobacco to wheat and expanded operations to include flour milling and hemp farming. Washington&#x27;s stepdaughter Patsy suffered from epileptic attacks, and she died at Mount Vernon in 1773, allowing Washington to use part of the inheritance from her estate to settle his debts.

===Opposition to the British Parliament and Crown===
Washington was opposed to the taxes which the British Parliament imposed on the Colonies without proper representation. He believed the Stamp Act 1765 was oppressive and celebrated its repeal the following year. In response to the Townshend Acts, he introduced a proposal in May 1769 which urged Virginians to boycott British goods; the Townshend Acts were mostly repealed in 1770. Washington and other colonists were also angered by the Royal Proclamation of 1763 (which banned American settlement west of the Allegheny Mountains) and British interference in American western land speculation (in which Washington was a participant).

Parliament sought to punish Massachusetts colonists for their role in the Boston Tea Party in 1774 by passing the Coercive Acts, which Washington saw as &quot;an invasion of our rights and privileges&quot;. That July, he and George Mason drafted a list of resolutions for the Fairfax County committee, including a call to end the Atlantic slave trade; the resolutions were adopted. In August, Washington attended the First Virginia Convention and was selected as a delegate to the First Continental Congress. As tensions rose in 1774, he helped train militias in Virginia and organized enforcement of the Continental Association boycott of British goods instituted by the Congress.

==Commander in chief of the army (1775–1783)==
The American Revolutionary War broke out on April 19, 1775. Washington hastily departed Mount Vernon on May 4 to join the Second Continental Congress in Philadelphia. On June 14, Congress created the Continental Army and John Adams nominated Washington as its commander-in-chief, mainly because of his military experience and the belief that a Virginian would better unite the colonies. He was unanimously elected by Congress the next day. Washington gave an acceptance speech on June 16, declining a salary, though he was later reimbursed expenses.

Congress chose Washington&#x27;s primary staff officers, including Artemas Ward, Horatio Gates, Charles Lee, Philip Schuyler, and Nathanael Greene. Henry Knox impressed Adams and Washington with his knowledge of ordnance and was promoted to colonel and chief of artillery. Similarly, Washington was impressed by Alexander Hamilton&#x27;s intelligence and bravery; he would later promote Hamilton to colonel and appoint him his aide-de-camp.

Washington initially banned the enlistment of Black soldiers, both free and enslaved. The British saw an opportunity to divide the colonies: the colonial governor of Virginia issued a proclamation promising freedom to slaves if they joined the British forces. In response to this proclamation and the need for troops, Washington soon overturned his ban. By the end of the war, around one-tenth of the soldiers in the Continental Army were Black, with some obtaining freedom.

===Siege of Boston===

In April 1775, in response to the growing rebellious movement, British troops occupied Boston, led by General Thomas Gage, commander of British forces in America. Local militias surrounded the city and trapped the British troops, resulting in a standoff. As Washington headed for Boston, he was greeted by cheering crowds and political ceremony; he became a symbol of the Patriot cause. Upon Washington&#x27;s arrival on July 2, he went to inspect the army, but found undisciplined militia. After consultation, he initiated Benjamin Franklin&#x27;s suggested reforms, instituting military drills and imposing strict disciplinary measures. Washington promoted some of the soldiers who had performed well at Bunker Hill to officer rank, and removed officers who he saw as incompetent. In October, King George III declared that the colonies were in open rebellion and relieved Gage of command, replacing him with General William Howe.

When the Charles River froze over, Washington was eager to cross and storm Boston, but Gates and others were opposed to having untrained militia attempt to assault well-garrisoned fortifications. Instead, Washington agreed to secure the Dorchester Heights above Boston to try to force the British out. On March 17, 8,906 British troops, 1,100 Loyalists, and 1,220 women and children began a chaotic naval evacuation. Washington entered the city with 500 men, giving them explicit orders not to plunder. He refrained from exerting military authority in Boston, leaving civilian matters in the hands of local authorities.

===New York and New Jersey===
====Battle of Long Island====

After the victory at Boston, Washington correctly guessed that the British would return to New York City and retaliate. He arrived there on April 13, 1776, and ordered the construction of fortifications. He also ordered his forces to treat civilians and their property with respect, to avoid the abuses Bostonians suffered at the hands of British troops. The British forces, including more than a hundred ships and thousands of troops, began arriving on Staten Island in July to lay siege to the city.

Howe&#x27;s troop strength totaled 32,000 regulars and Hessian auxiliaries; Washington had 23,000 men, mostly untrained recruits and militia. In August, Howe landed 20,000 troops at Gravesend, Brooklyn, and approached Washington&#x27;s fortifications. Overruling his generals, Washington chose to fight, based on inaccurate information that Howe&#x27;s army had only around 8,000 soldiers. In the Battle of Long Island, Howe assaulted Washington&#x27;s flank and inflicted 1,500 Patriot casualties. Washington retreated to Manhattan.

Howe sent a message to Washington to negotiate peace, addressing him as &quot;George Washington, Esq.&quot; Washington declined to accept the message, demanding to be addressed with diplomatic protocol—not as a rebel. Despite misgivings, Washington heeded the advice of General Greene to defend Fort Washington, but was ultimately forced to abandon it. Howe pursued and Washington retreated across the Hudson River to Fort Lee. In November, Howe captured Fort Washington. Loyalists in New York City considered Howe a liberator and spread a rumor that Washington had set fire to the city. Now reduced to 5,400 troops, Washington&#x27;s army retreated through New Jersey.

====Crossing the Delaware, Trenton, and Princeton====


Washington crossed the Delaware River into Pennsylvania, where General John Sullivan joined him with 2,000 more troops. The future of the Continental Army was in doubt due to a lack of supplies, a harsh winter, expiring enlistments, and desertions. Howe posted a Hessian garrison at Trenton to hold western New Jersey and the east shore of the Delaware. At sunrise on December 26, 1776, Washington, aided by Colonel Knox and artillery, led his men in a successful surprise attack on the Hessians.

Washington returned to New Jersey on January 3, 1777, launching an attack on the British regulars at Princeton, with 40 Americans killed or wounded and 273 British killed or captured. Howe retreated to New York City for the winter. Washington took up winter headquarters in Morristown, New Jersey. Strategically, Washington&#x27;s victories at Trenton and Princeton were pivotal: they revived Patriot morale and quashed the British strategy of showing overwhelming force followed by offering generous terms, changing the course of the war.

===Philadelphia===
====Brandywine, Germantown, and Saratoga====
In July 1777, the British general John Burgoyne led his British troops south from Quebec in the Saratoga campaign; he recaptured Fort Ticonderoga, intending to divide New England. However, General Howe took his army from New York City south to Philadelphia rather than joining Burgoyne near Albany. Washington and Gilbert, Marquis de Lafayette rushed to Philadelphia to engage Howe. In the Battle of Brandywine on September 11, 1777, Howe outmaneuvered Washington and marched unopposed into the American capital at Philadelphia. A Patriot attack against the British at Germantown in October failed.

In Upstate New York, the Patriots were led by General Horatio Gates. Concerned about Burgoyne&#x27;s movements southward, Washington sent reinforcements north with Generals Benedict Arnold and Benjamin Lincoln. On October 7, 1777, Burgoyne tried to take Bemis Heights but was isolated from support and forced to surrender. Gates&#x27; victory emboldened Washington&#x27;s critics, who favored Gates as a military leader. According to the biographer John Alden, &quot;It was inevitable that the defeats of Washington&#x27;s forces and the concurrent victory of the forces in upper New York should be compared.&quot; Admiration for Washington was waning.

====Valley Forge and Monmouth====

Washington and his army of 11,000 men went into winter quarters at Valley Forge north of Philadelphia in December 1777. There they lost between 2,000 and 3,000 men as a result of disease and lack of food, clothing, and shelter, reducing the army to below 9,000 men. By February, Washington was facing low troop morale and increased desertions. An internal revolt by his officers prompted some members of Congress to consider removing Washington from command. Washington&#x27;s supporters resisted, and the matter was ultimately dropped.

Washington made repeated petitions to Congress for provisions and expressed the urgency of the situation to a congressional delegation. Congress agreed to strengthen the army&#x27;s supply lines and reorganize the quartermaster and commissary departments, while Washington launched the Grand Forage of 1778 to collect food from the surrounding region. Meanwhile, Baron Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben&#x27;s incessant drilling transformed Washington&#x27;s recruits into a disciplined fighting force. Washington appointed him Inspector General.

In early 1778, the French entered into a Treaty of Alliance with the Americans. In May, Howe resigned and was replaced by Sir Henry Clinton. The British evacuated Philadelphia for New York that June and Washington summoned a war council of American and French generals. He chose to order a limited strike on the retreating British. Generals Lee and Lafayette moved with 4,000 men, without Washington&#x27;s knowledge, and bungled their first strike on June 28. Washington relieved Lee and achieved a draw after an expansive battle. The British continued their retreat to New York.
This battle &quot;marked the end of the war&#x27;s campaigning in the northern and middle states. Washington would not fight the British in a major engagement again for more than three years&quot;. British attention shifted to the Southern theatre; in late 1778, General Clinton captured Savannah, Georgia, a key port in the American South. Washington, meanwhile, ordered an expedition against the Iroquois, the Indigenous allies of the British, destroying their villages.

===Espionage and West Point===
Washington became America&#x27;s first spymaster by designing an espionage system against the British. In 1778, Major Benjamin Tallmadge formed the Culper Ring at Washington&#x27;s direction to covertly collect information about the British in New York. Intelligence from the Culper Ring saved French forces from a surprise British attack, which was itself based on intelligence from Washington&#x27;s general turned British spy Benedict Arnold.

Washington had disregarded incidents of disloyalty by Arnold, who had distinguished himself in many campaigns, including the invasion of Quebec. In 1779, Arnold began supplying the British spymaster John André with sensitive information intended to allow the British to capture West Point, a key American defensive position on the Hudson River. On September 21, Arnold gave André plans to take over the garrison. André was captured by militia who discovered the plans, after which Arnold escaped to New York. On being told about Arnold&#x27;s treason, Washington recalled the commanders positioned under Arnold at key points around the fort to prevent any complicity. He assumed personal command at West Point and reorganized its defenses.

===Southern theater and Yorktown===

By June 1780, the British had occupied the South Carolina Piedmont and had firm control of the South. Washington was reinvigorated, however, when Lafayette returned from France with more ships, men, and supplies, and 5,000 veteran French troops led by Marshal Rochambeau arrived at Newport, Rhode Island in July.

General Clinton sent Arnold, now a British brigadier general, to Virginia in December with 1,700 troops to capture Portsmouth and conduct raids on Patriot forces. Washington sent Lafayette south to counter Arnold&#x27;s efforts. Washington initially hoped to bring the fight to New York, drawing the British forces away from Virginia and ending the war there, but Rochambeau advised him that Cornwallis in Virginia was the better target. On August 19, 1781, Washington and Rochambeau began a march to Yorktown, Virginia, known now as the &quot;celebrated march&quot;. Washington was in command of an army of 7,800 Frenchmen, 3,100 militia, and 8,000 Continental troops. Inexperienced in siege warfare, he often deferred to the judgment of Rochambeau. Despite this, Rochambeau never challenged Washington&#x27;s authority as the battle&#x27;s commanding officer.

By late September, Patriot-French forces surrounded Yorktown, trapping the British Army, while the French navy emerged victorious at the Battle of the Chesapeake. The final American offensive began with a shot fired by Washington. The siege ended with a British surrender on October 19, 1781; over 7,000 British soldiers became prisoners of war. Washington negotiated the terms of surrender for two days, and the official signing ceremony took place on October 19. Although the peace treaty was not negotiated for two more years, Yorktown proved to be the last significant battle of the Revolutionary War, with the British Parliament agreeing to cease hostilities in March 1782.

===Demobilization and resignation===

When peace negotiations began in April 1782, both the British and French began gradually evacuating their forces. In March 1783, Washington successfully calmed the Newburgh Conspiracy, a planned mutiny by American officers dissatisfied with a lack of pay. Washington submitted an account of $450,000 in expenses which he had advanced to the army. The account was settled, though it was vague about large sums and included expenses his wife had incurred through visits to his headquarters.

When the Treaty of Paris was signed on September 3, 1783, Britain officially recognized American independence. Washington disbanded his army, giving a farewell address to his soldiers on November 2. He oversaw the evacuation of British forces in New York and was greeted by parades and celebrations.

In early December 1783, Washington bade farewell to his officers at Fraunces Tavern and resigned as commander-in-chief soon after. In a final appearance in uniform, he gave a statement to the Congress: &quot;I consider it an indispensable duty to close this last solemn act of my official life, by commending the interests of our dearest country to the protection of Almighty God, and those who have the superintendence of them, to his holy keeping.&quot; Washington&#x27;s resignation was acclaimed at home and abroad, &quot;extolled by later historians as a signal event that set the country&#x27;s political course&quot; according to the historian Edward J. Larson. The same month, Washington was appointed president-general of the Society of the Cincinnati, a newly established hereditary fraternity of Revolutionary War officers.

==Early republic (1783–1789)==

===Return to Mount Vernon===
After spending just ten days at Mount Vernon out of years of war, Washington was eager to return home. He arrived on Christmas Eve; Professor John E. Ferling wrote that he was delighted to be &quot;free of the bustle of a camp and the busy scenes of public life&quot;. He received a constant stream of visitors paying their respects at Mount Vernon.

Washington reactivated his interests in the Great Dismal Swamp and Potomac Canal projects, begun before the war, though neither paid him any dividends. He undertook a 34-day, trip in 1784 to check on his land holdings in the Ohio Country. He oversaw the completion of remodeling work at Mount Vernon, which transformed his residence into the mansion that survives to this day—although his financial situation was not strong. Creditors paid him in depreciated wartime currency, and he owed significant amounts in taxes and wages. Mount Vernon had made no profit during his absence, and he saw persistently poor crop yields due to pestilence and bad weather. His estate recorded its eleventh year running at a deficit in 1787.

To make his estate profitable again, Washington undertook a new landscaping plan and succeeded in cultivating a range of fast-growing trees and native shrubs. He also began breeding mules after being gifted a stud by King Charles III of Spain in 1785; he believed that they would revolutionize agriculture.

===Constitutional Convention of 1787===

Before returning to private life in June 1783, Washington called for a strong union. Though he was concerned that he might be criticized for meddling in civil matters, he sent a circular letter to the states, maintaining that the Articles of Confederation were no more than &quot;a rope of sand&quot;. He believed the nation was on the verge of &quot;anarchy and confusion&quot;, was vulnerable to foreign intervention, and that a national constitution would unify the states under a strong central government.

When Shays&#x27; Rebellion erupted in Massachusetts in August 1786, Washington was further convinced that a national constitution was needed. Some nationalists feared that the new republic had descended into lawlessness, and they met on September 11, 1786, at Annapolis to ask the Congress to revise the Articles of Confederation. Congress agreed to a Constitutional Convention to be held in Philadelphia in 1787, with each state to send delegates. Washington was chosen to lead the Virginia delegation, but he declined. He had concerns about the legality of the convention and consulted James Madison, Henry Knox, and others. They persuaded him to attend as they felt his presence might induce reluctant states to send delegates and smooth the way for the ratification process while also giving legitimacy to the convention.

Washington arrived in Philadelphia on May 9, 1787, and the convention began on May 25. Benjamin Franklin nominated Washington to preside over the meeting, and he was unanimously elected. The delegate Edmund Randolph introduced Madison&#x27;s Virginia Plan; it called for an entirely new constitution and a sovereign national government, which Washington highly recommended. However, details around representation were particularly contentious, resulting in a competing New Jersey Plan being brought forward. On July 10, Washington wrote to Alexander Hamilton: &quot;I almost despair of seeing a favorable issue to the proceedings of our convention and do therefore repent having had any agency in the business.&quot; Nevertheless, he lent his prestige to the work of the other delegates, lobbying many to support the ratification of the Constitution. The final version adopted the Connecticut Compromise between the two plans, and was signed by 39 of 55 delegates on September 17, 1787.

===First presidential election===

Just prior to the first presidential election of 1789, in 1788 Washington was appointed chancellor of the College of William &amp; Mary. He continued to serve through his presidency until his death. The delegates to the convention for the first presidential election anticipated a Washington presidency and left it to him to define the office once elected. When the state electors voted on February 4, 1789, Washington was unanimously elected, unique among U.S. presidents. John Adams was elected vice president. Despite writing that he felt &quot;anxious and painful sensations&quot; about leaving Mount Vernon, Washington departed for New York City on April 16.

==Presidency (1789–1797)==

===First term===

Washington was inaugurated on April 30, 1789, taking the oath of office at Federal Hall in New York City. His coach was led by militia and a marching band and followed by statesmen and foreign dignitaries in an inaugural parade, with a crowd of 10,000. Robert R. Livingston administered the oath, using a Bible provided by the Masons. Washington read a speech in the Senate Chamber, asking &quot;that Almighty Being ... consecrate the liberties and happiness of the people of the United States&quot;. Though he wished to serve without a salary, Congress insisted that he receive one, providing Washington $25,000 annually (compared to $5,000 annually for the vice president).

Washington wrote to James Madison: &quot;As the first of everything in our situation will serve to establish a precedent, it is devoutly wished on my part that these precedents be fixed on true principles.&quot; To that end, he argued against the majestic titles proposed by the Senate, including &quot;His Majesty&quot; and &quot;His Highness the President&quot;, in favor of &quot;Mr. President&quot;. His executive precedents included the inaugural address, messages to Congress, and the cabinet form of the executive branch. He also selected the first justices for the Supreme Court.

Washington was an able administrator and judge of talent and character. The old Confederation lacked the powers to handle its workload and had weak leadership, no executive, a small bureaucracy of clerks, large debt, worthless paper money, and no power to establish taxes. Congress created executive departments in 1789, including the State Department, the War Department, and the Treasury Department. Washington appointed Edmund Randolph as Attorney General, Samuel Osgood as Postmaster General, Thomas Jefferson as Secretary of State, Henry Knox as Secretary of War, and Alexander Hamilton as Secretary of the Treasury. Washington&#x27;s cabinet became a consulting and advisory body, not mandated by the Constitution. Washington restricted cabinet discussions to topics of his choosing and expected department heads to agreeably carry out his decisions. He exercised restraint in using his veto power, writing that &quot;I give my Signature to many Bills with which my Judgment is at variance.&quot;

Washington opposed political factionalism and remained non-partisan throughout his presidency (the only United States president to do so). He was sympathetic to a Federalist form of government. Washington&#x27;s closest advisors formed two factions, portending the First Party System. Hamilton formed the Federalist Party to promote national credit and a financially powerful nation. Jefferson opposed Hamilton&#x27;s agenda and founded the Jeffersonian Republicans. Washington favored Hamilton&#x27;s agenda, however, and it ultimately went into effect—resulting in bitter controversy.
Other domestic issues during Washington&#x27;s first term included the planning of a permanent capital, the passage of several constitutional amendments including the Bill of Rights, and continuing debates concerning slavery and expansion into Native American territory. Washington proclaimed November 26, 1789, as a day of Thanksgiving to encourage national unity.

===Second term===
Washington initially planned to retire after his first term, weary of office and in poor health. After dealing with the infighting in his cabinet and with partisan critics, he showed little enthusiasm for a second term, and Martha wanted him not to run. Washington&#x27;s nephew George Augustine Washington, managing Mount Vernon in his absence, was critically ill, further increasing Washington&#x27;s desire to retire. Many, however, urged him to run for a second term. Madison told him that his absence would allow the dangerous political rift in his cabinet and the House to worsen. Jefferson also pleaded with him not to retire, pledging to drop his attacks on Hamilton. Hamilton maintained that Washington&#x27;s absence would be &quot;deplored as the greatest evil&quot; to the country. With the election of 1792 nearing, Washington agreed to run. On February 13, 1793, the Electoral College unanimously re-elected Washington president, while John Adams was re-elected as vice president by a vote of 77 to 50. Washington was sworn into office by Associate Justice William Cushing on March 4, 1793, in Congress Hall in Philadelphia.

On April 22, 1793, after the French Revolutionary Wars broke out, Washington issued a proclamation declaring American neutrality. He was resolved to pursue &quot;a conduct friendly and impartial toward the belligerent Powers&quot; while warning Americans not to intervene in the conflict. Although Washington recognized France&#x27;s revolutionary government, he eventually asked that the French minister to the United States, Edmond-Charles Genêt, be recalled. Genêt was a diplomatic troublemaker who was openly hostile toward Washington&#x27;s neutrality policy. He procured four American ships as privateers to strike at Spanish forces (British allies) in Florida while organizing militias to strike at other British possessions. However, his efforts failed to draw the United States into the conflict.

During his second term Washington faced two major domestic conflicts. The first was the Whiskey Rebellion (1791–1794), a Pennsylvania revolt against liquor taxation. Washington mobilized a militia and personally commanded an expedition against the rebels which suppressed the insurgency. The second was the Northwest Indian War between White settlers and Native Americans who were supported by the British; the latter were stationed in forts that they had refused to abandon after the Revolutionary War. In 1794 American troops defeated the Native American forces at the Battle of Fallen Timbers, ending the conflict between the two.

Hamilton formulated the Jay Treaty to normalize trade relations with Britain while removing them from western forts, and also to resolve financial debts remaining from the Revolution. Chief Justice John Jay represented Washington&#x27;s position and signed the treaty on November 19, 1794. Washington supported the treaty because it avoided war, although he was disappointed that its provisions favored Britain. He mobilized public opinion and secured ratification but faced frequent public criticism and political controversy. Following the British abandonment of their forts around the Great Lakes, the proposed position of the Canada–United States border was sent to arbitration. Numerous pre-Revolution debts were settled and the British opened the British West Indies to American merchants. The agreement secured peace with Britain and a decade of prosperous trade; however, Jefferson claimed that it angered France and &quot;invited rather than avoided&quot; war. Jefferson&#x27;s claim was verified when relations with France deteriorated after the signing of the treaty, with the French Directory authorizing the seizure of American ships two days before Washington&#x27;s term ended. Succeeding president John Adams was left with the prospect of war. Relations with the Spanish were more successful: Thomas Pinckney negotiated the Treaty of San Lorenzo in 1795, settling the border between the United States and Spanish territory, and guaranteeing American navigational access to the Mississippi River

On July 31, 1793, Jefferson submitted his resignation from cabinet. Hamilton resigned from office in January 1795 and was replaced by Oliver Wolcott Jr. Washington&#x27;s relationship with Secretary of War Henry Knox deteriorated over rumors that Knox had profited from contracts for the construction of U.S. frigates ostensibly commissioned to combat Barbary pirates under the Naval Act of 1794. Knox was forced to resign. In the final months of his presidency, Washington was assailed by his political foes and a partisan press who accused him of being ambitious and greedy. He came to regard the press as a disuniting force. Washington also opposed demands by Congress to see papers related to the Jay Treaty, arguing that they were not &quot;relative to any purpose under the cognizance of the House of Representatives, except that of an impeachment, which the resolution has not expressed.&quot;

===Farewell Address===

At the end of his second term, Washington retired. He was dismayed with the personal attacks against him and wanted to ensure that a truly contested presidential election could be held. He did not feel bound to a two-term limit, but his retirement set a significant precedent. In May 1792, in anticipation of his retirement, Washington instructed James Madison to prepare a &quot;valedictory address&quot;, an initial draft of which was entitled the &quot;Farewell Address&quot;. In May 1796, Washington sent the manuscript to Hamilton, who did an extensive rewrite, while Washington provided final edits. On September 19, 1796, David Claypoole&#x27;s &quot;American Daily Advertiser&quot; published the address.

Washington stressed that national identity was paramount, and said that the &quot;name of AMERICAN... must always exalt the just pride of patriotism&quot;. Washington warned against the dangers of political parties and entangling foreign alliances with domestic affairs. He counseled friendship and commerce with all nations, but advised against involvement in European wars. He stressed the importance of religion, asserting that &quot;religion and morality are indispensable supports&quot; in a republic.

He closed the address by reflecting on his legacy: &quot;I fervently beseech the Almighty to avert or mitigate the evils to which [my unintentioned errors] may tend. I shall also carry with me the hope that my country will never cease to view them with indulgence, and that, after forty-five years of my life dedicated to its service with an upright zeal, the faults of incompetent abilities will be consigned to oblivion, as myself must soon be to the mansions of rest.&quot; After initial publication, many Republicans, including Madison, criticized the address and described it as an anti-French campaign document, with Madison believing that Washington was strongly pro-British. In 1972, the Washington scholar James Flexner referred to the Farewell Address as receiving as much acclaim as Thomas Jefferson&#x27;s Declaration of Independence and Abraham Lincoln&#x27;s Gettysburg Address. In 2010, Chernow called the &quot;Farewell Address&quot; one of the most influential statements on republicanism.

==Post-presidency (1797–1799)==
===Retirement===

Washington retired to Mount Vernon in March 1797 and devoted time to his business interests. His plantation operations were minimally profitable, and his lands in the west (on the Piedmont) yielded little income; he attempted to sell these but was unable to. He became an even more committed Federalist. He vocally supported the Alien and Sedition Acts and convinced Federalist John Marshall to run for Congress to weaken the Jeffersonian hold on Virginia.
French privateers began seizing American ships in 1798, and deteriorating relations led to the &quot;Quasi-War&quot;. Washington wrote to Secretary of War James McHenry offering to organize President Adams&#x27; army. Adams nominated him for a lieutenant general commission and the position of commander-in-chief of the armies on July 4, 1798. Washington served as the commanding general from July 13, 1798, until his death 17 months later. He participated in planning but delegated the active leadership of the army to Hamilton. No army invaded the United States during this period, and Washington did not assume a field command.

Washington was known to be rich because of what Chernow calls the &quot;glorified façade of wealth and grandeur&quot; at Mount Vernon. However, nearly all of his wealth was in the form of land and slaves rather than ready cash. To supplement his income, he erected a distillery for whiskey production. He bought land parcels to spur development around the new Federal City (named in his honor in 1791), and he sold individual lots to middle-income investors rather than multiple lots to large investors, believing the former would be more likely to commit to making improvements. At the time of his death in 1799, his estate was worth an estimated $780,000, and he held title to more than of land across Virginia, Ohio, Maryland, Pennsylvania, New York, Kentucky, and the Northwest Territory. Washington&#x27;s peak net worth was estimated to be $587 million in 2020 dollars.

===Death===

On December 12, 1799, Washington inspected his farms on horseback in inclement weather for five hours. He then dined with guests without putting on dry clothes. He had a sore throat the next day but was well enough to mark trees for cutting. Early the following morning, he awoke to an inflamed throat and difficulty breathing. He ordered his estate overseer, George Rawlins, to remove nearly a pint of his blood (bloodletting was a common practice of the time). His family summoned doctors James Craik, Gustavus Richard Brown, and Elisha C. Dick. Brown initially believed Washington had quinsy; Dick thought the condition was a more serious &quot;violent inflammation of the membranes of the throat&quot;. They continued bloodletting to approximately five pints, but Washington&#x27;s condition deteriorated further. Dick proposed a tracheotomy; the other physicians were not familiar with that procedure and disapproved. Washington instructed Brown and Dick to leave the room, while he assured Craik, &quot;Doctor, I die hard, but I am not afraid to go.&quot;

On his deathbed, afraid of being entombed alive, Washington instructed his private secretary Tobias Lear to wait three days before his burial. According to Lear, Washington died between 10 p.m. and 11 p.m. on December 14, 1799, with Martha seated at the foot of his bed. His last words were Tis well.&quot; The diagnosis of Washington&#x27;s illness and the immediate cause of his death have been subjects of debate. The published account of Craik and Brown stated that his symptoms were consistent with &quot;cynanche trachealis&quot;, a term then used to describe severe inflammation of the upper windpipe, including quinsy. Accusations of medical malpractice have persisted since Washington&#x27;s death. Modern medical authors have largely concluded that he likely died from severe epiglottitis complicated by the treatments he was given, which included multiple doses of calomel (a purgative) and extensive bloodletting, likely resulting in hypovolemic shock.

===Funeral and burial===

Washington&#x27;s funeral was held on December 18, 1799, four days after his death, at Mount Vernon. Cavalry and foot soldiers led the procession, and six colonels served as the pallbearers. The Mount Vernon funeral service was restricted mostly to family and friends. Reverend Thomas Davis read a brief funeral service, followed by a ceremony performed by members of Washington&#x27;s Masonic lodge; Washington had been a Freemason since 1752. Word of his death traveled slowly, but as it reached other regions, church bells rang and many businesses closed. Memorial processions were held in major cities of the United States. Martha burned her correspondence with Washington to protect its privacy, though five letters between the couple are known to have survived.
Washington was buried in the Washington family vault at Mount Vernon on December 18, 1799. In his will, Washington left instructions for the construction of a new vault; this was completed in 1831, after a disgruntled ex-employee of the estate attempted to steal what he thought was Washington&#x27;s skull. In 1832, a joint Congressional committee debated moving his body from Mount Vernon to a crypt in the United States Capitol. Southern opposition was intense, antagonized by an ever-growing rift between North and South; many were concerned that Washington&#x27;s remains could end up, in the words of Representative Wiley Thompson, on &quot;a shore foreign to his native soil&quot; if the country became divided, and Washington&#x27;s remains stayed in Mount Vernon. On October 7, 1837, Washington&#x27;s remains, still in the original lead coffin, were placed within a marble sarcophagus designed by William Strickland and constructed by John Struthers.

== Philosophy and views ==
=== Slavery ===


During Washington&#x27;s lifetime at least 577 slaves lived and worked at Mount Vernon. He inherited some, gained control of 84 dower slaves upon his marriage to Martha, and purchased at least 71 slaves between 1752 and 1773. From 1786, he rented slaves as part of an agreement regarding a neighboring estate; they totaled 40 in 1799.

Slavery was deeply ingrained in the economic and social fabric of the Colony of Virginia. Prior to the Revolutionary War, Washington&#x27;s views on slavery matched those of most Virginia planters of the time: &quot;his principal interest was still their contribution to the economic life of the plantation.&quot; Beginning in the 1760s, however, Washington gradually grew to oppose it. His first doubts were prompted by his choice to transition from tobacco to grain crops, which left him with a costly surplus of slaves, causing him to question the system&#x27;s economic efficiency. In a 1778 letter to Lund Washington, he made clear his desire &quot;to get quit of Negroes&quot;.

His growing disillusionment with the institution was spurred by the principles of the Revolution and revolutionary friends such as Lafayette and Hamilton. Most historians agree the Revolution was central to the evolution of Washington&#x27;s attitudes; Kenneth Morgan writes that after 1783, &quot;[Washington] began to express inner tensions about the problem of slavery more frequently, though always in private&quot;. As president, he remained publicly silent on the topic, believing it was a nationally divisive issue that could undermine the union. He gave moral support to a plan proposed by Lafayette to purchase land and free slaves to work on it, but chose not to participate in the experiment. Washington privately expressed support for emancipation to prominent Methodists Thomas Coke and Francis Asbury in 1785 but declined to sign their petition. In personal correspondence the next year, he made clear his desire to see the institution of slavery ended by a gradual legislative process, a view that correlated with the mainstream antislavery literature published in the 1780s. Washington emancipated 123 or 124 slaves, which was highly unusual among the large slave-holding Virginians during the Revolutionary era. However, he remained dependent on slave labor to work his farms.
Based on his private papers and on accounts from his contemporaries, Washington slowly developed a cautious sympathy toward abolitionism that ended with his will freeing his long-time valet Billy Lee, and freeing the rest of his personally owned slaves outright upon Martha&#x27;s death. On January 1, 1801, one year after George Washington&#x27;s death, Martha Washington signed an order to free his slaves. Many of them were reluctant to leave; others refused to abandon spouses or children still held as dower slaves by the Custis estate. Following Washington&#x27;s instructions in his will, funds were used to feed and clothe the young, aged, and infirm slaves until the early 1830s.

=== Religious and spiritual views ===

Washington was baptized as an infant in April 1732 and was a devoted member of the Anglican Church. He served for more than 20 years as a vestryman and churchwarden at the Fairfax and Truro parishes in Virginia. He privately prayed and read the Bible daily, and publicly encouraged prayer. He may have taken communion regularly prior to the Revolution, but he did not do so afterwards.

Washington referred to God in American Enlightenment terms, including &quot;Providence&quot;, the &quot;Almighty&quot;, and the &quot;Divine Author&quot;. He believed in a divine power who watched over battlefields, influenced the outcome of war, protected his life, and was involved in American politics and specifically in the creation of the United States. Chernow has argued that Washington avoided evangelistic Christianity, hellfire-and-brimstone speech, and anything inclined to &quot;flaunt his religiosity&quot;, saying that he &quot;never used his religion as a device for partisan purposes or in official undertakings&quot;. At the same time, Washington frequently quoted from or paraphrased the Bible, and often referred to the Anglican &quot;Book of Common Prayer&quot;.

While president, Washington acknowledged major religious sects, gave speeches on religious toleration, and opposed state religion. He adopted the ideas, values, and modes of thinking of the Enlightenment, but he harbored no contempt for organized Christianity and its clergy. In 1793, speaking to members of the New Church in Baltimore, Washington said, &quot;We have abundant reason to rejoice that in this Land the light of truth and reason has triumphed over the power of bigotry and superstition.&quot;

Freemasonry was a widely accepted institution in the late 18th century, known for advocating moral teachings. American Masonic lodges did not share the anti-clerical views of the controversial European lodges. A Masonic lodge was established in Fredericksburg, Virginia, in September 1752, and Washington was initiated two months later at the age of 20 as one of its first Entered Apprentices. Within a year, he progressed through its ranks to become a Master Mason. In 1777, he was recommended for the office of Grand Master of the newly established Grand Lodge of Virginia; sources differ as to whether he declined or was never asked, but he did not assume the role. He served as the charter Master of Alexandria Masonic lodge No. 22 in 1788–1789.

==Personal life==
Washington&#x27;s 1751 bout with smallpox may have rendered him sterile, though Chernow notes that it is possible Martha &quot;sustained injury during the birth of Patsy, her final child, making additional births impossible&quot;. The couple lamented not having any children together. The two raised Martha&#x27;s children John Parke Custis (Jacky) and Martha Parke Custis (Patsy), and later Jacky&#x27;s two youngest children Eleanor Parke Custis (Nelly) and George Washington Parke Custis (Washy), and supported numerous nieces and nephews. Some descendants of West Ford, a slave of Washington&#x27;s younger brother John Augustine Washington, maintain (based on family oral history) that Ford was fathered by George Washington, though this paternity has been disputed.

Washington was somewhat reserved in personality, although he was known for having a strong presence. He made speeches and announcements when required, but he was not a noted orator nor debater. He drank alcohol in moderation but was morally opposed to excessive drinking, smoking tobacco, gambling, and profanity. He was taller than most of his contemporaries; accounts of his height vary from to . He was known for his strength. He had grey-blue eyes and long reddish-brown hair. He did not wear a powdered wig; instead he wore his hair curled, powdered, and tied in a queue in the fashion of the day.

Washington suffered from severe tooth decay and ultimately lost all of his teeth except one. He had several sets of false teeth during his presidency. Contrary to common lore, these were not made of wood, but of metal, ivory, bone, animal teeth, and human teeth possibly obtained from slaves. His dental problems left him in constant pain, which he treated with laudanum. He also experienced a painful growth in his thigh early in his first presidential term, followed by a life-threatening bout of pneumonia in 1790 from which he never fully recovered.

Washington was a talented equestrian. Jefferson described him as &quot;the best horseman of his age&quot;. He collected thoroughbreds at Mount Vernon; his two favorite horses were Blueskin and Nelson.

==Legacy==


Washington is one of the most influential figures in American history. Virginia&#x27;s Governor Henry Lee as &quot;first in war, first in peace, and first in the hearts of his countrymen&quot;. Polls have consistently placed Washington among the highest-ranked of presidents.

Washington became an international symbol for liberation and nationalism as the leader of the first successful revolution against a colonial empire. In 1879, Congress proclaimed Washington&#x27;s Birthday to be a federal holiday. In 1976, he was posthumously appointed General of the Armies of the United States during the American Bicentennial. President Gerald Ford stated that Washington would &quot;rank first among all officers of the Army, past and present&quot;. On March 13, 1978, Washington was officially promoted by the Army.

In 1809, Mason Locke Weems wrote a hagiographic biography to honor Washington. Chernow maintains that Weems attempted to humanize Washington, inspire &quot;patriotism and morality&quot;, and foster &quot;enduring myths&quot;, such as that of Washington&#x27;s refusal to lie about damaging his father&#x27;s cherry tree. Weems&#x27; accounts have never been proven or disproven.

In the 21st century, Washington&#x27;s reputation has been critically scrutinized. The historian John Ferling maintains that Washington remains the only founder and president ever to be referred to as &quot;godlike&quot;, and points out that his character has been the most scrutinized by historians. The author David Hackett Fischer defined Washington&#x27;s character as &quot;integrity, self-discipline, courage, absolute honesty, resolve, and decision, but also forbearance, decency, and respect for others&quot;. Chernow describes Washington as always trying to be even-handed in dealing with Indigenous peoples, hoping they would abandon their itinerant hunting life and adapt to fixed agricultural communities in the manner of White settlers. He also maintains that Washington never advocated outright confiscation of tribal land or the forcible removal of tribes. By contrast, Colin G. Calloway wrote that &quot;Washington had a lifelong obsession with getting Indian land, either for himself or for his nation, and initiated policies and campaigns that had devastating effects in Indian country.&quot; He stated:
Along with other Founding Fathers, Washington has been criticized for holding enslaved people. Though he expressed the desire to see the abolition of slavery through legislation, he did not initiate or support any initiatives for bringing about its end. This has led to calls to remove his name from public buildings and his statue from public spaces.

Washington&#x27;s presidential library is housed at Mount Vernon, which is now a National Historic Landmark. His papers are held by the Library of Congress.

===Namesakes and monuments===

Many places and monuments have been named in honor of Washington, including the capital city of Washington, D.C., and the state of Washington. On February 21, 1885, the Washington Monument was dedicated, a marble obelisk on the National Mall in Washington, D.C.

Washington appears as one of four presidents on the &quot;Shrine of Democracy&quot;, a colossal sculpture by Gutzon Borglum on Mount Rushmore in South Dakota. The George Washington Bridge, opened in 1931, connects New York City to New Jersey. A number of secondary schools and universities are named in honor of Washington, including George Washington University and Washington University in St. Louis.

He appears on contemporary United States currency, including the one-dollar bill, the Presidential one-dollar coin and the quarter-dollar coin (the Washington quarter). Washington was pictured on the nation&#x27;s first postage stamp in 1847, and has since appeared on more United States postage stamps than anyone else.

==See also==

* Electoral history of George Washington
* The Washington Papers

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==

===Books===
* 
* 
*
*
*
* 
*
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 


* 

* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
*
*
* 

* 
* 
* 


* 
* 
* 
*

* 
*
*
* 

* 
*
* 
*
* 
*

* 
* 
*
*
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Journals===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

* George Washington on C-SPAN
* George Washington&#x27;s Mount Vernon
* The Papers of George Washington, subset of Founders Online from the National Archives
* In Our Time: Washington and the American Revolution, BBC Radio4 discussion with Carol Berkin, Simon Middleton, and Colin Bonwick (June 24, 2004)
* Great Lives: George Washington, BBC Radio4 discussion with Matthew Parris, Michael Rose, and Frank Grizzard (October 21, 2016)
* Scholarly coverage of Washington at the Miller Center, University of Virginia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="0" end="17" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="33" end="48" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="Founding Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="63" end="93" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="142" end="158" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365374" start="175" end="182" title="Patriot (American Revolution)" label="Patriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="208" end="234" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="247" end="261" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918497" start="291" end="312" title="Father of the Nation" label="Father of His Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="344" end="365" title="American independence" label="American independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="380" end="398" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Colony of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934476" start="439" end="456" title="Virginia Regiment" label="Virginia Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="468" end="489" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q920609" start="531" end="558" title="Virginia House of Burgesses" label="Virginia House of Burgesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115127" start="741" end="783" title="Commanding General of the United States Army" label="commander-in-chief of the Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q815128" start="928" end="943" title="Siege of Boston" label="Siege of Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630469" start="977" end="1003" title="New York and New Jersey campaign" label="retreat from New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971587" start="1028" end="1054" title="George Washington&amp;#x27;s crossing of the Delaware River" label="crossed the Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q653664" start="1078" end="1085" title="Battle of Trenton" label="Trenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132579" start="1103" end="1112" title="Battle of Princeton" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q301487" start="1153" end="1163" title="Battle of Brandywine" label="Brandywine"/>
<link wikidata="Q523857" start="1168" end="1178" title="Battle of Germantown" label="Germantown"/>
<link wikidata="Q459447" start="1416" end="1424" title="siege of Yorktown" label="Yorktown"/>
<link wikidata="Q217450" start="1451" end="1466" title="Treaty of Paris (1783)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q405475" start="1593" end="1618" title="Constitutional Convention (United States)" label="Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="1654" end="1687" title="Constitution of the United States" label="Constitution of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="1742" end="1759" title="United States Electoral College" label="Electoral College"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="1963" end="1979" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="1984" end="2002" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="2015" end="2032" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981888" start="2048" end="2070" title="Proclamation of Neutrality" label="a policy of neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568837" start="2092" end="2102" title="Jay Treaty" label="Jay Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355327" start="2160" end="2179" title="Executive Office of the President of the United States" label="office of president"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277720" start="2191" end="2204" title="Republicanism in the United States" label="republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q100235323" start="2208" end="2234" title="peaceful transfer of power" label="peaceful transfer of power"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2263" end="2276" title="President (government title)#United States" label="Mr. President"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2292" end="2310" title="Twenty-second Amendment to the United States Constitution#Background" label="two-term tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545908" start="2321" end="2337" title="George Washington&amp;#x27;s Farewell Address" label="farewell address"/>
<link wikidata="Q731635" start="2561" end="2573" title="Mount Vernon" label="Mount Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546058" start="2575" end="2603" title="George Washington and slavery" label="Washington owned many slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454489" start="2690" end="2701" title="manumission" label="manumission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044835" start="2756" end="2772" title="American culture" label="American culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633952" start="2780" end="2813" title="List of memorials to George Washington" label="has been extensively memorialized"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="2837" end="2857" title="Washington, D.C." label="the national capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="2866" end="2885" title="State of Washington" label="State of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476974" start="3088" end="3099" title="George Washington Birthplace National Monument" label="Popes Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q494413" start="3103" end="3132" title="Westmoreland County, Virginia" label="Westmoreland County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q768342" start="3170" end="3179" title="Augustine Washington" label="Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q458119" start="3184" end="3204" title="Mary Ball Washington" label="Mary Ball Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q329455" start="3223" end="3243" title="justice of the peace" label="justice of the peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q969817" start="3548" end="3556" title="Lawrence Washington (1718–1752)" label="Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6650383" start="3595" end="3615" title="Little Hunting Creek" label="Little Hunting Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408127" start="3643" end="3653" title="Ferry Farm" label="Ferry Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q492342" start="3659" end="3683" title="Fredericksburg, Virginia" label="Fredericksburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q731635" start="3826" end="3838" title="Mount Vernon" label="Mount Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781312" start="3961" end="3983" title="Appleby Grammar School" label="Appleby Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712753" start="4020" end="4032" title="Lower Church" label="Lower Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712506" start="4043" end="4052" title="Hartfield, Virginia" label="Hartfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="4086" end="4095" title="surveying" label="surveying"/>
<link wikidata="Q683754" start="4119" end="4128" title="draftsman" label="draftsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q42515" start="4133" end="4141" title="Cartography" label="mapmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q24302" start="4203" end="4214" title="Ron Chernow" label="Ron Chernow"/>
<link wikidata="Q816286" start="4491" end="4498" title="Belvoir (plantation)" label="Belvoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452585" start="4518" end="4533" title="William Fairfax" label="William Fairfax"/>
<link wikidata="Q142668" start="4717" end="4734" title="Shenandoah Valley" label="Shenandoah Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="4812" end="4841" title="College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q20773771" start="4895" end="4909" title="apprenticeship" label="apprenticeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767667" start="4911" end="4925" title="Thomas Fairfax, 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron" label="Thomas Fairfax"/>
<link wikidata="Q495154" start="4976" end="5001" title="Culpeper County, Virginia" label="Culpeper County, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q244" start="5255" end="5263" title="Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="5314" end="5326" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="5350" end="5358" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934705" start="5648" end="5664" title="Virginia militia" label="Virginia militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60918" start="5691" end="5709" title="Commission (document)" label="militia commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q935269" start="5748" end="5764" title="Robert Dinwiddie" label="Robert Dinwiddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915" start="5907" end="5924" title="Ohio River" label="Ohio River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492" start="6016" end="6025" title="Lake Erie" label="Lake Erie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6081" end="6094" title="Diplomatic rank#Special envoy" label="special envoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="6220" end="6240" title="Iroquois Confederacy" label="Iroquois Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q504039" start="6329" end="6341" title="Tanacharison" label="Tanacharison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667885" start="6345" end="6353" title="Logstown" label="Logstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829943" start="6415" end="6428" title="Town Destroyer" label="Conotocaurius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182695" start="6534" end="6549" title="John Washington" label="John Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279673" start="6582" end="6595" title="Susquehannock" label="Susquehannock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077920" start="6728" end="6741" title="Fort Le Boeuf" label="Fort Le Boeuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3159304" start="6861" end="6894" title="Jacques Legardeur de Saint-Pierre" label="Jacques Legardeur de Saint-Pierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934476" start="7397" end="7414" title="Virginia Regiment" label="Virginia Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208170" start="7458" end="7475" title="Point State Park" label="Forks of the Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q209679" start="7602" end="7615" title="Fort Duquesne" label="Fort Duquesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077972" start="7652" end="7670" title="Fort Necessity National Battlefield" label="defensive position"/>
<link wikidata="Q695485" start="7866" end="7875" title="Battle of Jumonville Glen" label="an ambush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004860" start="7970" end="7997" title="Joseph Coulon de Jumonville" label="Joseph Coulon de Jumonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q13694993" start="8108" end="8115" title="scalped" label="scalped"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077972" start="8158" end="8172" title="Fort Necessity" label="Fort Necessity"/>
<link wikidata="Q48743503" start="8373" end="8423" title="British Army Independent Companies in South Carolina" label="independent company of a hundred South Carolinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q16240364" start="8439" end="8451" title="James Mackay (British Army officer)" label="James Mackay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449358" start="8600" end="8614" title="Battle of Fort Necessity" label="ensuing battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="9214" end="9235" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q113412" start="9292" end="9307" title="Edward Braddock" label="Edward Braddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177722" start="9327" end="9337" title="Braddock Expedition" label="expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016453" start="9385" end="9397" title="Ohio Country" label="Ohio Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="9559" end="9568" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q524828" start="9810" end="9835" title="Battle of the Monongahela" label="Battle of the Monongahela"/>
<link wikidata="Q581935" start="9902" end="9913" title="Thomas Gage" label="Thomas Gage"/>
<link wikidata="Q980173" start="9961" end="9971" title="rear guard" label="rear guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867113" start="10565" end="10579" title="John Dagworthy" label="John Dagworthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471008" start="10662" end="10677" title="Fort Cumberland (Maryland)" label="Fort Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152172" start="10878" end="10896" title="Commander-in-Chief, North America" label="Commander-in-Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q331323" start="10898" end="10913" title="William Shirley" label="William Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q336819" start="10972" end="10984" title="John Campbell, 4th Earl of Loudoun" label="Lord Loudoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467240" start="11190" end="11207" title="Forbes Expedition" label="Forbes Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181518" start="11242" end="11253" title="John Forbes (British Army officer)" label="John Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q911283" start="11412" end="11418" title="Brevet (military)" label="brevet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303061" start="11630" end="11643" title="friendly fire" label="friendly fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q191789" start="12390" end="12413" title="Martha Washington" label="Martha Dandridge Custis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162023" start="12465" end="12484" title="Daniel Parke Custis" label="Daniel Parke Custis"/>
<link wikidata="Q351406" start="12751" end="12756" title="dower" label="dower"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12773" end="12786" title="Daniel Parke Custis#Estate" label="Custis estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7050434" start="12994" end="13008" title="Norborne Berkeley, 4th Baron Botetourt" label="Lord Botetourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q918867" start="13211" end="13224" title="Kanawha River" label="Great Kanawha"/>
<link wikidata="Q363749" start="13258" end="13274" title="William Crawford (soldier)" label="William Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q502021" start="13734" end="13750" title="Frederick County, Virginia" label="Frederick County"/>
<link wikidata="Q920609" start="13758" end="13785" title="Virginia House of Burgesses" label="Virginia House of Burgesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q162527" start="14034" end="14046" title="mercantilist" label="mercantilist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545904" start="14552" end="14565" title="George Washington&amp;#x27;s Gristmill" label="flour milling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150699" start="14570" end="14582" title="hemp farming" label="hemp farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="14635" end="14644" title="epilepsy" label="epileptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="14880" end="14898" title="British Parliament" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935160" start="14931" end="14952" title="Virtual representation" label="proper representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335777" start="14970" end="14984" title="Stamp Act 1765" label="Stamp Act 1765"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093092" start="15065" end="15079" title="Townshend Acts" label="Townshend Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q209573" start="15272" end="15298" title="Royal Proclamation of 1763" label="Royal Proclamation of 1763"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141373" start="15345" end="15364" title="Allegheny Mountains" label="Allegheny Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q107885" start="15416" end="15427" title="speculation" label="speculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19024" start="15544" end="15560" title="Boston Tea Party" label="Boston Tea Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365292" start="15584" end="15597" title="Intolerable Acts" label="Coercive Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q532329" start="15695" end="15707" title="George Mason" label="George Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430191" start="15718" end="15737" title="Fairfax Resolves" label="list of resolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="15800" end="15820" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934209" start="15887" end="15912" title="Virginia Conventions" label="First Virginia Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q252612" start="15951" end="15977" title="First Continental Congress" label="First Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231641" start="16075" end="16098" title="Continental Association" label="Continental Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="16204" end="16230" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983034" start="16322" end="16349" title="Second Continental Congress" label="Second Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="16353" end="16365" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="16400" end="16416" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="16421" end="16431" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="16460" end="16478" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q321887" start="16818" end="16830" title="Artemas Ward" label="Artemas Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q365124" start="16832" end="16845" title="Horatio Gates" label="Horatio Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q390992" start="16847" end="16858" title="Charles Lee (general)" label="Charles Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115886" start="16860" end="16875" title="Philip Schuyler" label="Philip Schuyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q366113" start="16881" end="16897" title="Nathanael Greene" label="Nathanael Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q355680" start="16899" end="16909" title="Henry Knox" label="Henry Knox"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16963" end="16971" title="Materiel#Military" label="ordnance"/>
<link wikidata="Q178903" start="17063" end="17081" title="Alexander Hamilton" label="Alexander Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q369894" start="17178" end="17190" title="aide-de-camp" label="aide-de-camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315497" start="17375" end="17389" title="Dunmore&amp;#x27;s Proclamation" label="a proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="17779" end="17785" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q581935" start="17802" end="17813" title="Thomas Gage" label="Thomas Gage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365374" start="18064" end="18071" title="Patriot (American Revolution)" label="Patriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="18216" end="18233" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q334029" start="18398" end="18409" title="Battle of Bunker Hill" label="Bunker Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="18492" end="18502" title="George III" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q333422" start="18610" end="18622" title="William Howe, 5th Viscount Howe" label="William Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q794927" start="18634" end="18647" title="Charles River" label="Charles River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078508" start="18851" end="18880" title="Fortification of Dorchester Heights" label="secure the Dorchester Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q935481" start="18968" end="18977" title="Loyalist (American Revolution)" label="Loyalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="19398" end="19411" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18432" start="19761" end="19774" title="Staten Island" label="Staten Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q700853" start="19865" end="19884" title="Hessian (soldier)" label="Hessian auxiliaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238884" start="19992" end="20011" title="Gravesend, Brooklyn" label="Gravesend, Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q862751" start="20207" end="20228" title="Battle of Long Island" label="Battle of Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="20333" end="20342" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438808" start="20640" end="20655" title="Fort Washington (Manhattan)" label="Fort Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="20747" end="20759" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471502" start="20763" end="20771" title="Fort Lee Historic Park" label="Fort Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q706755" start="20791" end="20815" title="Battle of Fort Washington" label="captured Fort Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335128" start="21003" end="21013" title="Province of New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q143762" start="21095" end="21109" title="Delaware River" label="Delaware River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="21115" end="21127" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q886420" start="21143" end="21156" title="John Sullivan (general)" label="John Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q633339" start="21309" end="21318" title="desertion" label="desertion"/>
<link wikidata="Q25330" start="21355" end="21362" title="Trenton, New Jersey" label="Trenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q653664" start="21523" end="21567" title="Battle of Trenton" label="a successful surprise attack on the Hessians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132579" start="21634" end="21643" title="Battle of Princeton" label="an attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q138518" start="21671" end="21680" title="Princeton, New Jersey" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q962499" start="21844" end="21866" title="Morristown, New Jersey" label="Morristown, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q436775" start="22209" end="22222" title="John Burgoyne" label="John Burgoyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="22257" end="22263" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q126876" start="22271" end="22288" title="Saratoga campaign" label="Saratoga campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307876" start="22293" end="22320" title="Siege of Fort Ticonderoga (1777)" label="recaptured Fort Ticonderoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="22342" end="22353" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="22466" end="22472" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q186652" start="22489" end="22518" title="Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette" label="Gilbert, Marquis de Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q301487" start="22565" end="22585" title="Battle of Brandywine" label="Battle of Brandywine"/>
<link wikidata="Q523857" start="22714" end="22720" title="Battle of Germantown" label="attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q279890" start="22744" end="22754" title="Germantown, Philadelphia" label="Germantown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018923" start="22778" end="22794" title="Upstate New York" label="Upstate New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q298237" start="22948" end="22963" title="Benedict Arnold" label="Benedict Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q817605" start="22968" end="22984" title="Benjamin Lincoln" label="Benjamin Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q846674" start="23029" end="23042" title="Battles of Saratoga" label="Bemis Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855211" start="23531" end="23543" title="Valley Forge" label="Valley Forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129490" start="23811" end="23826" title="Conway Cabal" label="internal revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q975834" start="24216" end="24229" title="quartermaster" label="quartermaster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24234" end="24244" title="Commissary#Military" label="commissary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24288" end="24308" title="Grand Forage of 1778" label="Grand Forage of 1778"/>
<link wikidata="Q213525" start="24371" end="24400" title="Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben" label="Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben"/>
<link wikidata="Q60171269" start="24526" end="24543" title="Office of the Inspector General of the United States Army" label="Inspector General"/>
<link wikidata="Q2788282" start="24587" end="24605" title="Treaty of Alliance (1778)" label="Treaty of Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q450734" start="24668" end="24685" title="Henry Clinton (British Army officer, born 1730)" label="Sir Henry Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638488" start="25057" end="25076" title="Battle of Monmouth" label="an expansive battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q83813" start="25415" end="25432" title="Savannah, Georgia" label="Savannah, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426614" start="25499" end="25512" title="Sullivan Expedition" label="an expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="25525" end="25533" title="Iroquois" label="Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581768" start="25671" end="25680" title="spymaster" label="spymaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q817708" start="25750" end="25768" title="Benjamin Tallmadge" label="Benjamin Tallmadge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143497" start="25780" end="25791" title="Culper Ring" label="Culper Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062383" start="26200" end="26222" title="Benedict Arnold&amp;#x27;s expedition to Quebec" label="the invasion of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q605719" start="26278" end="26288" title="John André" label="John André"/>
<link wikidata="Q679753" start="26357" end="26367" title="West Point, New York" label="West Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q426977" start="26915" end="26923" title="Piedmont (United States)" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q508363" start="27117" end="27127" title="Jean-Baptiste Donatien de Vimeur, comte de Rochambeau" label="Rochambeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q54264" start="27139" end="27160" title="Newport, Rhode Island" label="Newport, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q342803" start="27286" end="27296" title="Portsmouth, Virginia" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q164723" start="27563" end="27573" title="Charles Cornwallis, 1st Marquess Cornwallis" label="Cornwallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q938699" start="27672" end="27690" title="Yorktown, Virginia" label="Yorktown, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972604" start="27715" end="27731" title="Washington–Rochambeau Revolutionary Route" label="celebrated march"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419459" start="28171" end="28195" title="Battle of the Chesapeake" label="Battle of the Chesapeake"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="28362" end="28378" title="Prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574076" start="28916" end="28935" title="Newburgh Conspiracy" label="Newburgh Conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q217450" start="29251" end="29266" title="Treaty of Paris (1783)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133590" start="29456" end="29496" title="Evacuation Day (New York)" label="evacuation of British forces in New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947539" start="29611" end="29626" title="Fraunces Tavern" label="Fraunces Tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q47198426" start="29631" end="29661" title="George Washington&amp;#x27;s resignation as commander-in-chief" label="resigned as commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343656" start="30194" end="30210" title="Edward J. Larson" label="Edward J. Larson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632484" start="30278" end="30303" title="Society of the Cincinnati" label="Society of the Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q6230730" start="30582" end="30597" title="John E. Ferling" label="John E. Ferling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544257" start="30835" end="30853" title="Great Dismal Swamp" label="Great Dismal Swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235046" start="30858" end="30871" title="Potomac Company" label="Potomac Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q114403" start="31238" end="31249" title="depreciation" label="depreciated"/>
<link wikidata="Q41692" start="31699" end="31703" title="mule" label="mule"/>
<link wikidata="Q824176" start="31726" end="31730" title="Stud (animal)" label="stud"/>
<link wikidata="Q36234" start="31739" end="31759" title="Charles III of Spain" label="Charles III of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q493620" start="32096" end="32121" title="Articles of Confederation" label="Articles of Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q392601" start="32383" end="32404" title="Shays&amp;#x27; Rebellion" label="Shays&amp;#x27; Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996243" start="32638" end="32647" title="Annapolis Convention (1786)" label="Annapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q405475" start="32730" end="32755" title="Constitutional Convention (United States)" label="Constitutional Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="32966" end="32979" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q318703" start="33405" end="33420" title="Edmund Randolph" label="Edmund Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044176" start="33447" end="33460" title="Virginia Plan" label="Virginia Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045125" start="33674" end="33689" title="New Jersey Plan" label="New Jersey Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="34042" end="34054" title="Constitution of the United States" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q993847" start="34086" end="34108" title="Connecticut Compromise" label="Connecticut Compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434166" start="34140" end="34168" title="Signing of the United States Constitution" label="signed by 39 of 55 delegates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5070795" start="34316" end="34363" title="chancellor of the College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="chancellor of the College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454184" start="34954" end="34965" title="First inauguration of George Washington" label="inaugurated"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502117" start="34996" end="35010" title="Oath of office of the President of the United States" label="oath of office"/>
<link wikidata="Q858689" start="35014" end="35026" title="Federal Hall" label="Federal Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q283676" start="35192" end="35212" title="Robert R. Livingston (chancellor)" label="Robert R. Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639494" start="35244" end="35272" title="George Washington Inaugural Bible" label="Bible provided by the Masons"/>
<link wikidata="Q639738" start="36107" end="36119" title="Cabinet of the United States" label="cabinet form"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="36127" end="36143" title="Federal government of the United States" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="36189" end="36202" title="US Supreme Court" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742531" start="36285" end="36298" title="Confederation Period" label="Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="36540" end="36556" title="United States Department of State" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143596" start="36562" end="36576" title="United States Department of War" label="War Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q648666" start="36586" end="36605" title="United States Department of the Treasury" label="Treasury Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q636207" start="36647" end="36663" title="United States Attorney General" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396334" start="36665" end="36678" title="Samuel Osgood" label="Samuel Osgood"/>
<link wikidata="Q20820583" start="36682" end="36700" title="Postmaster General" label="Postmaster General"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="36702" end="36718" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="36722" end="36740" title="United States Secretary of State" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="36756" end="36772" title="United States Secretary of War" label="Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215834" start="36800" end="36825" title="United States Secretary of the Treasury" label="Secretary of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602907" start="37094" end="37108" title="List of United States presidential vetoes" label="his veto power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453498" start="37474" end="37492" title="First Party System" label="First Party System"/>
<link wikidata="Q42189" start="37514" end="37530" title="Federalist Party" label="Federalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q42186" start="37650" end="37674" title="Democratic-Republican Party" label="Jeffersonian Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q862765" start="37963" end="37977" title="United States Bill of Rights" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913791" start="38120" end="38132" title="Thanksgiving (United States)" label="Thanksgiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q698073" start="38984" end="39000" title="1792 United States presidential election" label="election of 1792"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="39062" end="39079" title="United States Electoral College" label="Electoral College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063381" start="39252" end="39267" title="William Cushing" label="William Cushing"/>
<link wikidata="Q917636" start="39289" end="39302" title="Congress Hall" label="Congress Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="39350" end="39375" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981888" start="39398" end="39419" title="Proclamation of Neutrality" label="issued a proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q713749" start="39748" end="39768" title="Edmond-Charles Genêt" label="Edmond-Charles Genêt"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="39980" end="39987" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q377542" start="40216" end="40233" title="Whiskey Rebellion" label="Whiskey Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656995" start="40435" end="40455" title="Northwest Indian War" label="Northwest Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237537" start="40699" end="40723" title="Battle of Fallen Timbers" label="Battle of Fallen Timbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568837" start="40787" end="40797" title="Jay Treaty" label="Jay Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q310847" start="40961" end="40969" title="John Jay" label="John Jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="41351" end="41362" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q119515" start="41393" end="41420" title="Canada–United States border" label="Canada–United States border"/>
<link wikidata="Q207946" start="41433" end="41444" title="arbitration" label="arbitration"/>
<link wikidata="Q920396" start="41516" end="41535" title="British West Indies" label="British West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q219817" start="41851" end="41867" title="French Directory" label="French Directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q881165" start="42072" end="42087" title="Thomas Pinckney" label="Thomas Pinckney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095499" start="42103" end="42124" title="Treaty of San Lorenzo" label="Treaty of San Lorenzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="42256" end="42273" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q452104" start="42409" end="42427" title="Oliver Wolcott Jr." label="Oliver Wolcott Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q899359" start="42627" end="42642" title="Barbary pirates" label="Barbary pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410826" start="42653" end="42670" title="Naval Act of 1794" label="Naval Act of 1794"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416417" start="43581" end="43600" title="Valedictorian" label="valedictory address"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164025" start="43859" end="43884" title="Pennsylvania Packet" label="American Daily Advertiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165928" start="44876" end="44892" title="John 14" label="mansions of rest"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452860" start="45138" end="45151" title="James Thomas Flexner" label="James Flexner"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="45241" end="45268" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="45273" end="45288" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q214524" start="45296" end="45314" title="Gettysburg Address" label="Gettysburg Address"/>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="45415" end="45428" title="republicanism" label="republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q426977" start="45661" end="45669" title="Piedmont (United States)" label="Piedmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118757" start="45810" end="45833" title="Alien and Sedition Acts" label="Alien and Sedition Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q310829" start="45859" end="45872" title="John Marshall" label="John Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="45928" end="45936" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q655480" start="46039" end="46048" title="Quasi-War" label="Quasi-War"/>
<link wikidata="Q266119" start="46093" end="46106" title="James McHenry" label="James McHenry"/>
<link wikidata="Q101017" start="46837" end="46847" title="distillery" label="distillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q281" start="46852" end="46859" title="whiskey" label="whiskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="46930" end="46942" title="Washington, D.C." label="Federal City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="47324" end="47332" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q669315" start="47342" end="47361" title="Northwest Territory" label="Northwest Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q356405" start="47874" end="47886" title="bloodletting" label="bloodletting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680222" start="47951" end="47962" title="James Craik" label="James Craik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280012" start="47964" end="47986" title="Gustavus Richard Brown" label="Gustavus Richard Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361737" start="47992" end="48006" title="Elisha C. Dick" label="Elisha C. Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586014" start="48048" end="48054" title="Peritonsillar abscess" label="quinsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q324921" start="48294" end="48305" title="tracheotomy" label="tracheotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811643" start="48616" end="48627" title="Tobias Lear" label="Tobias Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565355" start="49165" end="49184" title="medical malpractice" label="medical malpractice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347065" start="49309" end="49321" title="epiglottitis" label="epiglottitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q172949" start="49399" end="49406" title="Mercury(I) chloride" label="calomel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320276" start="49469" end="49486" title="hypovolemia" label="hypovolemic shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q24259828" start="50527" end="50545" title="Attempted theft of George Washington&amp;#x27;s skull" label="attempted to steal"/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="50692" end="50713" title="United States Capitol" label="United States Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571002" start="50905" end="50919" title="Wiley Thompson" label="Wiley Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q48634" start="51166" end="51177" title="sarcophagus" label="sarcophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132047" start="51190" end="51208" title="William Strickland (architect)" label="William Strickland"/>
<link wikidata="Q45803" start="51418" end="51423" title="Dowry" label="dower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868863" start="51638" end="51654" title="History of slavery in Virginia" label="deeply ingrained"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070529" start="51696" end="51714" title="Colony of Virginia" label="Colony of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630100" start="51814" end="51822" title="Planter class" label="planters"/>
<link wikidata="Q28924215" start="52232" end="52247" title="Lund Washington" label="Lund Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q718439" start="53095" end="53106" title="Thomas Coke (bishop)" label="Thomas Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q145140" start="53111" end="53125" title="Francis Asbury" label="Francis Asbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454489" start="53767" end="53774" title="manumission" label="freeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647292" start="53795" end="53804" title="William Lee (valet)" label="Billy Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="54417" end="54432" title="Anglican Church" label="Anglican Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923506" start="54472" end="54481" title="vestryman" label="vestryman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5430187" start="54506" end="54513" title="Fairfax Parish, Virginia" label="Fairfax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848036" start="54518" end="54523" title="Truro Parish, Virginia" label="Truro"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="54642" end="54651" title="eucharist" label="communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4064242" start="54751" end="54773" title="American Enlightenment" label="American Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q866338" start="54797" end="54807" title="divine providence" label="Providence"/>
<link wikidata="Q784710" start="55476" end="55497" title="Book of Common Prayer" label="Book of Common Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="55621" end="55635" title="state religion" label="state religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654539" start="55818" end="55828" title="The New Church (Swedenborgian)" label="New Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="55832" end="55841" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="56014" end="56025" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454597" start="56133" end="56146" title="Masonic lodge" label="Masonic lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774637" start="56193" end="56222" title="anticlericalism and Freemasonry" label="controversial European lodges"/>
<link wikidata="Q492342" start="56259" end="56283" title="Fredericksburg, Virginia" label="Fredericksburg, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940122" start="56527" end="56539" title="Grand Master (Freemasonry)" label="Grand Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594772" start="56565" end="56588" title="Grand Lodge of Virginia" label="Grand Lodge of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56708" end="56714" title="Masonic lodge officer#Worshipful Master" label="Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701323" start="57106" end="57123" title="John Parke Custis" label="John Parke Custis"/>
<link wikidata="Q21004273" start="57136" end="57155" title="Martha Parke Custis" label="Martha Parke Custis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325736" start="57210" end="57230" title="Eleanor Parke Custis Lewis" label="Eleanor Parke Custis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508559" start="57243" end="57273" title="George Washington Parke Custis" label="George Washington Parke Custis"/>
<link wikidata="Q56280020" start="57346" end="57355" title="West Ford (slave)" label="West Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6219733" start="57402" end="57427" title="John Augustine Washington" label="John Augustine Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q558929" start="57455" end="57467" title="oral history" label="oral history"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58055" end="58067" title="wig#19th and 20th centuries" label="powdered wig"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58126" end="58131" title="Queue (hairstyle)#Other queues" label="queue"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58139" end="58157" title="1775–1795 in Western fashion#Men&amp;#x27;s fashion" label="fashion of the day"/>
<link wikidata="Q133772" start="58192" end="58203" title="tooth decay" label="tooth decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088718" start="58231" end="58240" title="George Washington&amp;#x27;s teeth" label="his teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q82001" start="58379" end="58384" title="ivory" label="ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q898739" start="58522" end="58530" title="laudanum" label="laudanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="58659" end="58668" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19568889" start="58895" end="58903" title="Blueskin (horse)" label="Blueskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990337" start="58908" end="58914" title="Nelson (horse)" label="Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q450175" start="59026" end="59035" title="Henry Lee III" label="Henry Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q744159" start="59385" end="59411" title="Presidents&amp;#x27; Day" label="Washington&amp;#x27;s Birthday"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889582" start="59530" end="59551" title="United States Bicentennial" label="American Bicentennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="59563" end="59574" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297310" start="59754" end="59771" title="Mason Locke Weems" label="Mason Locke Weems"/>
<link wikidata="Q208628" start="59780" end="59792" title="Hagiography" label="hagiographic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59987" end="60064" title="Mason Locke Weems#Cherry-tree anecdote" label="Washington&amp;#x27;s refusal to lie about damaging his father&amp;#x27;s cherry tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234590" start="60437" end="60458" title="David Hackett Fischer" label="David Hackett Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145118" start="61010" end="61027" title="Colin G. Calloway" label="Colin G. Calloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q54251313" start="61618" end="61638" title="presidential library" label="presidential library"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="61681" end="61707" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="61736" end="61755" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="61885" end="61901" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="61920" end="61930" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q178114" start="61958" end="61977" title="Washington Monument" label="Washington Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q170980" start="62002" end="62009" title="obelisk" label="obelisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q465811" start="62017" end="62030" title="National Mall" label="National Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q336432" start="62161" end="62175" title="Gutzon Borglum" label="Gutzon Borglum"/>
<link wikidata="Q83497" start="62179" end="62193" title="Mount Rushmore" label="Mount Rushmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="62197" end="62209" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q125821" start="62215" end="62239" title="George Washington Bridge" label="George Washington Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="62266" end="62279" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="62283" end="62293" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62307" end="62341" title="Washington (disambiguation)#Education" label="secondary schools and universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q432637" start="62386" end="62414" title="George Washington University" label="George Washington University"/>
<link wikidata="Q777403" start="62419" end="62453" title="Washington University in St. Louis" label="Washington University in St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058210" start="62521" end="62536" title="United States one-dollar bill" label="one-dollar bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063458" start="62542" end="62570" title="Presidential dollar coins" label="Presidential one-dollar coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150083" start="62579" end="62598" title="Quarter (United States coin)" label="quarter-dollar coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030383" start="62604" end="62622" title="Washington quarter" label="Washington quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q28059665" start="62794" end="62832" title="Electoral history of George Washington" label="Electoral history of George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756034" start="62835" end="62856" title="The Washington Papers" label="The Washington Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022311" start="63129" end="63135" title="C-SPAN" label="C-SPAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q110933547" start="63221" end="63236" title="Founders Online" label="Founders Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q518155" start="63246" end="63263" title="National Archives and Records Administration" label="National Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859101" start="63582" end="63619" title="Miller Center of Public Affairs" label="Miller Center, University of Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11969" wikidata="Q55241" url="?curid=11969" title="Gulf Coast of the United States">
<text>The Gulf Coast of the United States, also known as the Gulf South or the South Coast, is the coastline along the Southern United States where they meet the Gulf of Mexico. The coastal states that have a shoreline on the Gulf of Mexico are Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and Florida, and these are known as the &quot;Gulf States&quot;.

The economy of the Gulf Coast area is dominated by industries related to energy, petrochemicals, fishing, aerospace, agriculture, and tourism. The large cities of the region are (from west to east) Brownsville, Corpus Christi, Houston, Galveston, Beaumont, Lake Charles, Lafayette, Baton Rouge, New Orleans, Gulfport, Biloxi, Mobile, Pensacola, Panama City, St. Petersburg, and Tampa. All are the centers or major cities of their respective metropolitan areas and many contain large ports.

==Geography==
The Gulf Coast is made of many inlets, bays, and lagoons. The coast is intersected by numerous rivers, the largest of which is the Mississippi River. Much of the land along the Gulf Coast is, or was, marshland. Ringing the Gulf Coast is the Gulf Coastal Plain, which reaches from Southern Texas to the western Florida panhandle, while the western portions of the Gulf Coast are made up of many barrier islands and peninsulas, including the Padre Island along the Texas coast. These landforms protect numerous bays and inlets providing as a barrier to oncoming waves. The central part of the Gulf Coast, from eastern Texas through Louisiana, consists primarily of marshland. The eastern part of the Gulf Coast, predominantly Florida, is dotted with many bays and inlets.

===Climate===

The Gulf Coast climate is humid subtropical, although Southwest Florida features a tropical climate. Much of the year is warm to hot along the Gulf Coast, while the three winter months bring periods of cool (or rarely, cold) weather mixed with mild temperatures. The area is highly vulnerable to hurricanes as well as floods and severe thunderstorms. Much of the Gulf Coast has a summer precipitation maximum, with July or August commonly the wettest month due to the combination of frequent summer thunderstorms produced by relentless heat and humidity, and tropical weather systems, including tropical depressions, tropical storms, and hurricanes, while winter and early spring rainfall also can be heavy.

This pattern is evident in southern cites as Houston; New Orleans; Mobile, Alabama; and Pensacola, Florida. However, the central and southern Florida peninsula and South Texas has a pronounced winter dry season, as at Tampa and Fort Myers. On the central and southern Texas coast, winter, early spring and mid-summer are markedly drier, and September is the wettest month on average at Corpus Christi and Brownsville, Texas. Tornadoes are infrequent at the coast but do occur; however, they occur more frequently in inland portions of Gulf Coast states. Over most of the Gulf Coast from Houston, Texas, eastward, extreme rainfall events are a significant threat, commonly from tropical weather systems, which can bring 4 to 10 or more inches of rain in a single day. In August 2017, Hurricane Harvey made landfall along the central Texas coast, then migrated to and stalled over the greater Houston area for several days, producing extreme, unprecedented rainfall totals of over 40 inches (1,000 mm) in many areas, unleashing widespread flooding. Climate scientists predict more hurricanes for Florida and the Texas coastline in particular. Earthquakes are extremely rare to the area, but a 6.0 earthquake in the Gulf of Mexico on September 10, 2006, could be felt from the cities of New Orleans to Tampa.

===Rising sea levels===
Due to the release of greenhouse gas emissions, glaciers and ice sheets are melting and expanding the oceans. The United States coastlines are projected to rise 1 foot in three decades or between 10 and 12 inches on average by 2050. The Gulf Coast will likely see the biggest change, with sea levels expected to rise between 14 and 18 inches. The Global and Regional Sea Level Rise Report predicted more frequent, major and destructive high tide flooding events along with taller storm surges by 2050 after scientists determined high tide flooding has been &quot;increasingly common&quot; over the past few years due to the rising sea levels. The impacts are expected to be dramatic. Low-lying coastal areas are expected to experience multiple factors, including increased levels of flooding, accelerated erosion, loss of wetlands and low-lying terrestrial ecosystems, and seawater intrusion into freshwater sources. Rising sea level and erosion will also imperil critical habitats for many commercially important fisheries that depend on inshore waters for either permanent residence or nursery area. In 2021 alone rising sea levels cost the United States approximately $2.6 billion in relief efforts and caused at least seven deaths. By 2051, the cost of flood damage is expected to increase by 61%, or $32 billion.

==Economic activities==

The Gulf Coast is a major center of economic activity. The marshlands along the Louisiana and Texas coasts provide breeding grounds and nurseries for ocean life that drive the fishing and shrimping industries. The Port of South Louisiana (Metropolitan New Orleans in Laplace) and the Port of Houston are two of the ten busiest ports in the world by cargo volume. As of 2004, seven of the top ten busiest ports in the U.S. are on the Gulf Coast.

The discovery of oil and gas deposits along the coast and offshore, combined with easy access to shipping, have made the Gulf Coast the heart of the U.S. petrochemical industry. The coast contains nearly 4,000 oil platforms.

Besides the above, the region features other important industries including aerospace and biomedical research, as well as older industries such as agriculture and — especially since the development of the Gulf Coast beginning in the 1920s and the increase in wealth throughout the United States — tourism.

==History==

Hurricane Katrina and Hurricane Rita have destroyed a number of museums and archives in the Gulf Coast. In 2008 floods in Iowa destroyed the local &quot;Flood Museum&quot; which held materials from the Great Mississippi and Missouri Rivers Flood of 1993.

Before European settlers arrived in the region, the Gulf Coast was home to several pre-Columbian kingdoms which had extensive trade networks with empires such as the Aztecs and the Mississippi Mound Builders. Shark and alligator teeth and shells from the Gulf have been found as far north as Ohio, in the mounds of the Hopewell culture.

The first Europeans to settle the Gulf Coast were primarily the French and the Spanish. The Louisiana Purchase (1803), Adams–Onís Treaty (1819) and the Texas Revolution (1835–1836) made the Gulf Coast a part of the United States during the first half of the 19th century. As the U.S. population continued to expand its frontiers westward, the Gulf Coast was a natural magnet in the South providing access to shipping lanes and both national and international commerce. The development of sugar and cotton production (enabled by slavery) allowed the South to prosper. By the mid-19th century the city of New Orleans, being situated as a key to commerce on the Mississippi River and in the Gulf, had become the largest U.S. city not on the Atlantic seaboard and the fourth largest in the U.S. overall.

Two major events were turning points in the earlier history of the Gulf Coast region. The first was the American Civil War, which caused severe damage to some economic sectors in the South, including the Gulf Coast. The second event was the Galveston Hurricane of 1900. At the end of the 19th century Galveston was, with New Orleans, one of the most developed cities in the region. The city had the third busiest port in the U.S. and its financial district was known as the &quot;Wall Street of the South&quot;.
Since then the Gulf Coast has been hit with numerous other hurricanes. On August 29, 2005, Hurricane Katrina struck the Gulf Coast as a Category 3 hurricane. It was the most damaging storm in the history of the United States, causing upwards of $80 billion in damages, and leaving over 1,800 dead. Again in 2008, the Gulf Coast was struck by a catastrophic hurricane. Due to its immense size, Hurricane Ike caused devastation from the Louisiana coastline all the way to the Kenedy County, Texas, region near Corpus Christi. In addition, Ike caused flooding and significant damage along the Mississippi coastline and the Florida panhandle. Ike killed 112 people and left upwards of 300 people missing, never to be found. Hurricane Ike was the third most damaging storm in the history of the United States, causing more than $25 billion in damage along the coast, leaving hundreds of thousands of people homeless, and sparking the largest search-and-rescue operation in U.S. history.

Other than the hurricanes, the Gulf Coast has redeveloped dramatically over the course of the 20th century. The gulf coast is highly populated. The petrochemical industry, launched with the major discoveries of oil in Texas and spurred on by further discoveries in the Gulf waters, has been a vehicle for development in the central and western Gulf which has spawned development on a variety of fronts in these regions. Texas in particular has benefited tremendously from this industry over the course of the 20th century and economic diversification has made the state a magnet for population and home to more &quot;Fortune&quot; 500 companies than any other U.S. state. Florida has grown as well, driven to a great extent by its long established tourism industry but also by its position as a gateway to the Caribbean and Latin America. As of 2024, Texas and Florida are the second and third most populous states in the nation, respectively. Other areas of the Gulf Coast have benefited less, though economic development fueled by tourism has greatly increased property values along the coast, and is now a severe danger to the valuable but fragile ecosystems of the Gulf Coast.

Within the United States, a process was started on January 20, 2025 to rename the waters enclosed by the Gulf States, extending southward to the maritime borders with Mexico and Cuba, the &quot;Gulf of America&quot; for federal use. On February 10, 2025, the U.S. Board on Geographic Names and the Federal Aviation Administration officially recognized the change.

==Metropolitan areas==
The following table lists the 11 largest core-based statistical areas along the Gulf Coast.
==Transportation==

===Road===

====Major Interstates====

====Major U.S. routes====
====Other significant routes====
===Air===

====International service====
International destinations
===Rail===

====Amtrak service====


==See also==
*East Coast of the United States
*West Coast of the United States
*Emerald Coast
*Florida Panhandle
*Geography of the United States
*Gulf Coast Ecosystem Restoration Task Force
*Gulf States Marine Fisheries Commission
*Houston
*List of ports in the United States
*Megaregions of the United States
*Mississippi Gulf Coast
*New Orleans
*Tampa
*West Florida
*Gulf Coast of Mexico
==Notes==
==Further reading==
* Drescher, Christopher F., Stefan E. Schulenberg, and C. Veronica Smith. &quot;The Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and the Mississippi Gulf Coast: Mental health in the context of a technological disaster.&quot; &quot;American Journal of Orthopsychiatry&quot; 84.2 (2014): 142.
* Smith, F. Todd &quot;Louisiana and the Gulf South Frontier, 1500–1821&quot; (Louisiana State University Press; 2014) 304 pages
* Williamson, James M., and John L. Pender. &quot;Economic Stimulus and the Tax Code The Impact of the Gulf Opportunity Zone.&quot; &quot;Public Finance Review&quot; (2014): 1091142114557724.

==External links==
* &quot;Map of the Gulf Coast from Florida to Mexico&quot; from 1639 via the World Digital Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q55241" start="4" end="35" title="Gulf Coast of the United States" label="Gulf Coast of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q55241" start="55" end="65" title="Gulf Coast of the United States" label="Gulf South"/>
<link wikidata="Q55241" start="73" end="84" title="Gulf Coast of the United States" label="South Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="93" end="98" title="coast" label="coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="113" end="135" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="156" end="170" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600993" start="176" end="190" title="list of U.S. states and territories by coastline" label="coastal states"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="203" end="208" title="shore" label="shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="239" end="244" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="246" end="255" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="257" end="268" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="270" end="277" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="283" end="290" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q51693" start="543" end="554" title="Brownsville, Texas" label="Brownsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q49242" start="556" end="570" title="Corpus Christi, Texas" label="Corpus Christi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="572" end="579" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q135744" start="581" end="590" title="Galveston, Texas" label="Galveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q128282" start="592" end="600" title="Beaumont, Texas" label="Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q864106" start="602" end="614" title="Lake Charles, Louisiana" label="Lake Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q128891" start="616" end="625" title="Lafayette, Louisiana" label="Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q28218" start="627" end="638" title="Baton Rouge, Louisiana" label="Baton Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="640" end="651" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q490587" start="653" end="661" title="Gulfport, Mississippi" label="Gulfport"/>
<link wikidata="Q490720" start="663" end="669" title="Biloxi, Mississippi" label="Biloxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q79875" start="671" end="677" title="Mobile, Alabama" label="Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q486306" start="679" end="688" title="Pensacola, Florida" label="Pensacola"/>
<link wikidata="Q852591" start="690" end="701" title="Panama City, Florida" label="Panama City"/>
<link wikidata="Q49236" start="703" end="717" title="St. Petersburg, Florida" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="723" end="728" title="Tampa, Florida" label="Tampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="786" end="803" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="828" end="832" title="port" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172599" start="881" end="887" title="inlets" label="inlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q39594" start="889" end="893" title="bays" label="bays"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="899" end="906" title="lagoons" label="lagoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="981" end="998" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="1050" end="1055" title="marsh" label="marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536415" start="1091" end="1109" title="Gulf Coastal Plain" label="Gulf Coastal Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393494" start="1130" end="1144" title="Southern Texas" label="Southern Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430068" start="1160" end="1177" title="Florida panhandle" label="Florida panhandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205140" start="1244" end="1258" title="barrier island" label="barrier island"/>
<link wikidata="Q34763" start="1264" end="1273" title="peninsula" label="peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046019" start="1290" end="1302" title="Padre Island" label="Padre Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q39594" start="1359" end="1362" title="bay" label="bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172599" start="1368" end="1373" title="inlet" label="inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902384" start="1690" end="1707" title="Southwest Florida" label="Southwest Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="1932" end="1942" title="tropical cyclone" label="hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="1954" end="1959" title="flood" label="flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857578" start="1972" end="1984" title="thunderstorm" label="thunderstorm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="2274" end="2284" title="hurricanes" label="hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="2390" end="2397" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="2399" end="2410" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q79875" start="2412" end="2427" title="Mobile, Alabama" label="Mobile, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q486306" start="2433" end="2451" title="Pensacola, Florida" label="Pensacola, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="2487" end="2494" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393494" start="2509" end="2520" title="South Texas" label="South Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="2563" end="2568" title="Tampa, Florida" label="Tampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q506451" start="2573" end="2583" title="Fort Myers, Florida" label="Fort Myers"/>
<link wikidata="Q49242" start="2731" end="2745" title="Corpus Christi, Texas" label="Corpus Christi"/>
<link wikidata="Q51693" start="2750" end="2768" title="Brownsville, Texas" label="Brownsville, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081" start="2770" end="2777" title="Tornado" label="Tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="2932" end="2939" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q37933184" start="3128" end="3144" title="Hurricane Harvey" label="Hurricane Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="3236" end="3243" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944" start="3486" end="3497" title="Earthquakes" label="Earthquakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4606335" start="3536" end="3550" title="2006 Gulf of Mexico earthquake" label="6.0 earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q635139" start="5196" end="5203" title="Fishing industry" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517781" start="5208" end="5214" title="shrimp" label="shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316930" start="5234" end="5257" title="Port of South Louisiana" label="Port of South Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010868" start="5259" end="5283" title="Metropolitan New Orleans" label="Metropolitan New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279189" start="5287" end="5294" title="Laplace, Louisiana" label="Laplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921365" start="5304" end="5319" title="Port of Houston" label="Port of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="5347" end="5351" title="port" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="5483" end="5486" title="petroleum" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="5491" end="5494" title="natural gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16070574" start="5620" end="5642" title="petrochemical industry" label="petrochemical industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q689880" start="5676" end="5688" title="oil platform" label="oil platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876213" start="5768" end="5777" title="aerospace" label="aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323511" start="5782" end="5801" title="Texas Medical Center" label="biomedical research"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="5989" end="5996" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="6012" end="6029" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q737890" start="6034" end="6048" title="Hurricane Rita" label="Hurricane Rita"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742723" start="6214" end="6265" title="Great Mississippi and Missouri Rivers Flood of 1993" label="Great Mississippi and Missouri Rivers Flood of 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="6670" end="6676" title="French Colonial Empire" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="6685" end="6692" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="6698" end="6716" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q351722" start="6725" end="6742" title="Adams–Onís Treaty" label="Adams–Onís Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q638530" start="6758" end="6774" title="Texas Revolution" label="Texas Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="6988" end="6993" title="American South" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="7094" end="7099" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="7104" end="7110" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="7134" end="7141" title="Slavery in the United States" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="7209" end="7220" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="7265" end="7282" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="7344" end="7361" title="East Coast of the United States" label="Atlantic seaboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="7511" end="7529" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="7590" end="7595" title="American South" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q186166" start="7648" end="7675" title="Galveston Hurricane of 1900" label="Galveston Hurricane of 1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q135744" start="7708" end="7717" title="Galveston" label="Galveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="8010" end="8027" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8055" end="8065" title="Saffir–Simpson Hurricane Scale#Category 3" label="Category 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q6613726" start="8088" end="8107" title="List of costliest Atlantic hurricanes" label="most damaging storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q392603" start="8312" end="8325" title="Hurricane Ike" label="Hurricane Ike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="8354" end="8363" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q27031" start="8393" end="8413" title="Kenedy County, Texas" label="Kenedy County, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49242" start="8427" end="8441" title="Corpus Christi, Texas" label="Corpus Christi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="8509" end="8520" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430068" start="8539" end="8556" title="Florida panhandle" label="Florida panhandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6613726" start="8661" end="8686" title="List of costliest Atlantic hurricanes" label="third most damaging storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="9322" end="9327" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="9513" end="9536" title="Fortune 500" label="&amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="9574" end="9581" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="9712" end="9721" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="9726" end="9739" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q125503" start="9796" end="9816" title="List of U.S. states and territories by population" label="most populous states"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="10053" end="10062" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10272" end="10299" title="Gulf of Mexico#Name" label="&amp;quot;Gulf of America&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148422" start="10343" end="10373" title="United States Board on Geographic Names" label="U.S. Board on Geographic Names"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="10382" end="10413" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170155" start="10513" end="10540" title="core-based statistical area" label="core-based statistical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4268" start="10801" end="10832" title="East Coast of the United States" label="East Coast of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="10834" end="10865" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West Coast of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920477" start="10867" end="10880" title="Emerald Coast" label="Emerald Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430068" start="10882" end="10899" title="Florida Panhandle" label="Florida Panhandle"/>
<link wikidata="Q272160" start="10901" end="10931" title="Geography of the United States" label="Geography of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5617422" start="10933" end="10976" title="Gulf Coast Ecosystem Restoration Task Force" label="Gulf Coast Ecosystem Restoration Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5617527" start="10978" end="11017" title="Gulf States Marine Fisheries Commission" label="Gulf States Marine Fisheries Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="11019" end="11026" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909043" start="11028" end="11062" title="List of ports in the United States" label="List of ports in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029013" start="11064" end="11096" title="Megaregions of the United States" label="Megaregions of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879154" start="11098" end="11120" title="Mississippi Gulf Coast" label="Mississippi Gulf Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="11122" end="11133" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="11135" end="11140" title="Tampa" label="Tampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425202" start="11142" end="11154" title="West Florida" label="West Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="11156" end="11176" title="Gulf Coast of Mexico" label="Gulf Coast of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q475225" start="11899" end="11920" title="World Digital Library" label="World Digital Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11971" wikidata="Q1995140" url="?curid=11971" title="Galaxy formation and evolution">
<text>In cosmology, the study of galaxy formation and evolution is concerned with the processes that formed a heterogeneous universe from a homogeneous beginning, the formation of the first galaxies, the way galaxies change over time, and the processes that have generated the variety of structures observed in nearby galaxies. Galaxy formation is hypothesized to occur from structure formation theories, as a result of tiny quantum fluctuations in the aftermath of the Big Bang. The simplest model in general agreement with observed phenomena is the Lambda-CDM model—that is, clustering and merging allows galaxies to accumulate mass, determining both their shape and structure. Hydrodynamics simulation, which simulates both baryons and dark matter, is widely used to study galaxy formation and evolution.

==Commonly observed properties of galaxies==
Because of the inability to conduct experiments in outer space, the only way to “test” theories and models of galaxy evolution is to compare them with observations. Explanations for how galaxies formed and evolved must be able to predict the observed properties and types of galaxies.

Edwin Hubble created an early galaxy classification scheme, now known as the Hubble tuning-fork diagram. It partitioned galaxies into ellipticals, normal spirals, barred spirals (such as the Milky Way), and irregulars. These galaxy types exhibit the following properties which can be explained by current galaxy evolution theories:

* Many of the properties of galaxies (including the galaxy color–magnitude diagram) indicate that there are fundamentally two types of galaxies. These groups divide into blue star-forming galaxies that are more like spiral types, and red non-star forming galaxies that are more like elliptical galaxies.
* Spiral galaxies are quite thin, dense, and rotate relatively fast, while the stars in elliptical galaxies have randomly oriented orbits.
* The majority of giant galaxies contain a supermassive black hole in their centers, ranging in mass from millions to billions of times the mass of the Sun. The black hole mass is tied to the host galaxy bulge or spheroid mass.
* Metallicity has a positive correlation with the absolute magnitude (luminosity) of a galaxy.
Astronomers now believe that disk galaxies likely formed first, then evolved into elliptical galaxies through galaxy mergers.

Current models also predict that the majority of mass in galaxies is made up of dark matter, a substance which is not directly observable, and might not interact through any means except gravity. This observation arises because galaxies could not have formed as they have, or rotate as they are seen to, unless they contain far more mass than can be directly observed.

==Formation of disk galaxies==
The earliest stage in the evolution of galaxies is their formation. When a galaxy forms, it has a disk shape and is called a spiral galaxy due to spiral-like &quot;arm&quot; structures located on the disk. There are different theories on how these disk-like distributions of stars develop from a cloud of matter: however, at present, none of them exactly predicts the results of observation.

=== Top-down theories ===
Olin J. Eggen, Donald Lynden-Bell, and Allan Sandage in 1962, proposed a theory that disk galaxies form through a monolithic collapse of a large gas cloud. The distribution of matter in the early universe was in clumps that consisted mostly of dark matter. These clumps interacted gravitationally, putting tidal torques on each other that acted to give them some angular momentum. As the baryonic matter cooled, it dissipated some energy and contracted toward the center. With angular momentum conserved, the matter near the center speeds up its rotation. Then, like a spinning ball of pizza dough, the matter forms into a tight disk. Once the disk cools, the gas is not gravitationally stable, so it cannot remain a singular homogeneous cloud. It breaks, and these smaller clouds of gas form stars. Since the dark matter does not dissipate as it only interacts gravitationally, it remains distributed outside the disk in what is known as the dark halo. Observations show that there are stars located outside the disk, which does not quite fit the &quot;pizza dough&quot; model. It was first proposed by Leonard Searle and Robert Zinn that galaxies form by the coalescence of smaller progenitors. Known as a top-down formation scenario, this theory is quite simple yet no longer widely accepted.

=== Bottom-up theory ===
More recent theories include the clustering of dark matter halos in the bottom-up process. Instead of large gas clouds collapsing to form a galaxy in which the gas breaks up into smaller clouds, it is proposed that matter started out in these “smaller” clumps (mass on the order of globular clusters), and then many of these clumps merged to form galaxies, which then were drawn by gravitation to form galaxy clusters. This still results in disk-like distributions of baryonic matter with dark matter forming the halo for all the same reasons as in the top-down theory. Models using this sort of process predict more small galaxies than large ones, which matches observations.

Astronomers do not currently know what process stops the contraction. In fact, theories of disk galaxy formation are not successful at producing the rotation speed and size of disk galaxies. It has been suggested that the radiation from bright newly formed stars, or from an active galactic nucleus can slow the contraction of a forming disk. It has also been suggested that the dark matter halo can pull the galaxy, thus stopping disk contraction.

The Lambda-CDM model is a cosmological model that explains the formation of the universe after the Big Bang. It is a relatively simple model that predicts many properties observed in the universe, including the relative frequency of different galaxy types; however, it underestimates the number of thin disk galaxies in the universe. The reason is that these galaxy formation models predict a large number of mergers. If disk galaxies merge with another galaxy of comparable mass (at least 15 percent of its mass) the merger will likely destroy, or at a minimum greatly disrupt the disk, and the resulting galaxy is not expected to be a disk galaxy (see next section). While this remains an unsolved problem for astronomers, it does not necessarily mean that the Lambda-CDM model is completely wrong, but rather that it requires further refinement to accurately reproduce the population of galaxies in the universe.

==Galaxy mergers and the formation of elliptical galaxies==

Elliptical galaxies (most notably supergiant ellipticals, such as ESO 306-17) are among some of the largest known thus far. Their stars are on orbits that are randomly oriented within the galaxy (i.e. they are not rotating like disk galaxies). A distinguishing feature of elliptical galaxies is that the velocity of the stars does not necessarily contribute to flattening of the galaxy, such as in spiral galaxies. Elliptical galaxies have central supermassive black holes, and the masses of these black holes correlate with the galaxy&#x27;s mass.

Elliptical galaxies have two main stages of evolution. The first is due to the supermassive black hole growing by accreting cooling gas. The second stage is marked by the black hole stabilizing by suppressing gas cooling, thus leaving the elliptical galaxy in a stable state. The mass of the black hole is also correlated to a property called sigma which is the dispersion of the velocities of stars in their orbits. This relationship, known as the M-sigma relation, was discovered in 2000. Elliptical galaxies mostly lack disks, although some bulges of disk galaxies resemble elliptical galaxies. Elliptical galaxies are more likely found in crowded regions of the universe (such as galaxy clusters).

Astronomers now see elliptical galaxies as some of the most evolved systems in the universe. It is widely accepted that the main driving force for the evolution of elliptical galaxies is mergers of smaller galaxies. Many galaxies in the universe are gravitationally bound to other galaxies, which means that they will never escape their mutual pull. If those colliding galaxies are of similar size, the resultant galaxy will appear similar to neither of the progenitors, but will instead be elliptical. There are many types of galaxy mergers, which do not necessarily result in elliptical galaxies, but result in a structural change. For example, a minor merger event is thought to be occurring between the Milky Way and the Magellanic Clouds.

Mergers between such large galaxies are regarded as violent, and the frictional interaction of the gas between the two galaxies can cause gravitational shock waves, which are capable of forming new stars in the new elliptical galaxy. By sequencing several images of different galactic collisions, one can observe the timeline of two spiral galaxies merging into a single elliptical galaxy.

In the Local Group, the Milky Way and the Andromeda Galaxy are gravitationally bound, and currently approaching each other at high speed. Simulations show that the Milky Way and Andromeda are on a collision course, and are expected to collide in less than five billion years. During this collision, it is expected that the Sun and the rest of the Solar System will be ejected from its current path around the Milky Way. The remnant could be a giant elliptical galaxy.

== Galaxy quenching ==

One observation that must be explained by a successful theory of galaxy evolution is the existence of two different populations of galaxies on the galaxy color-magnitude diagram. Most galaxies tend to fall into two separate locations on this diagram: a &quot;red sequence&quot; and a &quot;blue cloud&quot;. Red sequence galaxies are generally non-star-forming elliptical galaxies with little gas and dust, while blue cloud galaxies tend to be dusty star-forming spiral galaxies.

As described in previous sections, galaxies tend to evolve from spiral to elliptical structure via mergers. However, the current rate of galaxy mergers does not explain how all galaxies move from the &quot;blue cloud&quot; to the &quot;red sequence&quot;. It also does not explain how star formation ceases in galaxies. Theories of galaxy evolution must therefore be able to explain how star formation turns off in galaxies. This phenomenon is called galaxy &quot;quenching&quot;.

Stars form out of cold gas (see also the Kennicutt–Schmidt law), so a galaxy is quenched when it has no more cold gas. However, it is thought that quenching occurs relatively quickly (within 1 billion years), which is much shorter than the time it would take for a galaxy to simply use up its reservoir of cold gas. Galaxy evolution models explain this by hypothesizing other physical mechanisms that remove or shut off the supply of cold gas in a galaxy. These mechanisms can be broadly classified into two categories: (1) preventive feedback mechanisms that stop cold gas from entering a galaxy or stop it from producing stars, and (2) ejective feedback mechanisms that remove gas so that it cannot form stars.

One theorized preventive mechanism called “strangulation” keeps cold gas from entering the galaxy. Strangulation is likely the main mechanism for quenching star formation in nearby low-mass galaxies. The exact physical explanation for strangulation is still unknown, but it may have to do with a galaxy&#x27;s interactions with other galaxies. As a galaxy falls into a galaxy cluster, gravitational interactions with other galaxies can strangle it by preventing it from accreting more gas. For galaxies with massive dark matter halos, another preventive mechanism called “virial shock heating” may also prevent gas from becoming cool enough to form stars.

Ejective processes, which expel cold gas from galaxies, may explain how more massive galaxies are quenched. One ejective mechanism is caused by supermassive black holes found in the centers of galaxies. Simulations have shown that gas accreting onto supermassive black holes in galactic centers produces high-energy jets; the released energy can expel enough cold gas to quench star formation.

Our own Milky Way and the nearby Andromeda Galaxy currently appear to be undergoing the quenching transition from star-forming blue galaxies to passive red galaxies.

== Hydrodynamics Simulation ==
Dark energy and dark matter account for most of the Universe&#x27;s energy, so it is valid to ignore baryons when simulating large-scale structure formation (using methods such as N-body simulation). However, since the visible components of galaxies consist of baryons, it is crucial to include baryons in the simulation to study the detailed structures of galaxies. At first, the baryon component consists of mostly hydrogen and helium gas, which later transforms into stars during the formation of structures. From observations, models used in simulations can be tested and the understanding of different stages of galaxy formation can be improved.

===Euler equations===

In cosmological simulations, astrophysical gases are typically modeled as inviscid ideal gases that follow the Euler equations, which can be expressed mainly in three different ways: Lagrangian, Eulerian, or arbitrary Lagrange-Eulerian methods. Different methods give specific forms of hydrodynamical equations. When using the Lagrangian approach to specify the field, it is assumed that the observer tracks a specific fluid parcel with its unique characteristics during its movement through space and time. In contrast, the Eulerian approach emphasizes particular locations in space that the fluid passes through as time progresses.

===Baryonic Physics===

To shape the population of galaxies, the hydrodynamical equations must be supplemented by a variety of astrophysical processes mainly governed by baryonic physics.

====Gas cooling====

Processes, such as collisional excitation, ionization, and inverse Compton scattering, can cause the internal energy of the gas to be dissipated. In the simulation, cooling processes are realized by coupling cooling functions to energy equations. Besides the primordial cooling, at high temperature,formula_1, heavy elements (metals) cooling dominates. When formula_2, the fine structure and molecular cooling also need to be considered to simulate the cold phase of the interstellar medium.

====Interstellar medium====

Complex multi-phase structure, including relativistic particles and magnetic field, makes simulation of interstellar medium difficult. In particular, modeling the cold phase of the interstellar medium poses technical difficulties due to the short timescales associated with the dense gas. In the early simulations, the dense gas phase is frequently not modeled directly but rather characterized by an effective polytropic equation of state. More recent simulations use a multimodal distribution to describe 
the gas density and temperature distributions, which directly model the multi-phase structure. However, more detailed physics processes needed to be considered in future simulations, since the structure of the interstellar medium directly affects star formation.

====Star formation====

As cold and dense gas accumulates, it undergoes gravitational collapse and eventually forms stars. To simulate this process, a portion of the gas is transformed into collisionless star particles, which represent coeval, single-metallicity stellar populations and are described by an initial underlying mass function. Observations suggest that star formation efficiency in molecular gas is almost universal, with around 1% of the gas being converted into stars per free fall time. In simulations, the gas is typically converted into star particles using a probabilistic sampling scheme based on the calculated star formation rate. Some simulations seek an alternative to the probabilistic sampling scheme and aim to better capture the clustered nature of star formation by treating star clusters as the fundamental unit of star formation. This approach permits the growth of star particles by accreting material from the surrounding medium. In addition to this, modern models of galaxy formation track the evolution of these stars and the mass they return to the gas component, leading to an enrichment of the gas with metals.

====Stellar feedback====

Stars have an influence on their surrounding gas by injecting energy and momentum. This creates a feedback loop that regulates the process of star formation. To effectively control star formation, stellar feedback must generate galactic-scale outflows that expel gas from galaxies. Various methods are utilized to couple energy and momentum, particularly through supernova explosions, to the surrounding gas. These methods differ in how the energy is deposited, either thermally or kinetically. However, excessive radiative gas cooling must be avoided in the former case. Cooling is expected in dense and cold gas, but it cannot be reliably modeled in cosmological simulations due to low resolution. This leads to artificial and excessive cooling of the gas, causing the supernova feedback energy to be lost via radiation and significantly reducing its effectiveness. In the latter case, kinetic energy cannot be radiated away until it thermalizes. However, using hydrodynamically decoupled wind particles to inject momentum non-locally into the gas surrounding active star-forming regions may still be necessary to achieve large-scale galactic outflows. Recent models explicitly model stellar feedback. These models not only incorporate supernova feedback but also consider other feedback channels such as energy and momentum injection from stellar winds, photoionization, and radiation pressure resulting from radiation emitted by young, massive stars. During the Cosmic Dawn, galaxy formation occurred in short bursts of 5 to 30 Myr due to stellar feedbacks.

====Supermassive black holes====

Simulation of supermassive black holes is also considered, numerically seeding them in dark matter haloes, due to their observation in many galaxies and the impact of their mass on the mass density distribution. Their mass accretion rate is frequently modeled by the Bondi-Hoyle model.

====Active galactic nuclei ====

Active galactic nuclei (AGN) have an impact on the observational phenomena of supermassive black holes, and further have a regulation of black hole growth and star formation. In simulations, AGN feedback is usually classified into two modes, namely quasar and radio mode. Quasar mode feedback is linked to the radiatively efficient mode of black hole growth and is frequently incorporated through energy or momentum injection. The regulation of star formation in massive galaxies is believed to be significantly influenced by radio mode feedback, which occurs due to the presence of highly collimated jets of relativistic particles. These jets are typically linked to X-ray bubbles that possess enough energy to counterbalance cooling losses.

====Magnetic fields====

The ideal magnetohydrodynamics approach is commonly utilized in cosmological simulations since it provides a good approximation for cosmological magnetic fields. The effect of magnetic fields on the dynamics of gas is generally negligible on large cosmological scales. Nevertheless, magnetic fields are a critical component of the interstellar medium since they provide pressure support against gravity and affect the propagation of cosmic rays.

====Cosmic rays====

Cosmic rays play a significant role in the interstellar medium by contributing to its pressure, serving as a crucial heating channel, and potentially driving galactic gas outflows. The propagation of cosmic rays is highly affected by magnetic fields. So in the simulation, equations describing the cosmic ray energy and flux are coupled to magnetohydrodynamics equations.

====Radiation Hydrodynamics====

Radiation hydrodynamics simulations are computational methods used to study the interaction of radiation with matter. In astrophysical contexts, radiation hydrodynamics is used to study the epoch of reionization when the Universe had high redshift. There are several numerical methods used for radiation hydrodynamics simulations, including ray-tracing, Monte Carlo, and moment-based methods. Ray-tracing involves tracing the paths of individual photons through the simulation and computing their interactions with matter at each step. This method is computationally expensive but can produce very accurate results.

== Gallery ==
==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* List of galaxies
* 
* 
* Red nugget, small galaxies packed with large amounts of red stars
* 
* 
==Further reading==

==References==
==External links==
* NOAO gallery of galaxy images 
** Image of Andromeda galaxy (M31) 
* Javascript passive evolution calculator for early type (elliptical) galaxies
* Video on the evolution of galaxies by Canadian astrophysicist Doctor P</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="3" end="12" title="cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995140" start="27" end="57" title="Galaxy formation and evolution" label="galaxy formation and evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q19933904" start="104" end="117" title="Homogeneity and heterogeneity" label="heterogeneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="134" end="155" title="Big Bang" label="homogeneous beginning"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="184" end="192" title="galaxies" label="galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914363" start="369" end="388" title="structure formation" label="structure formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193821" start="419" end="438" title="quantum fluctuation" label="quantum fluctuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="464" end="472" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q692197" start="545" end="561" title="Lambda-CDM model" label="Lambda-CDM model"/>
<link wikidata="Q159731" start="721" end="727" title="baryon" label="baryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="733" end="744" title="dark matter" label="dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q43027" start="1134" end="1146" title="Edwin Hubble" label="Edwin Hubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q184348" start="1268" end="1279" title="Elliptical galaxy" label="ellipticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488" start="1288" end="1295" title="Spiral galaxy" label="spirals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490" start="1297" end="1311" title="Barred spiral galaxy" label="barred spirals"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="1325" end="1334" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q190397" start="1341" end="1351" title="Irregular galaxy" label="irregulars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025899" start="1519" end="1549" title="galaxy color–magnitude diagram" label="galaxy color–magnitude diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q40392" start="1953" end="1976" title="supermassive black hole" label="supermassive black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="2062" end="2065" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q217030" start="2140" end="2151" title="Metallicity" label="Metallicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="2188" end="2206" title="absolute magnitude" label="absolute magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="2440" end="2451" title="dark matter" label="dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315984" start="3180" end="3193" title="Olin J. Eggen" label="Olin J. Eggen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240090" start="3195" end="3213" title="Donald Lynden-Bell" label="Donald Lynden-Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q358253" start="3219" end="3232" title="Allan Sandage" label="Allan Sandage"/>
<link wikidata="Q159731" start="3568" end="3583" title="Baryon" label="baryonic matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q864952" start="4123" end="4132" title="Dark matter halo" label="dark halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525715" start="4284" end="4298" title="Leonard Searle" label="Leonard Searle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11276" start="4784" end="4800" title="globular cluster" label="globular cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q204107" start="4904" end="4918" title="galaxy cluster" label="galaxy cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q46587" start="5455" end="5478" title="active galactic nucleus" label="active galactic nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="5559" end="5570" title="dark matter" label="dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q692197" start="5634" end="5650" title="Lambda-CDM model" label="Lambda-CDM model"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="5729" end="5737" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q308492" start="6642" end="6664" title="Type-cD galaxy" label="supergiant ellipticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817613" start="6674" end="6684" title="ESO 306-17" label="ESO 306-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q18388926" start="6708" end="6730" title="List of largest galaxies" label="largest known thus far"/>
<link wikidata="Q40392" start="7056" end="7079" title="supermassive black hole" label="supermassive black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q637450" start="7501" end="7506" title="Velocity dispersion" label="sigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424023" start="7607" end="7623" title="M–sigma relation" label="M-sigma relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q854155" start="7702" end="7708" title="Galaxy bulge" label="bulges"/>
<link wikidata="Q204107" start="7842" end="7856" title="galaxy cluster" label="galaxy cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518150" start="8048" end="8055" title="Galaxy merger" label="mergers"/>
<link wikidata="Q190688" start="8758" end="8768" title="shock wave" label="shock wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q3944" start="9004" end="9015" title="Local Group" label="Local Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="9039" end="9055" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Andromeda Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744" start="10453" end="10463" title="Star formation" label="Stars form"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390903" start="10494" end="10515" title="Kennicutt–Schmidt law" label="Kennicutt–Schmidt law"/>
<link wikidata="Q864952" start="11683" end="11699" title="dark matter halo" label="dark matter halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q190688" start="11746" end="11751" title="Shock wave" label="shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q284657" start="12140" end="12143" title="astrophysical jet" label="jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q85787439" start="12597" end="12614" title="N-body simulation" label="N-body simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q375175" start="13203" end="13218" title="Euler equations (fluid dynamics)" label="Euler equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q25424022" start="14004" end="14022" title="Compton scattering" label="Compton scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="14408" end="14427" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q85900768" start="14930" end="14953" title="multimodal distribution" label="multimodal distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744" start="15214" end="15228" title="star formation" label="star formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670901" start="17874" end="17885" title="Cosmic Dawn" label="Cosmic Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q46587" start="18325" end="18347" title="Active galactic nuclei" label="Active galactic nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549249" start="19104" end="19124" title="magnetohydrodynamics" label="magnetohydrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549249" start="19902" end="19922" title="magnetohydrodynamics" label="magnetohydrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q45240" start="20322" end="20333" title="Monte Carlo" label="Monte Carlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q829956" start="20632" end="20648" title="List of galaxies" label="List of galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q55631336" start="20657" end="20667" title="Red nugget" label="Red nugget"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11973" wikidata="Q379689" url="?curid=11973" title="Generation X">
<text>Generation X (often shortened to Gen X) is the demographic cohort following the Baby Boomers and preceding Millennials. Researchers and popular media often use the mid-1960s as its starting birth years and the late 1970s as its ending birth years, with the generation generally defined as people born from 1965 to 1980. By this definition and U.S. Census data, there are 65.2 million Gen Xers in the United States as of 2019. Most of Generation X are the children of the Silent Generation and early Baby Boomers; Xers are also often the parents of Millennials and Generation Z.

As children in the 1970s and 1980s, a time of shifting societal values, Gen Xers were sometimes called the &quot;Latchkey Generation&quot;, a reference to their returning as children from school to an empty home and using a key to let themselves in. This was a result of what is now called free-range parenting, increasing divorce rates, and increased maternal participation in the workforce before widespread availability of childcare options outside the home.

As adolescents and young adults in the 1980s and 1990s, Xers were dubbed the &quot;MTV Generation&quot; (a reference to the music video channel) and sometimes characterized as slackers, cynical, and disaffected. Some of the many cultural influences on Gen X youth included a proliferation of musical genres with strong social-tribal identity such as alternative rock, hip hop, punk, post-punk, rave, and heavy metal, in addition to later forms developed by Xers themselves (e.g., grunge, grindcore and related genres). Film was also a notable cultural influence, via both the birth of franchise mega-sequels and a proliferation of independent film (enabled in part by video). Video games, in both amusement parlors and devices in Western homes, were also a major part of juvenile entertainment for the first time. Politically, Generation X experienced the last days of communism in the Soviet Union and the Eastern Bloc countries of Central and Eastern Europe, witnessing the transition to capitalism in these regions during their youth. In much of the Western world, a similar time period was defined by a dominance of conservatism and free market economics.

In their midlife during the early 21st century, research describes Gen Xers as active, happy, and achieving a work–life balance. The cohort has also been more broadly described as entrepreneurial and productive in the workplace.

== Terminology and etymology ==
The term &quot;Generation X&quot; has been used at various times to describe alienated youth. In the early 1950s, Hungarian photographer Robert Capa first used &quot;Generation X&quot; as the title for a photo-essay about young men and women growing up immediately after World War II. The term first appeared in print in a December 1952 issue of &quot;Holiday&quot; magazine announcing its upcoming publication of Capa&#x27;s photo-essay. From 1976 to 1981, English musician Billy Idol used the term as the name of his punk rock band. Idol attributed his band&#x27;s name to Jane Deverson&#x27;s and Charles Hamblett&#x27;s 1964 book &quot;Generation X&quot;, about British popular youth culture—a copy of which his mother had owned. These uses of the term appear to have no connection to Capa&#x27;s photo-essay.

The term gained a modern application after the release of Canadian author Douglas Coupland&#x27;s 1991 novel &quot;Generation X: Tales for an Accelerated Culture&quot;, but the definition used there is &quot;born in the late 1950s and 1960s&quot;, which is about ten years earlier than definitions that came later. In 1987, Coupland had written a piece in &quot;Vancouver Magazine&quot; titled &quot;Generation X&quot; which was &quot;the seed of what went on to become the book&quot;. Coupland referenced Billy Idol&#x27;s band Generation X in the 1987 article and again in 1989 in &quot;Vista&quot; magazine. In the book proposal for his novel, Coupland wrote that &quot;Generation X&quot; is &quot;taken from the name of Billy Idol’s long-defunct punk band of the late 1970s&quot;, but in 1995 he denied the term&#x27;s connection to the band, saying:

The book&#x27;s title came not from Billy Idol&#x27;s band, as many supposed, but from the final chapter of a funny sociological book on American class structure titled &quot;&quot;, by Paul Fussell. In his final chapter, Fussell named an &quot;X&quot; category of people who wanted to hop off the merry-go-round of status, money, and social climbing that so often frames modern existence.

Author William Strauss noted that around the time Coupland&#x27;s novel was published the symbol &quot;X&quot; was prominent in popular culture, as the film &quot;Malcolm X&quot; was released in 1992, and that the name &quot;Generation X&quot; stuck. The &quot;X&quot; refers to an unknown variable or to a desire not to be defined. Strauss&#x27;s coauthor Neil Howe noted the delay in naming this demographic cohort: &quot;Over 30 years after their birthday, they didn&#x27;t have a name. I think that&#x27;s germane.&quot; Previously, the cohort had been called post-Boomers, Baby Busters (which refers to the drop in birth rates after the baby boom in the western world, particularly in the U.S.), the New Lost Generation, latchkey kids, the MTV Generation, and the 13th Generation (the 13th generation since American independence).

==Date and age range definitions==

Generation X is the demographic cohort following the post–World War II baby-boom, representing a generational change from the baby boomers. Many researchers and demographers use dates that correspond to the fertility-patterns in the population. For Generation X, in the U.S. (and broadly, in the Western world), the period begins at a time when fertility rates started to significantly decrease, from the peak in the late 1950s until an upswing in the late 1970s and recovery at the start of the 1980s.

In the U.S., the Pew Research Center, a nonpartisan think tank, delineates a Generation X period of 1965–1980 which has gradually gained acceptance in academic circles. Moreover, although fertility rates are preponderant in the definition of start and end dates, the center remarks: &quot;Generations are analytical constructs, it takes time for popular and expert consensus to develop as to the precise boundaries that demarcate one generation from another.&quot; Pew takes into account other factors, notably the labor market as well as a group&#x27;s attitudinal and behavioral trends. Writing for Pew&#x27;s &quot;Trend&quot; magazine in 2018, psychologist Jean Twenge observed that the &quot;birth year boundaries of Gen X are debated but settle somewhere around 1965–1980&quot;. According to this definition, as of the oldest members of Generation X are and the youngest are .
The Brookings Institution, another U.S. think tank, sets the Gen X period as from 1965 to 1981. The U.S. Federal Reserve Board uses 1965–1980. The U.S. Social Security Administration (SSA) uses 1965 to 1980. In their 2002 book &quot;When Generations Collide&quot;, Lynne Lancaster and David Stillman use 1965 to 1980, while in 2012 authors Jain and Pant also used 1965 to 1980. U.S. news outlets such as &quot;The New York Times&quot; and &quot;The Washington Post&quot; describe Generation X as people born between 1965 and 1980. Gallup, Bloomberg, &quot;Business Insider&quot;, and &quot;Forbes&quot; use 1965–1980. &quot;Time&quot; magazine wrote that Generation X is &quot;roughly defined as anyone born between 1965 and 1980&quot;. George Masnick of the Harvard Joint Center for Housing Studies puts this generation in the time frame of 1965 to 1984 to satisfy the condition that boomers, Xers, and millennials &quot;cover equal 20-year age spans&quot;.

In Australia, the McCrindle Research Center uses 1965–1979. In the UK, the Resolution Foundation think tank defines Gen X as those born between 1966 and 1980. PricewaterhouseCoopers, a multinational professional services network headquartered in London, describes Generation X employees as those born from 1965 to 1980.

===Other age range markers===
On the basis of the time it takes for a generation to mature, U.S. authors William Strauss and Neil Howe define Generation X as those born between 1961 and 1981 in their 1991 book &quot;Generations&quot;, and divide the cohort into two waves. Jeff Gordinier, in his 2008 book &quot;X Saves the World&quot;, includes those born between 1961 and 1977 but possibly as late as 1980. George Masnick of the Harvard Joint Center for Housing Studies puts this generation in the time frame of 1965 to 1984 to satisfy the condition that boomers, Xers, and millennials &quot;cover equal 20-year age spans&quot;. In 2004, journalist J. Markert acknowledged the 20-year increments but went a step further, dividing the generation into two 10-year cohorts. The first begins in 1966 and ends in 1975 and the second begins in 1976 and ends in 1985; this thinking is applied to each generation (Silent, boomers, Gen X, millennials, etc.).

Based on events of historical importance, Schewe and Noble in 2002 argued that a cohort is formed against significant milestones and can be any length of time. They said Generation X began in 1966 and ended in 1976, with those born between 1955 and 1965 called &quot;trailing-edge boomers&quot;.

George Barna&#x27;s 1994 book &quot;Baby Busters: The Disillusioned Generation&quot; called those born between 1965 and 1983 the &quot;baby busters&quot; generation.

In his 1996 book &quot;Boom Bust &amp; Echo: How to Profit from the Coming Demographic Shift&quot;, David Foot describes Generation X as late boomers and includes those born between 1960 and 1966, while the &quot;Bust Generation&quot;, those born between 1967 and 1979, is considered a separate generation.

===Generational cuspers===
People born in the latter half of the Baby Boom, from the early 1960s to the early years of Generation X, are sometimes called Generation Jones. People born in the Generation X / millennial cusp years of the late 1970s and early to mid-1980s are sometimes called Xennials. Other names include the &quot;Star Wars&quot; Generation, Generation Catalano, and the &quot;Oregon Trail&quot; Generation. These &quot;microgenerations&quot; share characteristics of both generations.

==Demographics==
===United States===

There are differences in Gen X population numbers depending on the date-range selected. In the U.S., using Census population projections, the Pew Research Center found that the Gen X population born from 1965 to 1980 numbered 65.2 million in 2019. The cohort is likely to overtake Boomers in 2028. A 2010 Census report counted approximately 84 million people living in the US who are defined by birth years ranging from the early 1960s to the early 1980s. 

In a 2012 article for the Joint Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University, George Masnick wrote that the &quot;Census counted 82.1 million&quot; Gen Xers in the U.S. Masnick concluded that immigration filled in any birth year deficits during low fertility years of the late 1960s and early 1970s. Jon Miller at the Longitudinal Study of American Youth at the University of Michigan wrote that &quot;Generation X refers to adults born between 1961 and 1981&quot; and it &quot;includes 84 million people&quot;. In their 1991 book &quot;Generations&quot;, authors Howe and Strauss indicated that the total number of Gen X individuals in the U.S. was 88.5 million.

====Impact of family planning programs====

The birth control pill, introduced in 1960, was one contributing factor of declining birth rates. Initially, the pill spread rapidly amongst married women as an approved treatment for menstrual disturbance. However, it was also found to prevent pregnancy and was prescribed as a contraceptive in 1964. &quot;The pill&quot;, as it became commonly known, reached younger, unmarried college women in the late 1960s when state laws were amended and reduced the age of majority from 21 to ages 18–20. These policies are commonly referred to as the Early Legal Access (ELA) laws.

Another major factor was abortion, only available in a few states until its legalisation in a 1973 US Supreme Court decision in &quot;Roe v. Wade.&quot; This was replicated elsewhere, with reproductive rights legislation passed, notably in the UK (1967), France (1975), West Germany (1976), New Zealand (1977), Italy (1978), and the Netherlands (1980). From 1973 to 1980, the abortion rate per 1,000 US women aged 15–44 increased from 16% to 29% with more than 9.6 million terminations of pregnancy practiced. Between 1970 and 1980, on average, for every 10 American citizens born, 3 were aborted. However, increased immigration during the same period of time helped to partially offset declining birth-rates and contributed to making Generation X an ethnically and culturally diverse demographic cohort.

====Parental lineage====
Generally, Gen Xers are the children of the Silent Generation and older Baby Boomers.

==Characteristics==

=== In the United States ===

====As children and adolescents ====
=====Rising divorce rates and women workforce participation=====
Strauss and Howe, who wrote several books on generations, including one specifically on Generation X titled &quot;13th Gen: Abort, Retry, Ignore, Fail?&quot; (1993), reported that Gen Xers were children at a time when society was less focused on children and more focused on adults. Xers were children during a time of increasing divorce rates, with divorce rates doubling in the mid-1960s, before peaking in 1980. Strauss and Howe described a cultural shift where the long-held societal value of staying together for the sake of the children was replaced with a societal value of parental and individual self-actualization. Strauss wrote that society &quot;moved from what Leslie Fiedler called a 1950s-era &#x27;cult of the child&#x27; to what Landon Jones called a 1970s-era &#x27;cult of the adult&#x27;&quot;. &quot;The Generation Map&quot;, a report from Australia&#x27;s McCrindle Research Center writes of Gen X children: Boomer parents were the most divorced generation in Australian history&quot;. According to Christine Henseler in the 2012 book &quot;Generation X Goes Global: Mapping a Youth Culture in Motion&quot;, &quot;We watched the decay and demise (of the family), and grew callous to the loss.&quot;
The Gen X childhood coincided with the sexual revolution of the 1960s to 1980s, which Susan Gregory Thomas described in her book &quot;In Spite of Everything&quot; as confusing and frightening for children in cases where a parent would bring new sexual partners into their home. Thomas also discussed how divorce was different during the Gen X childhood, with the child having a limited or severed relationship with one parent following divorce, often the father, due to differing societal and legal expectations. In the 1970s, only nine U.S. states allowed for joint custody of children, which has since been adopted by all 50 states following a push for joint custody during the mid-1980s. &quot;Kramer vs. Kramer&quot;, a 1979 American legal drama based on Avery Corman&#x27;s best-selling novel, came to epitomize the struggle for child custody and the demise of the traditional nuclear family.
The rapid influx of Boomer women into the labor force that began in the 1970s was marked by the confidence of many in their ability to successfully pursue a career while meeting the needs of their children. This resulted in an increase in latchkey children, leading to the terminology of the &quot;latchkey generation&quot; for Generation X. These children lacked adult supervision in the hours between the end of the school day and when a parent returned home from work in the evening, and for longer periods of time during the summer. Latchkey children became common among all socioeconomic demographics, but this was particularly so among middle- and upper-class children. The higher the educational attainment of the parents, the higher the odds the children of this time would be latchkey children, due to increased maternal participation in the workforce at a time before childcare options outside the home were widely available. McCrindle Research Centre described the cohort as &quot;the first to grow up without a large adult presence, with both parents working&quot;, stating this led to Gen Xers being more peer-oriented than previous generations.

=====Conservative and neoliberal turn=====
Some older Gen Xers started high school in the waning years of the Carter presidency, but much of the cohort became socially and politically conscious during the Reagan Era. President Ronald Reagan, voted in office principally by the Boomer generation, embraced &quot;laissez-faire&quot; economics with vigor. His policies included cuts in the growth of government spending, reduction in taxes for the higher echelon of society, legalization of stock buybacks, and deregulation of key industries. The early 1980s recession saw unemployment rise to 10.8% in 1982; requiring, more often than not, dual parental incomes. One in five American children grew up in poverty during this time. The federal debt almost tripled during Reagan&#x27;s time in office, from $998 billion in 1981 to $2.857 trillion in 1989, placing greater burden of repayment on the incoming generation.
Government expenditure shifted from domestic programs to defense. Remaining funding initiatives, moreover, tended to be diverted away from programs for children and often directed toward the elderly population, with cuts to Medicaid and programs for children and young families, and protection and expansion of Medicare and Social Security for the elderly population. These programs for the elderly were not tied to economic need. Congressman David Durenberger criticized this political situation, stating that while programs for poor children and for young families were cut, the government provided &quot;free health care to elderly millionaires&quot;.

=====The crack epidemic and AIDS=====
Gen Xers came of age or were children during the 1980s crack epidemic, which disproportionately impacted urban areas as well as the African-American community. The U.S. Drug turf battles increased violent crime. Crack addiction impacted communities and families. Between 1984 and 1989, the homicide rate for black males aged 14 to 17 doubled in the U.S., and the homicide rate for black males aged 18 to 24 increased almost as much. The crack epidemic had a destabilizing impact on families, with an increase in the number of children in foster care. In 1986, President Reagan signed the Anti-Drug Abuse Act to enforce strict mandatory minimum sentencing for drug users. He also increased the federal budget for supply-reduction efforts.

Fear of the impending AIDS epidemic of the 1980s and 1990s loomed over the formative years of Generation X. The emergence of AIDS coincided with Gen X&#x27;s adolescence, with the disease first clinically observed in the U.S. in 1981. By 1985, an estimated one-to-two million Americans were HIV-positive. This particularly hit the LGBT community. As the virus spread, at a time before effective treatments were available, a public panic ensued. Sex education programs in schools were adapted to address the AIDS epidemic, which taught Gen X students that sex could kill them.

=====The rise of home computing=====

Gen Xers were the first children to have access to personal computers in their homes and at schools. In the early 1980s, the growth in the use of personal computers exploded. Manufacturers such as Commodore, Atari, and Apple responded to the demand via 8-bit and 16-bit machines. This in turn stimulated the software industries with corresponding developments for backup storage, use of the floppy disk, zip drive, and CD-ROM.

At school, several computer projects were supported by the Department of Education under United States Secretary of Education Terrel Bell&#x27;s &quot;Technology Initiative&quot;. This was later mirrored in the UK&#x27;s 1982 Computers for Schools programme and, in France, under the 1985 scheme &quot;Plan Informatique pour Tous (IPT).&quot;

=====The post–civil rights generation=====
In the U.S., Generation X was the first cohort to grow up post-integration after the racist Jim Crow laws. They were described in a marketing report by &quot;Specialty Retail&quot; as the kids who &quot;lived the civil rights movement&quot;. They were among the first children to be bused to attain integration in the public school system. In the 1990s, Strauss reported Gen Xers were &quot;by any measure the least racist of today&#x27;s generations&quot;. In the U.S., Title IX, which passed in 1972, provided increased athletic opportunities to Gen X girls in the public school setting. &quot;Roots&quot;, based on the novel by Alex Haley and broadcast as a 12-hour series, was viewed as a turning point in the country&#x27;s ability to relate to Afro-American history.

====As young adults====
=====Continued growth in college enrollments=====

In the U.S., compared to the Boomer generation, Generation X was more educated than their parents. The share of young adults enrolling in college steadily increased from 1983, before peaking in 1998. In 1965, as early Boomers entered college, total enrollment of new undergraduates was just over 5.7 million individuals across the public and private sectors. By 1983, the first year of Gen X college enrollments (as per Pew Research&#x27;s definition), this figure had reached 12.2 million. This was an increase of 53%, effectively a doubling in student intake. As the 1990s progressed, Gen X college enrollments continued to climb, with increased loan borrowing as the cost of an education became substantially more expensive compared to their peers in the mid-1980s. By 1998, the generation&#x27;s last year of college enrollment, those entering the higher education sector totaled 14.3 million. In addition, unlike Boomers and previous generations, women outpaced men in college completion rates.

=====Adjusting to a new societal environment=====
For early Gen Xer graduates entering the job market at the end of the 1980s, economic conditions were challenging and did not show signs of major improvements until the mid-1990s. In the U.S., restrictive monetary policy to curb rising inflation and the collapse of a large number of savings and loan associations (private banks that specialized in home mortgages) impacted the welfare of many American households. This precipitated a large government bailout, which placed further strain on the budget. Furthermore, three decades of growth came to an end. The social contract between employers and employees, which had endured during the 1960s and 1970s and was scheduled to last until retirement, was no longer applicable. By the late 1980s, there were large-scale layoffs of Boomers, corporate downsizing, and accelerated offshoring of production.

On the political front, in the U.S. the generation became ambivalent if not outright disaffected with politics. They had been reared in the shadow of the Vietnam War and the Watergate scandal. They came to maturity under the Reagan and George H. W. Bush presidencies, with first-hand experience of the impact of neoliberal policies. Few had experienced a Democratic administration and even then, only, at an atmospheric level. For those on the left of the political spectrum, the disappointments with the previous Boomer student mobilizations of the 1960s and the collapse of those movements towards a consumerist &quot;greed is good&quot; and &quot;yuppie&quot; culture during the 1980s felt, to a great extent, like hypocrisy if not outright betrayal. Hence, the preoccupation on &quot;authenticity&quot; and not &quot;selling-out&quot;. The Revolutions of 1989 and the collapse of the socialist utopia with the fall of the Berlin Wall, moreover, added to the disillusionment that any alternative to the capitalist model was possible.

=====Birth of the &quot;slacker&quot;=====

In 1990, &quot;Time&quot; magazine published an article titled &quot;Living: Proceeding with Caution&quot;, which described those then in their 20s as aimless and unfocused. Media pundits and advertisers further struggled to define the cohort, typically portraying them as &quot;unfocused twentysomethings&quot;. A MetLife report noted: &quot;media would portray them as the &quot;Friends&quot; generation: rather self-involved and perhaps aimless...but fun&quot;. 

Gen Xers were often portrayed as apathetic or as &quot;slackers&quot;, lacking bearings, a stereotype which was initially tied to Richard Linklater&#x27;s comedic and essentially plotless 1991 film &quot;Slacker&quot;. After the film was released, &quot;journalists and critics thought they put a finger on what was different about these young adults in that &#x27;they were reluctant to grow up&#x27; and &#x27;disdainful of earnest action&#x27;&quot;. Ben Stiller&#x27;s 1994 film &quot;Reality Bites&quot; also sought to capture the zeitgeist of the generation with a portrayal of the attitudes and lifestyle choices of the time.

Negative stereotypes of Gen X young adults continued, including that they were &quot;bleak, cynical, and disaffected&quot;. In 1998, such stereotypes prompted sociological research at Stanford University to study the accuracy of the characterization of Gen X young adults as cynical and disaffected. Using the national General Social Survey, the researchers compared answers to identical survey questions asked of 18–29-year-olds in three different time periods. Additionally, they compared how older adults answered the same survey questions over time. The surveys showed 18–29-year-old Gen Xers did exhibit higher levels of cynicism and disaffection than previous cohorts of 18–29-year-olds surveyed. However, they also found that cynicism and disaffection had increased among all age groups surveyed over time, not just young adults, making this a period effect, not a cohort effect. In other words, adults of all ages were more cynical and disaffected in the 1990s, not just Generation X.

In a 2023 interview with television host Bill Maher on the podcast &quot;Club Random with Bill Maher&quot;, vocalist and guitarist Billy Corgan hinted at how the Smashing Pumpkins spoke to the disillusionment felt by many Gen Xers as they reached adulthood, noting:

==== Rise of the Internet and the dot-com bubble ====
By the mid-late 1990s, under Bill Clinton&#x27;s presidency, economic optimism had returned to the U.S., with unemployment reduced from 7.5% in 1992 to 4% in 2000. Younger members of Gen X, straddling across administrations, politically experienced a &quot;liberal renewal&quot;. In 1997, &quot;Time&quot; magazine published an article titled &quot;Generation X Reconsidered&quot;, which retracted the previously reported negative stereotypes and reported positive accomplishments. The article cited Gen Xers&#x27; tendency to found technology startup companies and small businesses, as well as their ambition, which research showed was higher among Gen X young adults than older generations. Yet, the slacker moniker stuck. As the decade progressed, Gen X gained a reputation for entrepreneurship. In 1999, &quot;The New York Times&quot; dubbed them &quot;Generation 1099&quot;, describing them as the &quot;once pitied but now envied group of self-employed workers whose income is reported to the Internal Revenue Service not on a W-2 form, but on Form 1099&quot;.
Consumer access to the Internet and its commercial development throughout the 1990s witnessed a frenzy of IT initiatives. Newly created companies, launched on stock exchanges globally, were formed with dubitable revenue generation or cash flow. When the dot-com bubble eventually burst in 2000, early Gen Xers who had embarked as entrepreneurs in the IT industry while riding the Internet wave, as well as newly qualified programmers at the tail-end of the generation (who had grown up with AOL and the first Web browsers), were both caught in the crash. This had major repercussions, with cross-generational consequences; five years after the bubble burst, new matriculation of IT Millennial undergraduates fell by 40% and by as much as 70% in some information systems programs.

However, following the crisis, sociologist Mike Males reported continued confidence and optimism among the cohort. He reported &quot;surveys consistently find 80% to 90% of Gen Xers self-confident and optimistic&quot;. Males wrote &quot;these young Americans should finally get the recognition they deserve&quot;, praising the cohort and stating that &quot;the permissively raised, universally deplored Generation X is the true &#x27;great generation&#x27;, for it has braved a hostile social climate to reverse abysmal trends&quot;. He described them as the hardest-working group since the World War II generation. He reported Gen Xers&#x27; entrepreneurial tendencies helped create the high-tech industry that fueled the 1990s economic recovery. In 2002, &quot;Time&quot; magazine published an article titled &quot;Gen Xers Aren&#x27;t Slackers After All&quot;, reporting that four out of five new businesses were the work of Gen Xers.

=====Response to 9/11=====
In the U.S., Gen Xers were described as the major heroes of the September 11 terrorist attacks by author William Strauss. The firefighters and police responding to the attacks were predominantly from Generation X. Additionally, the leaders of the passenger revolt on United Airlines Flight 93 were also, by majority, Gen Xers. Author Neil Howe reported survey data which showed that Gen Xers were cohabiting and getting married in increasing numbers following the terrorist attacks. Gen X survey respondents reported that they no longer wanted to live alone. 

In October 2001, the &quot;Seattle Post-Intelligencer&quot; wrote of Gen Xers: &quot;Now they could be facing the most formative events of their lives and their generation.&quot; The &quot;Greensboro News &amp; Record&quot; reported members of the cohort &quot;felt a surge of patriotism since terrorists struck&quot; by giving blood, working for charities, donating to charities, and by joining the military to fight the War on Terror. &quot;The Jury Expert&quot;, a publication of The American Society of Trial Consultants, reported: &quot;Gen X members responded to the terrorist attacks with bursts of patriotism and national fervor that surprised even themselves.&quot;

====In midlife====
=====Achieving a work-life balance=====
In 2011, survey analysis from the &quot;Longitudinal Study of American Youth&quot; found Gen Xers (defined as those who were then between the ages of 30 and 50) to be &quot;balanced, active, and happy&quot; in midlife and as achieving a work-life balance. The Longitudinal Study of Youth is an NIH-NIA funded study by the University of Michigan which has been studying Generation X since 1987. The study asked questions such as &quot;Thinking about all aspects of your life, how happy are you? If zero means that you are very unhappy and 10 means that you are very happy, please rate your happiness.&quot; LSA reported that &quot;mean level of happiness was 7.5 and the median (middle score) was 8. Only four percent of Generation X adults indicated a great deal of unhappiness (a score of three or lower). Twenty-nine percent of Generation X adults were very happy with a score of 9 or 10 on the scale.&quot;

In 2014, Pew Research provided further insight, describing the cohort as &quot;savvy, skeptical and self-reliant; they&#x27;re not into preening or pampering, and they just might not give much of a hoot what others think of them. Or whether others think of them at all.&quot; Furthermore, guides regarding managing multiple generations in the workforce describe Gen Xers as: independent, resilient, resourceful, self-managing, adaptable, cynical, pragmatic, skeptical of authority, and as seeking a work-life balance.

=====Entrepreneurship as an individual trait=====

Individualism is one of the defining traits of Generation X, and is reflected in their entrepreneurial spirit. In the 2008 book &quot;X Saves the World: How Generation X Got the Shaft but Can Still Keep Everything from Sucking&quot;, author Jeff Gordinier describes Generation X as a &quot;dark horse demographic&quot; which &quot;doesn&#x27;t seek the limelight&quot;. Gordiner cites examples of Gen Xers&#x27; contributions to society such as: Google, Wikipedia, Amazon.com, and YouTube, arguing that if Boomers had created them, &quot;we&#x27;d never hear the end of it&quot;. In the book, Gordinier contrasts Gen Xers to Baby Boomers, saying Boomers tend to trumpet their accomplishments more than Gen Xers do, creating what he describes as &quot;elaborate mythologies&quot; around their achievements. Gordiner cites Steve Jobs as an example, while Gen Xers, he argues, are more likely to &quot;just quietly do their thing&quot;.

In a 2007 article published in the Harvard Business Review, authors Strauss and Howe wrote of Generation X: &quot;They are already the greatest entrepreneurial generation in U.S. history; their high-tech savvy and marketplace resilience have helped America prosper in the era of globalization.&quot; According to authors Michael Hais and Morley Winograd:
Small businesses and the entrepreneurial spirit that Gen Xers embody have become one of the most popular institutions in America. There&#x27;s been a recent shift in consumer behavior and Gen Xers will join the &quot;idealist generation&quot; in encouraging the celebration of individual effort and business risk-taking. As a result, Xers will spark a renaissance of entrepreneurship in economic life, even as overall confidence in economic institutions declines. Customers, and their needs and wants (including Millennials) will become the North Star for an entire new generation of entrepreneurs.

A 2015 study by Sage Group reports Gen Xers &quot;dominate the playing field&quot; with respect to founding startups in the United States and Canada, with Xers launching the majority (55%) of all new businesses in 2015.

=====Income benefits of a college education=====
Generation X was the last generation in the U.S. for whom higher education was broadly financially remunerative. In 2019, the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis published research (using data from the 2016 &quot;Survey of Consumer Finances&quot;) demonstrating that after controlling for race and age, families with heads of household born before 1980 had higher wealth and income when the head of household had post-secondary education. For those born after 1980, the wealth premium (of college education) was no longer statistically significant (in part because of the rising cost of college). The income premium, while remaining positive, had declined to historic lows, with more pronounced downward trajectories among heads of household with postgraduate degrees.

=====Parenting and volunteering=====
In terms of advocating for their children in the educational setting, author Neil Howe describes Gen X parents as distinct from Baby Boomer parents. Howe argues that Gen Xers are not helicopter parents, which Howe describes as a parenting style of Boomer parents of Millennials. Howe described Gen Xers instead as &quot;stealth fighter parents&quot;, due to the tendency of Gen X parents to let minor issues go and to not hover over their children in the educational setting, but to intervene forcefully and swiftly in the event of more serious issues. In 2012, the Corporation for National and Community Service ranked Gen X volunteer rates in the U.S. at &quot;29.4% per year&quot;, the highest compared with other generations. The rankings were based on a three-year moving average between 2009 and 2011.

=====Communication style=====
Generation X prefers the communication modes of face-to-face and phone, whereas the younger generations prefer e-mail and texting. In terms of writing, Generation X is more likely than Generation Z to know cursive and more likely than Millennials to use postal mail. Also, Generation X is less likely to ghost than Millennials and Generation Z. Social media usage is also different, with Generation X preferring LinkedIn and Facebook, while Millennials and Generation Z prefer Snapchat and TikTok.

=====Income differential with previous generations=====
A report titled &quot;Economic Mobility: Is the American Dream Alive and Well?&quot; focused on the income of males 30–39 in 2004 (those born April 1964March 1974). The study was released on 25 May 2007 and emphasized that this generation&#x27;s men made less (by 12%) than their fathers had at the same age in 1974, thus reversing a historical trend. It concluded that, per year increases in household income generated by fathers/sons slowed from an average of 0.9% to 0.3%, barely keeping pace with inflation. &quot;Family incomes have risen though (over the period 1947 to 2005) because more women have gone to work&quot;, &quot;supporting the incomes of men, by adding a second earner to the family. And as with male income, the trend is downward.&quot;

===Globally ===
Although, globally, children and adolescents of Generation X will have been heavily influenced by U.S. cultural industries with shared global currents (e.g., rising divorce rates, the AIDS epidemic, advancements in ICT), there is not one U.S.-born raised concept but multiple perspectives and geographical outgrowths. Even within the period of analysis, inside national communities, commonalities will have differed on the basis of one&#x27;s birth date. The generation, Christine Henseler also remarks, was shaped as much by real-world events, within national borders, determined by specific political, cultural, and historical incidents. She adds &quot;In other words, it is in between both real, clearly bordered spaces and more fluid global currents that we can spot the spirit of Generation X.&quot; 

In 2016, a global consumer insights project from Viacom International Media Networks and Viacom, based on over 12,000 respondents across 21 countries, reported on Gen X&#x27;s unconventional approach to sex, friendship, and family, their desire for flexibility and fulfillment at work and the absence of midlife crisis for Gen Xers. The project also included a 20 min documentary titled &quot;Gen X Today&quot;.

==== Russia ====
In Russia, Generation Xers are referred to as &quot;the last Soviet children&quot;, as the last children to come of age prior to the downfall of communism in their nation and prior to the Dissolution of the Soviet Union. Those that reached adulthood in the 1980s and grew up educated in the doctrines of Marxism and Leninism found themselves against a background of economic and social change, with the advent of Mikhail Gorbachev to power and &quot;Perestroika&quot;. However, even before the collapse of the Soviet Union and the disbanding of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, surveys demonstrated that Russian young people repudiated the key features of the Communist worldview that their party leaders, schoolteachers, and even parents had tried to instill in them. This generation, caught in the transition between Marxism–Leninism and an unknown future, and wooed by the new domestic political classes, remained largely apathetic.

==== France ====
In France, &quot;Generation X&quot; is not as widely known or used to define its members. Politically, this loosely denotes those born in the early 1960s to the early 1980s. Although fertility rates started to fall in 1965, number of births in France only followed suit in 1975. There is general agreement that, domestically, the event that is accepted in France as the separating point between the Baby Boomer generation and Generation X are the French strikes and violent riots of May 1968 with those of the generation too young to participate. Those at the start of the cohort are sometimes referred to as &#x27;Génération Bof&#x27; because of their tendency to use the word &#x27;bof&#x27;, which, translated into English, means &quot;whatever&quot;.

The generation is closely associated with socialist François Mitterrand who served as President of France during two consecutive terms between 1981 and 1995 as most transitioned from teenagers into adulthood during that period. Economically, Xers started when the new labour market was emerging and were the first to fully experience the advent of the post-industrial society. For those at the tail-end of the generation, educational and defence reforms, a new style &quot;baccalauréat général&quot; with three distinct streams in 1995 (the preceding programme, introduced in 1968) the 2002 licence-master-doctorat reform for first Millennial graduates (DEUG, Maîtrise, DESS and DEA degrees no longer awarded), and the cessation of military conscription in 1997 (for those born after January 1979) are considered as new transition points to the next.

====Republic of Ireland====

The term &quot;Generation X&quot; is used to describe Irish people born between 1965 and 1985; they grew up during The Troubles and the 1980s economic recession, coming of age during the Celtic Tiger period of prosperity in the 1990s onward. The appropriateness of the term to Ireland has been questioned, with Darach Ó Séaghdha noting that &quot;Generation X is usually contrasted with the one before by growing up in smaller and different family units on account of their parents having greater access to contraception and divorce – again, things that were not widely available in Ireland. [&quot;Contraception was only available under prescription in 1978 and without prescription in 1985; divorce was illegal until 1996.&quot;] However, this generation was in prime position to benefit from the Celtic Tiger, the Peace Process and liberalisations introduced on foot of EU membership and was less likely to emigrate than those that came before and after. You could say that in many ways, these are Ireland’s real Boomers.&quot;

Culturally, Britpop, Celtic rock, the trad revival, &quot;Father Ted&quot;, the 1990 FIFA World Cup and rave culture were significant. The Divine Comedy song &quot;Generation Sex&quot; (1998) painted a picture of hedonism in the late 20th century, as well as its effect on the media. David McWilliams&#x27; 2005 book &quot;The Pope&#x27;s Children: Ireland&#x27;s New Elite&quot; profiled Irish people born in the 1970s (just prior to the papal visit to Ireland), which was a baby boom that saw Ireland&#x27;s population increase for the first time since the 1840s Great Famine. The Pope&#x27;s Children were in position to benefit from the Celtic Tiger and the newly liberal culture, where the Catholic Church had significantly less social power.

==== United Kingdom ====

===== As children, adolescents and young adults =====

====== Political environment ======
The United Kingdom&#x27;s Economic and Social Research Council described Generation X as &quot;Thatcher&#x27;s children&quot; because the cohort grew up while Margaret Thatcher was Prime Minister from 1979 to 1990, &quot;a time of social flux and transformation&quot;. Those born in the late 1960s and early 1970s grew up in a period of social unrest. While unemployment was low in the early 1970s, industrial and social unrest escalated. Strike action culminated in the &quot;Winter of Discontent&quot; in 1978–79, and the Troubles began to unfold in Northern Ireland. The turn to neoliberal policies introduced and maintained by consecutive conservative governments from 1979 to 1997 marked the end of the post-war consensus.

====== Education ======
The almost universal dismantling of the grammar school system in Great Britain during the 1960s and the 1970s meant that the vast majority of the cohort attended comprehensive schools. Compulsory education ended at the age of 16. As older members of the cohort reached the end of their mandatory schooling, levels of educational enrollment among older adolescents remained below much of the Western world. By the early 1980s, some 80% to 90% of school leavers in France and West Germany received vocational training, compared with 40% in the United Kingdom. By the mid-1980s, over 80% of pupils in the United States and West Germany and over 90% in Japan stayed in education until the age of eighteen, compared with 33% of British pupils. There was, however, broadly a rise in education levels among this age range as Generation X passed through it.

In 1990, 25% of young people in England stayed in some kind of full-time education after the age of 18, this was an increase from 15% a decade earlier. Later, the Further and Higher Education Act 1992 and the liberalisation of higher education in the UK saw greater numbers of those born towards the tail-end of the generation gaining university places.

====== Employment ======
The 1980s, when some of Generation X reached working age, was an era defined by high unemployment rates. This was particularly true of the youngest members of the working aged population. In 1984, 26% of 16 to 24 year olds were neither in full-time education or participating in the workforce. However, this figure did decrease as the economic situation improved reaching 17% by 1993.

===== In midlife =====
Generation X were far more likely to have children out of wedlock than their parents. The number of babies being born to unmarried parents in England and Wales rose from 11% in 1979, a quarter in 1998, 40% by 2002 and almost half in 2012. They were also significantly more likely to have children later in life than their predecessors. The average age of a mother giving birth rose from 27 in 1982 to 30 in 2012. That year saw 29,994 children born to mothers over the age 40, an increase of 360% from 2002.

A 2016 study of over 2,500 British office workers conducted by Workfront found that survey respondents of all ages selected those from Generation X as the hardest-working employees and members of the workforce (chosen by 60%). Gen X was also ranked highest among fellow workers for having the strongest work ethic (chosen by 59.5%), being the most helpful (55.4%), the most skilled (54.5%), and the best troubleshooters/problem-solvers (41.6%).

===== Political evolution =====
Ipsos MORI reports that at the 1987 and 1992 general elections, the first United Kingdom general elections where significant numbers of Generation X members could vote, a plurality of 18 to 24 year olds opted for the Labour Party by a small margin. The polling organisation&#x27;s figures suggest that in 1987, 39% of that age group voted Labour, 37% for the Conservatives and 22% for the SDP–Liberal Alliance. Five years later, these numbers were fairly similar at 38% Labour, 35% Conservative and 19% Liberal Democrats, a party by then formed from the previously mentioned alliance. Both these elections saw a fairly significant lead for the Conservatives in the popular vote among the general population.

At the 1997 General election where Labour won a large majority of seats and a comfortable lead in the popular vote, research suggests that voters under the age of 35 were more likely to vote Labour if they turned out than the wider electorate but significantly less likely to vote than in 1992. Analysts suggested this may have been due to fewer differences in policies between the major parties and young people having less of a sense of affiliation with particular political parties than older generations. A similar trend continued at the 2001 and 2005 general elections as turnout dropped further among both the relatively young and the wider public.

Voter turnout across the electorate began to recover from a 2001 low until the 2017 general election. Generation X also became more likely to vote as they entered the midlife age demographics. Polling suggests a plurality of their age group backed the Conservatives in 2010 and 2015 but less overwhelming than much of the older generation. At the 2016 EU membership referendum and 2017 general election, Generation X was split with younger members appearing to back remain and Labour and older members tending towards Leave and Conservative in a British electorate more polarised by age than ever before. At the 2019 general election, voting trends continued to be heavily divided by age but a plurality of younger as well as older generation X members (then 39 to 55 year olds) voted Conservative.

==== Germany ====
In Germany, &quot;Generation X&quot; is not widely used or applied. Instead, reference is sometimes made to &quot;Generation Golf&quot; in the previous West German republic, based on a novel by Florian Illies. In the east, children of the &quot;Mauerfall&quot; or coming down of the wall. For former East Germans, there was adaptation, but also a sense of loss of accustomed values and structures. These effects turned into romantic narratives of their childhood. For those in the West, there was a period of discovery and exploration of what had been a forbidden land.

==== South Africa ====
In South Africa, Gen Xers spent their formative years of the 1980s during the &quot;hyper-politicized environment of the final years of apartheid&quot;.

==Arts and culture==
=== Music ===

Gen Xers were the first cohort to come of age with MTV. They were the first generation to experience the emergence of music videos as teenagers and are sometimes called the MTV Generation. Gen Xers were responsible for the alternative rock movement of the 1990s and 2000s, including the grunge subgenre. Hip hop has also been described as defining music of the generation, particularly artists such as Tupac Shakur, N.W.A., and The Notorious B.I.G.

====Punk rock====

From 1974 to 1976, a new generation of rock bands arose, including the Ramones, Johnny Thunders and the Heartbreakers, and the Dictators in New York City; the Sex Pistols, the Clash, the Damned, and Buzzcocks in the United Kingdom; and the Saints in Brisbane, Australia. By late 1976, these acts were generally recognized as forming the vanguard of &quot;punk rock&quot;, and as 1977 approached, punk rock became a major and highly controversial cultural phenomenon in the UK. It spawned a punk subculture which expressed a youthful rebellion, characterized by distinctive styles of clothing and adornment (ranging from deliberately offensive T-shirts, leather jackets, studded or spiked bands and jewelry, as well as bondage and S&amp;M clothes) and a variety of anti-authoritarian ideologies that have since been associated with the form. 

By 1977 the influence of punk rock music and its subculture became more pervasive, spreading throughout various countries worldwide. It generally took root in local scenes that tended to reject affiliation with the mainstream. In the late 1970s, punk experienced its second wave. Acts that were not active during its formative years adopted the style. While at first punk musicians were not Gen Xers themselves (many of them were late Boomers, or Generation Jones), the fanbase for punk became increasingly Gen X-oriented as the earliest Xers entered their adolescence, and it therefore made a significant imprint on the cohort. 

By the 1980s, faster and more aggressive subgenres such as hardcore punk (e.g., Minor Threat), street punk (e.g., the Exploited, NOFX) and anarcho-punk (e.g., Subhumans) became the predominant modes of punk rock. Musicians identifying with or inspired by punk often later pursued other musical directions, resulting in a broad range of spinoffs. This development gave rise to genres such as post-punk, new wave and later indie pop, alternative rock, and noise rock. Gen Xers were no longer simply the consumers of punk, they became the creators as well. By the 1990s, punk rock re-emerged into the mainstream. Punk rock and pop punk bands with Gen X members such as Green Day, Rancid, The Offspring, and Blink-182 brought widespread popularity to the genre .

====Hard rock====
Arguably in a similar way to punk, a sense of disillusionment, angst and anger catalysed hard rock and heavy metal to grow from the earlier influence of rock.

====Post-punk====
The energy generated by the punk movement launched a subsequent proliferation of weird and eclectic post-punk sub cultures, spanning new wave, goth, etc., and influencing the New Romantics.

====Grunge====

A notable example of alternative rock is grunge and the associated subculture that developed in the Pacific Northwest of the U.S. Grunge lyrics have been called the &quot;product of Generation X malaise&quot;. Vulture wrote, &quot;the best bands arose from the boredom of latchkey kids&quot;. Producer Jack Endino said, &quot;People made records entirely to please themselves because there was nobody else to please&quot;. 

Grunge lyrics are typically dark, nihilistic, angst-filled, and anguished. They often address themes such as social alienation, despair, and apathy. &quot;The Guardian&quot; wrote that grunge &quot;didn&#x27;t recycle banal cliches but tackled weighty subjects&quot;. Topics of grunge lyrics include homelessness, suicide, rape, broken homes, drug addiction, self-loathing, misogyny, domestic abuse, and finding &quot;meaning in an indifferent universe&quot;. Grunge lyrics tend to be introspective and aim to enable the listener to see into hidden personal issues and examine depravity. Notable grunge bands include Nirvana, Pearl Jam, Alice in Chains, Stone Temple Pilots, and Soundgarden.

====Hip hop====

The golden age of hip hop refers to hip hop music made from the mid-1980s to mid-1990s, typically by artists originating from the New York metropolitan area. The music is characterized by its diversity, quality, innovation, and influence after the genre&#x27;s emergence and establishment in the previous decade. It has various , while the music is experimental and the sampling eclectic. 

Artists associated with the era include LL Cool J, Run–D.M.C., Public Enemy, the Beastie Boys, KRS-One, Eric B. &amp; Rakim, De La Soul, Big Daddy Kane, EPMD, A Tribe Called Quest, Wu-Tang Clan, Slick Rick, Ultramagnetic MC&#x27;s, and the Jungle Brothers. Releases by these acts coexisted in this period with, and were as commercially viable as, those of early gangsta rap artists such as Ice-T, Geto Boys, and N.W.A, the sex raps of 2 Live Crew and Too Short, and party-oriented music by acts such as Kid &#x27;n Play, The Fat Boys, DJ Jazzy Jeff &amp; The Fresh Prince, and MC Hammer.

In addition to lyrical self-glorification, hip hop was also used as social protest. Lyrics from the era often draw attention to social issues, including afrocentric living, drug use, crime and violence, religion, culture, the state of the U.S. economy, and the modern man&#x27;s struggle. Conscious and political hip hop tracks of the time were a response to the effects of American capitalism and President Reagan&#x27;s conservative political economy. According to Rose Tricia, &quot;In rap, relationships between black cultural practice, social and economic conditions, technology, sexual and racial politics, and the institution policing of the popular terrain are complex and in constant motion&quot;. 

There was also often an emphasis on black nationalism. Hip hop artists often talked about urban poverty and the problems of alcohol, drugs, and gangs in their communities. Public Enemy&#x27;s most influential song, &quot;Fight the Power&quot;, came out at this time; the song speaks up to the government, proclaiming that people in the ghetto have freedom of speech and rights like every other American.

===Film===
====Indie films====
Gen Xers are largely responsible for the &quot;indie film&quot; movement of the 1990s, both as young directors and in large part as the audiences fueling demand for such films. In cinema, directors Kevin Smith, Quentin Tarantino, Sofia Coppola, Wes Anderson, John Singleton, Spike Jonze, David Fincher, Christopher Nolan, Paul Thomas Anderson, Steven Soderbergh, and Richard Linklater have been called Generation X filmmakers. Smith is best known for his View Askewniverse films, the flagship being &quot;Clerks&quot;, which is set in New Jersey circa 1994 and focuses on two convenience-store clerks in their twenties. Linklater&#x27;s &quot;Slacker&quot; similarly explores young adult characters interested in philosophizing.

While not a member of Gen X himself, director John Hughes has been recognized as having created classic 1980s teen films with early Gen X characters which &quot;an entire generation took ownership of&quot;, including &quot;The Breakfast Club&quot;, &quot;Sixteen Candles&quot;, &quot;Weird Science&quot;, &quot;Pretty in Pink&quot;, and &quot;Ferris Bueller&#x27;s Day Off&quot;.

In France, a new movement emerged, the &quot;Cinéma du look&quot;, spearheaded by filmmakers Luc Besson, Jean-Jacques Beineix, and Leos Carax. Although not Gen Xers themselves, &quot;Subway&quot; (1985), &quot;37°2 le matin&quot; (English: &quot;Betty Blue&quot;; 1986), and &quot;Mauvais Sang&quot; (1986) sought to capture on screen the generation&#x27;s malaise, sense of entrapment, and desire to escape.

====Franchise mega sequels====
The birth of franchise mega-sequels in the science fiction, fantasy, and horror fiction genres, such as the epic space opera &quot;Star Wars&quot; and the &quot;Halloween&quot; franchise, had a notable cultural influence.

===Television===
The Netflix science-fiction drama series &quot;Stranger Things&quot; is a popular example of television both using and evoking nostalgia for the 1980s. It was popular with Generation Z as a way to experience what their Gen X parents experienced in their youth. Music featured in Stranger Things such as Kate Bush&#x27;s Running Up That Hill made a comeback. Other songs that gained popularity from the show include Metallica&#x27;s &quot;Master of Puppets&quot;, The Clash&#x27;s &quot;Should I Stay or Should I Go&quot;, Limahl&#x27;s &quot;Never Ending Story&quot;, The Police&#x27;s &quot;Every Breath You Take&quot;, Cyndi Lauper&#x27;s &quot;Time After Time&quot;, Madonna&#x27;s &quot;Material Girl&quot;, Toto&#x27;s &quot;Africa&quot;, REO Speedwagon&#x27;s &quot;Can&#x27;t Fight This Feeling&quot;, Corey Hart&#x27;s &quot;Sunglasses at Night&quot; and &quot;Never Surrender&quot;, Peter Gabriel&#x27;s cover of David Bowie&#x27;s &quot;Heroes&quot;, Musical Youth&#x27;s &quot;Pass the Dutchie&quot;, and Journey&#x27;s &quot;Separate Ways (Worlds Apart)&quot;.

===Literature===
The literature of early Gen Xers is often dark and introspective. In the U.S., authors such as Elizabeth Wurtzel, David Foster Wallace, Bret Easton Ellis, and Douglas Coupland captured the generation&#x27;s zeitgeist. In France, Michel Houellebecq and Frédéric Beigbeder rank among major novelists whose work reflects the cohort&#x27;s dissatisfaction and melancholy. In the UK, Alex Garland, author of &quot;The Beach&quot; (1996), added to the genre.

==Health problems==
While previous research indicated that the likelihood of heart attacks was declining among Americans aged 35 to 74, a 2018 study published in the American Heart Association&#x27;s journal &quot;Circulation&quot; found that this did not apply to the younger half of that cohort (controlling for age, Generation X have not seen a reduction in heart attack risk versus previous generations). Data from 28,000 patients from across the U.S. who were hospitalized for heart attacks between 1995 and 2014 showed that a growing proportion were between the ages of 35 and 54. The proportion of heart-attack patients in this age group at the end of the study was 32%, up from 27% at the start of the study. This increase is most pronounced among women, for whom the number rose from 21% to 31%. Many of those who had heart attacks also had high blood pressure, diabetes, and chronic kidney disease. These changes have been faster for women than for men. Experts suggest a number of reasons for this. Conditions such as coronary artery disease are traditionally viewed as a man&#x27;s problem, and so female patients are not considered high-risk. More often than in previous generations, Generation X women are both the primary caretakers of their families and full-time employees, reducing time for self-care.

==Offspring==
Generation X are usually the parents of Generation Z, and sometimes Millennials. Jason Dorsey, who works for the Center of Generational Kinetics, observed that like their parents from Generation X, members of Generation Z tend to be autonomous and pessimistic. They need validation less than Millennials and typically become financially literate at an earlier age, as many of their parents bore the full brunt of the Great Recession.

==See also==

* Generation Jones
* Gray ceiling
* List of generations
* MTV Generation
* Xennials
==References==
==External links==

*&quot;Generation X Goes Global: Mapping a Youth Culture in Motion&quot; , Christine Henseler, Ed.; 2012
*&quot;Generation X&#x27;s journey from jaded to sated&quot; – &quot;Salon&quot;, 1 October 2013
*&quot;Gen X Today&quot;—2016 documentary by Viacom International Media Networks</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q379689" start="0" end="12" title="Generation X" label="Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q379689" start="33" end="38" title="Generation X" label="Gen X"/>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="47" end="58" title="Demography" label="demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303415" start="59" end="65" title="Cohort (statistics)" label="cohort"/>
<link wikidata="Q797819" start="80" end="92" title="Baby Boomers" label="Baby Boomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q277633" start="107" end="118" title="Millennials" label="Millennials"/>
<link wikidata="Q213381" start="257" end="267" title="generation" label="generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345528" start="343" end="354" title="United States Census" label="U.S. Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="400" end="413" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044693" start="471" end="488" title="Silent Generation" label="Silent Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987589" start="564" end="576" title="Generation Z" label="Generation Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412097" start="692" end="700" title="Latchkey kid" label="Latchkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908509" start="869" end="889" title="free-range parenting" label="free-range parenting"/>
<link wikidata="Q93190" start="902" end="909" title="divorce" label="divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861009" start="1125" end="1139" title="MTV Generation" label="MTV Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="1166" end="1185" title="MTV" label="music video channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q630800" start="1218" end="1225" title="slacker" label="slacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="1392" end="1408" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="1410" end="1417" title="Hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="1419" end="1423" title="Punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q598929" start="1425" end="1434" title="post-punk" label="post-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q645767" start="1436" end="1440" title="rave" label="rave"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="1446" end="1457" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="1522" end="1528" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q188534" start="1530" end="1539" title="grindcore" label="grindcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="1673" end="1689" title="independent film" label="independent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q34508" start="1710" end="1715" title="video" label="video"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="1911" end="1920" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1928" end="1940" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="1949" end="1961" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="1975" end="1982" title="Central Europe" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="1987" end="2001" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="2032" end="2042" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="2162" end="2174" title="conservatism" label="conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="2179" end="2190" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q152524" start="2602" end="2613" title="Robert Capa" label="Robert Capa"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2736" end="2748" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5880356" start="2817" end="2824" title="Holiday (magazine)" label="Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q73437" start="2940" end="2950" title="Billy Idol" label="Billy Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157004" start="2984" end="2998" title="Generation X (band)" label="punk rock band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994951" start="3105" end="3117" title="Generation X (1964 book)" label="Generation X"/>
<link wikidata="Q322060" start="3354" end="3370" title="Douglas Coupland" label="Douglas Coupland"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3395" end="3441" title="Generation X: Tales for an Accelerated Culture" label="Generation X: Tales for an Accelerated Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914221" start="3642" end="3660" title="Vancouver Magazine" label="Vancouver Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397350" start="4322" end="4334" title="Paul Fussell" label="Paul Fussell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622335" start="4534" end="4549" title="Strauss–Howe generational theory" label="William Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q923925" start="4690" end="4699" title="Malcolm X (1992 film)" label="Malcolm X"/>
<link wikidata="Q6988751" start="4884" end="4893" title="Neil Howe" label="Neil Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q234105" start="5236" end="5251" title="Lost Generation" label="Lost Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412097" start="5253" end="5265" title="latchkey kid" label="latchkey kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861009" start="5272" end="5286" title="MTV Generation" label="MTV Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="5339" end="5360" title="American independence" label="American independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722724" start="5453" end="5480" title="post–World War II baby boom" label="post–World War II baby-boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q285897" start="5745" end="5760" title="Total fertility rate" label="fertility rates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="5921" end="5940" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q201296" start="6505" end="6508" title="The Pew Charitable Trusts" label="Pew"/>
<link wikidata="Q32979574" start="6565" end="6576" title="Jean Twenge" label="Jean Twenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q929154" start="6791" end="6812" title="Brookings Institution" label="Brookings Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440396" start="6887" end="6913" title="Federal Reserve Board" label="U.S. Federal Reserve Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824618" start="6934" end="6975" title="Social Security Administration" label="U.S. Social Security Administration (SSA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="7197" end="7215" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="7232" end="7251" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q65358" start="7318" end="7324" title="Gallup, Inc." label="Gallup"/>
<link wikidata="Q14270642" start="7326" end="7335" title="Bloomberg News" label="Bloomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q286707" start="7343" end="7359" title="Business Insider" label="Business Insider"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="7377" end="7383" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="7411" end="7415" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972850" start="7546" end="7586" title="Joint Center for Housing Studies" label="Harvard Joint Center for Housing Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027769" start="7822" end="7843" title="Resolution Foundation" label="Resolution Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q488048" start="7906" end="7928" title="PricewaterhouseCoopers" label="PricewaterhouseCoopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248095" start="7946" end="7975" title="professional services networks" label="professional services network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622335" start="8173" end="8202" title="William Strauss and Neil Howe" label="William Strauss and Neil Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q20979265" start="8341" end="8355" title="Jeff Gordinier" label="Jeff Gordinier"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972850" start="8499" end="8539" title="Joint Center for Housing Studies" label="Harvard Joint Center for Housing Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370315" start="9318" end="9330" title="George Barna" label="George Barna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233723" start="9585" end="9595" title="David Foot" label="David Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532571" start="9947" end="9963" title="Generation Jones" label="Generation Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134195" start="10010" end="10014" title="Cusper" label="cusp"/>
<link wikidata="Q24901995" start="10083" end="10091" title="Xennials" label="Xennials"/>
<link wikidata="Q30611746" start="10186" end="10198" title="The Oregon Trail (series)" label="Oregon Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345528" start="10441" end="10447" title="United States Census" label="Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972850" start="10818" end="10850" title="Joint Center for Housing Studies" label="Joint Center for Housing Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="10854" end="10872" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="11158" end="11180" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q817281" start="11509" end="11527" title="birth control pill" label="birth control pill"/>
<link wikidata="Q18000" start="11962" end="11977" title="age of majority" label="age of majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="12105" end="12113" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q300950" start="12214" end="12225" title="Roe v. Wade" label="Roe v. Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806189" start="12269" end="12300" title="Timeline of reproductive rights legislation" label="reproductive rights legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044693" start="12955" end="12972" title="Silent Generation" label="Silent Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q93190" start="13481" end="13488" title="divorce" label="divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q198827" start="13756" end="13774" title="self-actualization" label="self-actualization"/>
<link wikidata="Q465467" start="14411" end="14428" title="sexual revolution" label="sexual revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q193577" start="15070" end="15087" title="Kramer vs. Kramer" label="Kramer vs. Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q352325" start="15132" end="15144" title="Avery Corman" label="Avery Corman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412097" start="15510" end="15524" title="latchkey child" label="latchkey child"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="16541" end="16547" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300744" start="16636" end="16646" title="Reagan Era" label="Reagan Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="16658" end="16671" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="16736" end="16771" title="Laissez-faire" label="&amp;quot;laissez-faire&amp;quot; economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q939290" start="16919" end="16933" title="Share repurchase" label="stock buybacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326569" start="16975" end="16996" title="early 1980s recession" label="early 1980s recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141363" start="17570" end="17578" title="Medicaid" label="Medicaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q559392" start="17657" end="17665" title="Medicare (United States)" label="Medicare"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184791" start="17670" end="17685" title="Social Security (United States)" label="Social Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174268" start="17789" end="17806" title="David Durenberger" label="David Durenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758527" start="18095" end="18109" title="crack epidemic" label="crack epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q330694" start="18252" end="18267" title="Crack cocaine" label="Crack addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774158" start="18628" end="18647" title="Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986" label="Anti-Drug Abuse Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374310" start="18666" end="18694" title="Mandatory sentencing" label="mandatory minimum sentencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="18801" end="18805" title="HIV/AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="19110" end="19114" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q192280" start="19224" end="19237" title="Sex education" label="Sex education"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="19445" end="19462" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q208305" start="19591" end="19600" title="Commodore International" label="Commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q207922" start="19602" end="19607" title="Atari" label="Atari"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="19613" end="19618" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="19647" end="19652" title="8-bit computing" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q194368" start="19657" end="19672" title="16-bit computing" label="16-bit machines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="19785" end="19796" title="floppy disk" label="floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q335185" start="19798" end="19807" title="zip drive" label="zip drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982" start="19813" end="19819" title="CD-ROM" label="CD-ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q967762" start="19911" end="19947" title="United States Secretary of Education" label="United States Secretary of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q382517" start="19948" end="19959" title="Terrel Bell" label="Terrel Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391337" start="20124" end="20157" title="Computing for All" label="Plan Informatique pour Tous (IPT)"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="20290" end="20309" title="Jim Crow laws" label="the racist Jim Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="20422" end="20443" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382217" start="20492" end="20497" title="Desegregation busing" label="bused"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772686" start="20508" end="20519" title="Racial integration" label="integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133007" start="20680" end="20688" title="Title IX" label="Title IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247168" start="20805" end="20810" title="Roots (1977 miniseries)" label="Roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q296069" start="20840" end="20850" title="Alex Haley" label="Alex Haley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091703" start="22393" end="22421" title="savings and loan association" label="savings and loan association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210094" start="22458" end="22471" title="home mortgage" label="home mortgage"/>
<link wikidata="Q9051832" start="22934" end="22944" title="offshoring" label="offshoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="23115" end="23126" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="23135" end="23152" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="23197" end="23214" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="23273" end="23283" title="Neoliberalism" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584003" start="23581" end="23594" title="greed is good" label="greed is good"/>
<link wikidata="Q72879" start="23611" end="23617" title="yuppie" label="yuppie"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="23805" end="23824" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="Revolutions of 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q69163529" start="23875" end="23898" title="fall of the Berlin Wall" label="fall of the Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="23967" end="23983" title="capitalist model" label="capitalist model"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="24058" end="24062" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q332154" start="24332" end="24347" title="Twentysomething (term)" label="twentysomething"/>
<link wikidata="Q607131" start="24358" end="24365" title="MetLife" label="MetLife"/>
<link wikidata="Q79784" start="24424" end="24431" title="Friends" label="Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q309406" start="24543" end="24552" title="Apathy" label="apathetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q630800" start="24565" end="24573" title="slackers" label="slackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q40035" start="24640" end="24657" title="Richard Linklater" label="Richard Linklater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574019" start="24714" end="24721" title="Slacker (film)" label="Slacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q47100" start="24964" end="24975" title="Ben Stiller" label="Ben Stiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423849" start="24999" end="25012" title="Reality Bites" label="Reality Bites"/>
<link wikidata="Q211679" start="25046" end="25055" title="zeitgeist" label="zeitgeist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="25328" end="25347" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118918" start="25463" end="25484" title="General Social Survey" label="General Social Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048982" start="26016" end="26029" title="cohort effect" label="cohort effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q489" start="26179" end="26189" title="Bill Maher" label="Bill Maher"/>
<link wikidata="Q311382" start="26269" end="26281" title="Billy Corgan" label="Billy Corgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q184217" start="26296" end="26317" title="the Smashing Pumpkins" label="the Smashing Pumpkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="26488" end="26500" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="26754" end="26758" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q129238" start="27003" end="27020" title="Startup company" label="startup companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="27240" end="27256" title="entrepreneurship" label="entrepreneurship"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="27273" end="27291" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005490" start="27404" end="27417" title="self-employed" label="self-employed"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="27458" end="27482" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="Internal Revenue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909685" start="27492" end="27500" title="W-2 form" label="W-2 form"/>
<link wikidata="Q22905934" start="27509" end="27518" title="Form 1099" label="Form 1099"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="27549" end="27557" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q79721" start="27780" end="27794" title="dot-com bubble" label="dot-com bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="28017" end="28020" title="AOL" label="AOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="28035" end="28046" title="Web browser" label="Web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q6845822" start="28350" end="28360" title="Mike Males" label="Mike Males"/>
<link wikidata="Q27995878" start="28898" end="28921" title="Greatest Generation" label="World War II generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="29337" end="29367" title="September 11 terrorist attacks" label="September 11 terrorist attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q638603" start="29540" end="29565" title="United Airlines Flight 93" label="United Airlines Flight 93"/>
<link wikidata="Q49800" start="29670" end="29680" title="cohabitation" label="cohabiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q286261" start="29861" end="29887" title="Seattle Post-Intelligencer" label="Seattle Post-Intelligencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019293" start="30023" end="30051" title="Greensboro News &amp;amp; Record" label="Greensboro News &amp;amp; Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241" start="30111" end="30121" title="patriotism" label="patriotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="30256" end="30269" title="War on Terror" label="War on Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q763264" start="30806" end="30823" title="work-life balance" label="work-life balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="30863" end="30866" title="NIH" label="NIH"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969362" start="30867" end="30870" title="National Institute on Aging" label="NIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796622" start="31199" end="31203" title="mean" label="mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q226995" start="31239" end="31245" title="median" label="median"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="31489" end="31501" title="Pew Research" label="Pew Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="32050" end="32063" title="Individualism" label="Individualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q20979265" start="32291" end="32305" title="Jeff Gordinier" label="Jeff Gordinier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914973" start="32340" end="32350" title="dark horse" label="dark horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="32496" end="32502" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q52" start="32504" end="32513" title="Wikipedia" label="Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="32515" end="32525" title="Amazon.com" label="Amazon.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="32531" end="32538" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q19837" start="32871" end="32881" title="Steve Jobs" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q277351" start="33020" end="33043" title="Harvard Business Review" label="Harvard Business Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="33707" end="33723" title="entrepreneurship" label="entrepreneurship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469903" start="33956" end="33966" title="Sage Group" label="Sage Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q129238" start="34048" end="34056" title="Startup company" label="startups"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34268" end="34321" title="Issues in higher education in the United States#Financial value of degrees" label="higher education was broadly financially remunerative"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383730" start="34336" end="34369" title="Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis" label="Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647081" start="34421" end="34448" title="Survey of Consumer Finances" label="Survey of Consumer Finances"/>
<link wikidata="Q65046543" start="34780" end="34802" title="Cost and financing issues facing higher education in the United States" label="rising cost of college"/>
<link wikidata="Q141212" start="34955" end="34975" title="Postgraduate education" label="postgraduate degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352982" start="35198" end="35216" title="helicopter parents" label="helicopter parents"/>
<link wikidata="Q511243" start="35581" end="35627" title="Corporation for National and Community Service" label="Corporation for National and Community Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079418" start="36060" end="36067" title="cursive" label="cursive"/>
<link wikidata="Q49845" start="36115" end="36119" title="mail" label="mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q21050182" start="36158" end="36163" title="Ghosting (behavior)" label="ghost"/>
<link wikidata="Q213660" start="36266" end="36274" title="LinkedIn" label="LinkedIn"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="36279" end="36287" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q333618" start="36331" end="36339" title="Snapchat" label="Snapchat"/>
<link wikidata="Q48938223" start="36344" end="36350" title="TikTok" label="TikTok"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="37399" end="37402" title="Information and communications technology" label="ICT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697466" start="38040" end="38075" title="Viacom International Media Networks" label="Viacom International Media Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q214346" start="38080" end="38086" title="Viacom (2005–present)" label="Viacom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332059" start="38295" end="38309" title="midlife crisis" label="midlife crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="38424" end="38430" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="38566" end="38575" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="38609" end="38640" title="Dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="Dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="38725" end="38732" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q155059" start="38737" end="38745" title="Leninism" label="Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="38834" end="38851" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q167634" start="38871" end="38882" title="Perestroika" label="Perestroika"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="38970" end="39005" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="39248" end="39264" title="Marxism–Leninism" label="Marxism–Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743" start="39830" end="39874" title="May 68" label="French strikes and violent riots of May 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038" start="40191" end="40210" title="François Mitterrand" label="François Mitterrand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40612" end="40632" title="Baccalauréat#Baccalauréat général" label="baccalauréat général"/>
<link wikidata="Q56348298" start="40730" end="40753" title="Licence Master Doctorat" label="licence-master-doctorat"/>
<link wikidata="Q911435" start="40793" end="40797" title="Diplôme d&amp;#x27;études universitaires générales" label="DEUG"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785146" start="40809" end="40813" title="Diplome d&amp;#x27;Etudes Superieures Specialisees" label="DESS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785146" start="40818" end="40821" title="Diplome d&amp;#x27;Etudes Approfondies" label="DEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="41074" end="41086" title="Irish people" label="Irish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="41135" end="41147" title="The Troubles" label="The Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q176494" start="41162" end="41180" title="economic recession" label="economic recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q855736" start="41207" end="41219" title="Celtic Tiger" label="Celtic Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q52063097" start="41331" end="41348" title="Darach Ó Séaghdha" label="Darach Ó Séaghdha"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="41527" end="41540" title="contraception" label="contraception"/>
<link wikidata="Q93190" start="41545" end="41552" title="divorce" label="divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058587" start="41837" end="41850" title="Northern Ireland peace process" label="Peace Process"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="41893" end="41906" title="EU membership" label="EU membership"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574155" start="41930" end="41938" title="Irish diaspora" label="emigrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189045" start="42064" end="42071" title="Britpop" label="Britpop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662148" start="42073" end="42084" title="Celtic rock" label="Celtic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7482056" start="42090" end="42102" title="Irish traditional music" label="trad revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366945" start="42110" end="42120" title="Father Ted" label="Father Ted"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="42132" end="42151" title="1990 FIFA World Cup" label="1990 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q645767" start="42156" end="42160" title="rave" label="rave"/>
<link wikidata="Q40185" start="42187" end="42204" title="The Divine Comedy" label="The Divine Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532584" start="42216" end="42230" title="Generation Sex" label="Generation Sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064" start="42265" end="42273" title="hedonism" label="hedonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567091" start="42336" end="42352" title="David McWilliams (economist)" label="David McWilliams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757765" start="42375" end="42425" title="The Pope&amp;#x27;s Children" label="The Pope&amp;#x27;s Children: Ireland&amp;#x27;s New Elite"/>
<link wikidata="Q17984806" start="42491" end="42513" title="Pope John Paul II&amp;#x27;s visit to Ireland" label="papal visit to Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q610548" start="42528" end="42537" title="baby boom" label="baby boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="42611" end="42629" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="1840s Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="42747" end="42762" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333434" start="42944" end="42980" title="Economic and Social Research Council" label="Economic and Social Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="43077" end="43094" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247283" start="43395" end="43415" title="Winter of Discontent" label="Winter of Discontent"/>
<link wikidata="Q815436" start="43438" end="43450" title="the Troubles" label="the Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="43470" end="43486" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105865" start="43626" end="43644" title="post-war consensus" label="post-war consensus"/>
<link wikidata="Q967098" start="43711" end="43725" title="grammar school" label="grammar school"/>
<link wikidata="Q682697" start="43833" end="43853" title="comprehensive school" label="comprehensive school"/>
<link wikidata="Q511009" start="43856" end="43876" title="Compulsory education" label="Compulsory education"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="44062" end="44075" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869278" start="44167" end="44186" title="vocational training" label="vocational training"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091069" start="44685" end="44722" title="Further and Higher Education Act 1992" label="Further and Higher Education Act 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156248" start="45453" end="45470" title="England and Wales" label="England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812278" start="45882" end="45891" title="Workfront" label="Workfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426207" start="46122" end="46132" title="work ethic" label="work ethic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6065484" start="46297" end="46307" title="Ipsos MORI" label="Ipsos MORI"/>
<link wikidata="Q918472" start="46328" end="46332" title="1987 United Kingdom general election" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q543609" start="46337" end="46341" title="1992 United Kingdom general election" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215622" start="46371" end="46403" title="List of United Kingdom general elections" label="United Kingdom general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="46514" end="46526" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="46656" end="46669" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389478" start="46686" end="46706" title="SDP–Liberal Alliance" label="SDP–Liberal Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="46800" end="46817" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q590740" start="47548" end="47552" title="2001 United Kingdom general election" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q428598" start="47557" end="47561" title="2005 United Kingdom general election" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052149" start="47741" end="47762" title="2017 United Kingdom general election" label="2017 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="47931" end="47935" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586935" start="47940" end="47944" title="2015 United Kingdom general election" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="48009" end="48038" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="2016 EU membership referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052149" start="48043" end="48064" title="2017 United Kingdom general election" label="2017 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="48632" end="48643" title="West German" label="West German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429736" start="48674" end="48688" title="Florian Illies" label="Florian Illies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="48780" end="48791" title="East German" label="East German"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="49077" end="49089" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="49210" end="49219" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="49315" end="49318" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="49382" end="49394" title="music videos" label="music videos"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861009" start="49437" end="49451" title="MTV Generation" label="MTV Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="49487" end="49503" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="49551" end="49557" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="49568" end="49575" title="Hip hop music" label="Hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107" start="49666" end="49678" title="Tupac Shakur" label="Tupac Shakur"/>
<link wikidata="Q216856" start="49680" end="49686" title="N.W.A." label="N.W.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q179157" start="49692" end="49712" title="The Notorious B.I.G." label="The Notorious B.I.G."/>
<link wikidata="Q483407" start="49804" end="49811" title="Ramones" label="Ramones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508520" start="49813" end="49850" title="Johnny Thunders and the Heartbreakers" label="Johnny Thunders and the Heartbreakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q645464" start="49856" end="49869" title="the Dictators" label="the Dictators"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="49892" end="49903" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q125603" start="49905" end="49914" title="the Clash" label="the Clash"/>
<link wikidata="Q940536" start="49916" end="49926" title="The Damned (band)" label="the Damned"/>
<link wikidata="Q939329" start="49932" end="49941" title="Buzzcocks" label="Buzzcocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635619" start="49969" end="49979" title="The Saints (Australian band)" label="the Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="49983" end="49991" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q153946" start="50223" end="50238" title="punk subculture" label="punk subculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423086" start="50306" end="50338" title="Punk fashion" label="styles of clothing and adornment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131285" start="50497" end="50526" title="Punk ideologies" label="anti-authoritarian ideologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532571" start="51023" end="51039" title="Generation Jones" label="Generation Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="51266" end="51279" title="hardcore punk" label="hardcore punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q81509" start="51287" end="51299" title="Minor Threat" label="Minor Threat"/>
<link wikidata="Q383615" start="51302" end="51313" title="street punk" label="street punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q117684" start="51321" end="51334" title="the Exploited" label="the Exploited"/>
<link wikidata="Q265222" start="51336" end="51340" title="NOFX" label="NOFX"/>
<link wikidata="Q486365" start="51346" end="51358" title="anarcho-punk" label="anarcho-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141308" start="51366" end="51375" title="Subhumans (British band)" label="Subhumans"/>
<link wikidata="Q598929" start="51598" end="51607" title="post-punk" label="post-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q187760" start="51609" end="51617" title="new wave music" label="new wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q842324" start="51628" end="51637" title="indie pop" label="indie pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="51639" end="51655" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q181861" start="51661" end="51671" title="noise rock" label="noise rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q487914" start="51831" end="51839" title="pop punk" label="pop punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q47871" start="51873" end="51882" title="Green Day" label="Green Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q390590" start="51884" end="51890" title="Rancid (band)" label="Rancid"/>
<link wikidata="Q157041" start="51892" end="51905" title="The Offspring" label="The Offspring"/>
<link wikidata="Q482477" start="51911" end="51920" title="Blink-182" label="Blink-182"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="52074" end="52083" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="52088" end="52099" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q187760" start="52296" end="52304" title="New wave music" label="new wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q485395" start="52306" end="52310" title="Gothic rock" label="goth"/>
<link wikidata="Q597240" start="52338" end="52350" title="New Romantic" label="New Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="52391" end="52407" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="52411" end="52417" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="52470" end="52487" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q27881700" start="52580" end="52587" title="Vulture.com" label="Vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412097" start="52642" end="52655" title="latchkey kids" label="latchkey kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q427917" start="52672" end="52683" title="Jack Endino" label="Jack Endino"/>
<link wikidata="Q80968" start="52829" end="52839" title="nihilism" label="nihilistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522565" start="52841" end="52846" title="angst" label="angst"/>
<link wikidata="Q545825" start="52904" end="52921" title="social alienation" label="social alienation"/>
<link wikidata="Q309406" start="52936" end="52942" title="apathy" label="apathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="52950" end="52962" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="53095" end="53107" title="homelessness" label="homelessness"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="53109" end="53116" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="53118" end="53122" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="53169" end="53177" title="misogyny" label="misogyny"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="53412" end="53419" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="53421" end="53430" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q484255" start="53432" end="53447" title="Alice in Chains" label="Alice in Chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q329270" start="53449" end="53468" title="Stone Temple Pilots" label="Stone Temple Pilots"/>
<link wikidata="Q174817" start="53474" end="53485" title="Soundgarden" label="Soundgarden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="53541" end="53554" title="hip hop music" label="hip hop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q683705" start="53635" end="53661" title="New York metropolitan area" label="New York metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q438503" start="53854" end="53866" title="experimental hip hop" label="experimental"/>
<link wikidata="Q596446" start="53875" end="53883" title="Sampling (music)" label="sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q52440" start="53936" end="53945" title="LL Cool J" label="LL Cool J"/>
<link wikidata="Q159351" start="53947" end="53957" title="Run–D.M.C." label="Run–D.M.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q209182" start="53959" end="53971" title="Public Enemy (group)" label="Public Enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q214039" start="53977" end="53989" title="Beastie Boys" label="Beastie Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q432552" start="53991" end="53998" title="KRS-One" label="KRS-One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351122" start="54000" end="54019" title="Eric B. &amp;amp; Rakim" label="Eric B. &amp;amp; Rakim"/>
<link wikidata="Q685595" start="54021" end="54031" title="De La Soul" label="De La Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q535972" start="54033" end="54047" title="Big Daddy Kane" label="Big Daddy Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q291286" start="54049" end="54053" title="EPMD" label="EPMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q300602" start="54055" end="54075" title="A Tribe Called Quest" label="A Tribe Called Quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q52463" start="54077" end="54089" title="Wu-Tang Clan" label="Wu-Tang Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q708620" start="54091" end="54101" title="Slick Rick" label="Slick Rick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252866" start="54103" end="54126" title="Ultramagnetic MC&amp;#x27;s" label="Ultramagnetic MC&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q42023" start="54136" end="54151" title="Jungle Brothers" label="Jungle Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q753679" start="54258" end="54269" title="gangsta rap" label="gangsta rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q309941" start="54286" end="54291" title="Ice-T" label="Ice-T"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519986" start="54293" end="54302" title="Geto Boys" label="Geto Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q216856" start="54308" end="54313" title="N.W.A" label="N.W.A"/>
<link wikidata="Q3709211" start="54319" end="54327" title="dirty rap" label="sex raps"/>
<link wikidata="Q222856" start="54331" end="54342" title="2 Live Crew" label="2 Live Crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q158223" start="54347" end="54356" title="Too Short" label="Too Short"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572585" start="54362" end="54382" title="pop rap" label="party-oriented music"/>
<link wikidata="Q425641" start="54399" end="54415" title="Kid &amp;#x27;n Play" label="Kid &amp;#x27;n Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q775830" start="54417" end="54429" title="The Fat Boys" label="The Fat Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154136" start="54431" end="54467" title="DJ Jazzy Jeff &amp;amp; The Fresh Prince" label="DJ Jazzy Jeff &amp;amp; The Fresh Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q295923" start="54473" end="54482" title="MC Hammer" label="MC Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q969663" start="54774" end="54783" title="Conscious hip hop" label="Conscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q969663" start="54788" end="54805" title="political hip hop" label="political hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720299" start="55230" end="55247" title="black nationalism" label="black nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q209182" start="55366" end="55378" title="Public Enemy (group)" label="Public Enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982366" start="55415" end="55430" title="Fight the Power (Public Enemy song)" label="Fight the Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q152018" start="55530" end="55536" title="ghetto" label="ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="55542" end="55559" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="55677" end="55687" title="Independent film" label="indie film"/>
<link wikidata="Q489831" start="55828" end="55839" title="Kevin Smith" label="Kevin Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772" start="55841" end="55858" title="Quentin Tarantino" label="Quentin Tarantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q193628" start="55860" end="55873" title="Sofia Coppola" label="Sofia Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q223687" start="55875" end="55887" title="Wes Anderson" label="Wes Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q363005" start="55889" end="55903" title="John Singleton" label="John Singleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q259913" start="55905" end="55916" title="Spike Jonze" label="Spike Jonze"/>
<link wikidata="Q184903" start="55918" end="55931" title="David Fincher" label="David Fincher"/>
<link wikidata="Q25191" start="55933" end="55950" title="Christopher Nolan" label="Christopher Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25132" start="55952" end="55972" title="Paul Thomas Anderson" label="Paul Thomas Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q103917" start="55974" end="55991" title="Steven Soderbergh" label="Steven Soderbergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q40035" start="55997" end="56014" title="Richard Linklater" label="Richard Linklater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140919" start="56085" end="56102" title="View Askewniverse" label="View Askewniverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q747877" start="56135" end="56141" title="Clerks (1994 film)" label="Clerks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574019" start="56273" end="56280" title="Slacker (film)" label="Slacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="56343" end="56357" title="philosophizing" label="philosophizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q311263" start="56406" end="56417" title="John Hughes (filmmaker)" label="John Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146335" start="56470" end="56479" title="teen film" label="teen film"/>
<link wikidata="Q499152" start="56583" end="56601" title="The Breakfast Club" label="The Breakfast Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q572616" start="56615" end="56630" title="Sixteen Candles" label="Sixteen Candles"/>
<link wikidata="Q785031" start="56644" end="56657" title="Weird Science (film)" label="Weird Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q777564" start="56671" end="56685" title="Pretty in Pink" label="Pretty in Pink"/>
<link wikidata="Q498906" start="56703" end="56732" title="Ferris Bueller&amp;#x27;s Day Off" label="Ferris Bueller&amp;#x27;s Day Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121159" start="56786" end="56800" title="Cinéma du look" label="Cinéma du look"/>
<link wikidata="Q484779" start="56834" end="56844" title="Luc Besson" label="Luc Besson"/>
<link wikidata="Q505626" start="56846" end="56866" title="Jean-Jacques Beineix" label="Jean-Jacques Beineix"/>
<link wikidata="Q737693" start="56872" end="56882" title="Leos Carax" label="Leos Carax"/>
<link wikidata="Q634729" start="56924" end="56930" title="Subway (film)" label="Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q850338" start="56987" end="56997" title="Betty Blue" label="Betty Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275853" start="57022" end="57034" title="Mauvais Sang" label="Mauvais Sang"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="57225" end="57240" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="57242" end="57249" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="57255" end="57269" title="horror fiction" label="horror fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q468478" start="57295" end="57306" title="space opera" label="space opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="57313" end="57322" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364022" start="57343" end="57352" title="Halloween (franchise)" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="57426" end="57433" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q19798734" start="57469" end="57484" title="Stranger Things" label="Stranger Things"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57549" end="57572" title="1980s nostalgia#Generation Z" label="nostalgia for the 1980s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987589" start="57594" end="57606" title="Generation Z" label="Generation Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q48792173" start="57683" end="57716" title="Music of Stranger Things" label="Music featured in Stranger Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q636" start="57725" end="57734" title="Kate Bush" label="Kate Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q56043480" start="57742" end="57762" title="Running Up That Hill" label="Running Up That Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="57837" end="57846" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q383630" start="57860" end="57877" title="Master of Puppets (song)" label="Master of Puppets"/>
<link wikidata="Q125603" start="57885" end="57894" title="The Clash" label="The Clash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608170" start="57908" end="57936" title="Should I Stay or Should I Go" label="Should I Stay or Should I Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q921176" start="57944" end="57950" title="Limahl" label="Limahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413048" start="57964" end="57982" title="The NeverEnding Story (song)" label="Never Ending Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q178095" start="57990" end="58000" title="The Police" label="The Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330171" start="58014" end="58035" title="Every Breath You Take" label="Every Breath You Take"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545" start="58043" end="58055" title="Cyndi Lauper" label="Cyndi Lauper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808348" start="58069" end="58084" title="Time After Time (Cyndi Lauper song)" label="Time After Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="58092" end="58099" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q654228" start="58113" end="58126" title="Material Girl" label="Material Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q207472" start="58134" end="58138" title="Toto (band)" label="Toto"/>
<link wikidata="Q383842" start="58152" end="58158" title="Africa (Toto song)" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q845084" start="58166" end="58180" title="REO Speedwagon" label="REO Speedwagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034041" start="58194" end="58223" title="Can&amp;#x27;t Fight This Feeling" label="Can&amp;#x27;t Fight This Feeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q709024" start="58231" end="58241" title="Corey Hart (singer)" label="Corey Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7640229" start="58255" end="58274" title="Sunglasses at Night" label="Sunglasses at Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004286" start="58291" end="58306" title="Never Surrender (Corey Hart song)" label="Never Surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q175195" start="58314" end="58327" title="Peter Gabriel" label="Peter Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="58344" end="58355" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q701655" start="58369" end="58375" title="&amp;quot;Heroes&amp;quot; (David Bowie song)" label="Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q744781" start="58383" end="58396" title="Musical Youth" label="Musical Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q144464" start="58410" end="58426" title="Pass the Dutchie" label="Pass the Dutchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q464749" start="58438" end="58445" title="Journey (band)" label="Journey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58459" end="58487" title="Separate Ways (Worlds Apart)#Stranger Things version" label="Separate Ways (Worlds Apart)"/>
<link wikidata="Q442854" start="58608" end="58625" title="Elizabeth Wurtzel" label="Elizabeth Wurtzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q313246" start="58627" end="58647" title="David Foster Wallace" label="David Foster Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q241583" start="58649" end="58666" title="Bret Easton Ellis" label="Bret Easton Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q322060" start="58672" end="58688" title="Douglas Coupland" label="Douglas Coupland"/>
<link wikidata="Q103114" start="58742" end="58760" title="Michel Houellebecq" label="Michel Houellebecq"/>
<link wikidata="Q314972" start="58765" end="58783" title="Frédéric Beigbeder" label="Frédéric Beigbeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q542634" start="58892" end="58904" title="Alex Garland" label="Alex Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197181" start="58922" end="58931" title="The Beach (novel)" label="The Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="59044" end="59057" title="Myocardial infarction" label="heart attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q464880" start="59133" end="59159" title="American Heart Association" label="American Heart Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q578091" start="59181" end="59192" title="Circulation (journal)" label="Circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="59817" end="59836" title="Hypertension" label="high blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="59838" end="59846" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q736715" start="59852" end="59874" title="chronic kidney disease" label="chronic kidney disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q844935" start="59996" end="60019" title="coronary artery disease" label="coronary artery disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q4519653" start="60276" end="60285" title="self-care" label="self-care"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987589" start="60342" end="60354" title="Generation Z" label="Generation Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="60719" end="60734" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532571" start="60753" end="60769" title="Generation Jones" label="Generation Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598252" start="60772" end="60784" title="Gray ceiling" label="Gray ceiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q213381" start="60787" end="60806" title="List of generations" label="List of generations"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861009" start="60809" end="60823" title="MTV Generation" label="MTV Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q24901995" start="60826" end="60834" title="Xennials" label="Xennials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150423" start="61044" end="61049" title="Salon (website)" label="Salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697466" start="61117" end="61152" title="Viacom International Media Networks" label="Viacom International Media Networks"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11974" wikidata="Q16635" url="?curid=11974" title="Guam">
<text>Guam ( ; ) is an organized, unincorporated territory of the United States in the Micronesia subregion of the western Pacific Ocean. Guam&#x27;s capital is Hagåtña, and the most populous village is Dededo. It is the westernmost point and territory of the United States, reckoned from the geographic center of the U.S. In Oceania, Guam is the largest and southernmost of the Mariana Islands and the largest island in Micronesia. As of 2022, its population was 168,801. Chamorros are its largest ethnic group, but a minority on the multiethnic island. The territory spans and has a population density of .

Indigenous Guamanians are the Chamorro, who are related to the Austronesian peoples of the Malay Archipelago, the Philippines, Taiwan, and Polynesia. But unlike most of its neighbors, the Chamorro language is not classified as a Micronesian or Polynesian language. Rather, like Palauan, it possibly constitutes an independent branch of the Malayo-Polynesian language family. The Chamorro people settled Guam and the Mariana islands approximately 3,500 years ago. Portuguese explorer Ferdinand Magellan, while in the service of Spain, was the first European to visit and claim the island on March 6, 1521. Guam was fully colonized by Spain in 1668. Between the 17th and 19th centuries, Guam was an important stopover for Spanish Manila galleons. During the Spanish–American War, the United States captured Guam on June 21, 1898. Under the 1898 Treaty of Paris, Spain ceded Guam to the U.S. effective April 11, 1899.

Before World War II, Guam was one of five American jurisdictions in the Pacific Ocean, along with Wake Island in Micronesia, American Samoa and Hawaii in Polynesia, and the Philippines. On December 8, 1941, hours after the attack on Pearl Harbor, Guam was captured by the Japanese, who occupied the island for two and a half years before American forces recaptured it on July 21, 1944, which is commemorated there as Liberation Day. Since the 1960s, Guam&#x27;s economy has been supported primarily by tourism and the U.S. military, for which Guam is a major strategic asset. Its future political status has been a matter of significant discussion, with public opinion polls indicating a strong preference for American statehood.

Guam&#x27;s &quot;de facto&quot; motto is &quot;Where America&#x27;s Day Begins&quot;, which refers to the island&#x27;s proximity to the International Date Line. Guam is among the 17 non-self-governing territories listed by the United Nations, and has been a member of the Pacific Community since 1983.

Guam is called by Chamorro speakers, from the word , meaning &#x27;to have&#x27;; its English gloss &#x27;we have&#x27; references the island&#x27;s providing everything needed to live.

== History ==
=== Pre-Contact era ===
Guam, along with the other Mariana Islands, were the first islands settled by humans in Remote Oceania. It was also the first and the longest of the ocean-crossing voyages of the Austronesian peoples, and is separate from the later Polynesian settlement of the rest of Remote Oceania. They were first settled around 1500 to 1400 BC, by migrants departing from the Philippines which was followed by a second migration from the Caroline Islands in the first millennium AD. A third migration wave took place from Island Southeast Asia, likely the Philippines or eastern Indonesia, by 900 AD.

These original settlers of Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands evolved into the Chamorro people, historically known as Chamorros after first contact with the Spaniards. The ancient Chamorro society had four classes: (chiefs), (upper class), (middle class), and (lower class). The were located in the coastal villages, which meant they had the best access to fishing grounds. The were located in the island&#x27;s interior. and rarely communicated with each other. The often used as intermediaries.

There were also &quot; or &quot;, shamans with magical powers and &quot;&#x27;&quot; or &quot;, healers who used different kinds of plants and natural materials to make medicine. Belief in spirits of ancient Chamorros called &quot; still persists as a remnant of pre-European culture. It is believed that &quot; or &quot; are the only ones who can safely harvest plants and other natural materials from their homes or &quot;&quot; without incurring the wrath of the &quot;.&quot; Their society was organized along matrilineal clans.

The Chamorro people raised colonnades of megalithic capped pillars called upon which they built their homes. Latte stones are stone pillars that are found only in the Mariana Islands. They are a recent development in Pre-Contact Chamorro society. The latte-stone was used as a foundation on which thatched huts were built. Latte stones consist of a base shaped from limestone called the and with a capstone, or , made either from a large brain coral or limestone, placed on top. A possible source for these stones, the Rota Latte Stone Quarry, was discovered in 1925 on Rota.

=== Spanish era ===
The first European to travel to Guam was Portuguese navigator Ferdinand Magellan, sailing for the King of Spain, when he sighted the island on March 6, 1521, during his fleet&#x27;s circumnavigation of the globe. Despite Magellan&#x27;s visit, Guam was not officially claimed by Spain until January 26, 1565, by Miguel López de Legazpi. From 1565 to 1815, Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands, the only Spanish outposts in the Pacific Ocean east of the Philippines, were reprovisioning stops for the Manila galleons, a fleet that covered the Pacific trade route between Acapulco and Manila.

Spanish colonization commenced on June 15, 1668, with the arrival of a mission led by Diego Luis de San Vitores, who established the first Catholic church. The islands were part of the Spanish East Indies, and part of the Viceroyalty of New Spain, based in Mexico City. The Spanish-Chamorro Wars on Guam began in 1670 over growing tensions with the Jesuit mission, with the last large-scale uprising in 1683.

Intermittent warfare, plus the typhoons of 1671 and 1693, and in particular the smallpox epidemic of 1688, reduced the Chamorro population from 50,000 to 10,000, and finally to less than 5,000. Up until the late 19th century, Guam was encountered by adventurers and pirates, including Thomas Cavendish, Olivier van Noort, John Eaton, William Dampier, Woodes Rogers, John Clipperton, George Shelvocke and William &quot;Bully&quot; Hayes.

The island became a rest stop for whalers starting in 1823. A devastating typhoon struck the island on August 10, 1848, followed by a severe earthquake on January 25, 1849, which resulted in many refugees from the Caroline Islands, victims of a resultant tsunami. This earthquake was much more powerful than the 8.2 one that occurred on August 8, 1993. After a smallpox epidemic killed 3,644 Guamanians in 1856, Carolinians and Japanese were permitted to settle in the Marianas.

=== American era ===

After almost four centuries as part of the Kingdom of Spain, the United States occupied the island following Spain&#x27;s defeat in the 1898 Spanish–American War, as part of the Treaty of Paris of 1898. Guam was transferred to the United States Navy control on December 23, 1898, by from 25th President William McKinley.

Guam was a station for American merchants and warships traveling to and from the Philippines, which was another American acquisition from Spain, while the Northern Mariana Islands were sold by Spain to Germany for part of its rapidly expanding German Empire. A U.S. Navy yard was established at Piti in 1899. A United States Marine Corps barracks was established at Sumay in 1901.

A marine seaplane unit was stationed in Sumay from 1921 to 1930, the first in the Pacific. The Commercial Pacific Cable Company built a telegraph/telephone station in 1903 for the first trans-Pacific communications cable, followed by Pan American World Airways establishing a seaplane base at Sumay for its trans-Pacific &quot;China Clipper&quot; route.

==== World War I ====
On December 10, 1914, the SMS &quot;Cormoran&quot;, a German armed merchant raider, was forced to seek port at Apra Harbor on the U.S. territory of Guam after running short on coal. The United States, which was neutral at the time refused to supply provisions sufficient for the &quot;Cormoran&quot; to make a German port so the ship and her crew were interned until 1917.

On the morning of April 7, 1917, word reached Guam by telegraph cable that the U.S. Congress had declared war on Germany. The Naval Governor of Guam, Roy Campbell Smith, sent two officers to inform the &quot;Cormoran&quot; that a state of war existed between the two countries, that the crew were now prisoners of war, and that the ship must be surrendered. Meanwhile, the USS &quot;Supply&quot; blocked the entrance to Apra Harbor to prevent any attempt to flee. In a separate boat, the two officers were accompanied by a barge commanded by Lt. W.A. Hall, who was designated prize master, and had brought 18 sailors and 15 Marines from the barracks at Sumay.

Seeing a launch from &quot;Cormoran&quot; hauling a barge of supplies back shore, Hall ordered shots fired across the bow of the launch until it hove to. Meanwhile, the two officers reached &quot;Cormoran&quot; and informed Captain Adalbert Zuckschwerdt of the situation. Zuckschwerdt agreed to surrender his crew but refused to turn over the ship. The U.S. officers informed Zuckschwerdt that the &quot;Cormoran&quot; would be treated as an enemy combatant and left to inform Governor Smith of the situation. Unbeknownst to the Americans, the Germans had secreted an explosive device in the ship&#x27;s coal bunker. Minutes after the Americans left, an explosion aboard &quot;Cormoran&quot; hurled debris across the harbor and her crew began abandoning ship. The two American boats and USS &quot;Supply&quot; immediately began to recover German sailors from the water, saving all but seven of the roughly 370 &quot;Cormoran&quot; crew. This incident, including the warning shots against the launch, accounted for the first violent action of the United States in World War I, first shots fired by the U.S. against Germany in World War I, the first German prisoners of war captured by the U.S., and the first Germans killed in action by the U.S. in World War I.

==== World War II ====

During World War II, the Empire of Japan attacked and invaded in the 1941 Battle of Guam on December 8, at the same time as the attack on Pearl Harbor. The Japanese renamed Guam (Great Shrine Island). The Japanese occupation of Guam lasted about 31 months. During this period, the indigenous people of Guam were subjected to beatings, forced labor, family separation, concentration camps, massacres, beheadings and rape.

During the nearly three years of occupation approximately 1,100 Chamorros were killed, according to later US Congressional committee testimony in 2004. Some historians estimate that war violence killed 10% of Guam&#x27;s then 20,000 population. The United States returned and fought the 1944 Battle of Guam from July 21 to August 10, to recapture the island. July 21 is now a territorial holiday, Liberation Day.

==== Post-war ====
After World War II, the Guam Organic Act of 1950 established Guam as an unincorporated organized territory of the United States, provided for the structure of the island&#x27;s civilian government, and granted the people U.S. citizenship. The Governor of Guam was federally appointed until 1968 when the Guam Elective Governor Act provided for the office&#x27;s popular election. Since Guam is not a U.S. state, U.S. citizens residing on Guam are not allowed to vote for president and their congressional representative is a non-voting member.

They do, however, vote for party delegates in presidential primaries. In 1969, a referendum on unification with the Northern Mariana Islands was held and rejected. During the 1970s, Maryly Van Leer Peck started an engineering program, expanded University of Guam, and founded Guam Community College. In the same period, Alby Mangels, Australian adventurer and filmmaker of &quot;World Safari&quot; visited Guam during his six-year escapade on the leg of his voyage through the Pacific aboard the &quot;Klaraborg&quot;.

The removal of Guam&#x27;s security clearance by President John F. Kennedy in 1963 allowed for the development of a tourism industry. When the United States closed U.S. Naval Base Subic Bay and Clark Air Base bases in the Philippines after the expiration of their leases in the early 1990s, many of the forces stationed there were relocated to Guam.

The 1997 Asian financial crisis, which hit Japan particularly hard, severely affected Guam&#x27;s tourism industry. Military cutbacks in the 1990s also disrupted the island&#x27;s economy. Economic recovery was further hampered by devastation from super typhoons Paka in 1997 and Pongsona in 2002, as well as the effects of the September 11 terrorist attacks and the crash of Korean Air Flight 801 on tourism.

== Geography and environment ==


Guam is long and wide. It has an area of . It is the 32nd largest island of the United States. It is the southernmost and largest island in the Mariana Islands, as well as the largest in Micronesia. Guam&#x27;s Point Udall is the westernmost point of the U.S., as measured from the geographic center of the United States.

The Mariana chain, of which Guam is a part, was created by collision of the Pacific and Philippine Sea tectonic plates. Guam is located on the micro Mariana Plate between the two. Guam is the closest land mass to the Mariana Trench, the deep subduction zone that runs east of the Marianas. Volcanic eruptions established the base of the island in the Eocene, roughly 56 to 33.9 million years ago. The north of Guam is a result of this base being covered with layers of coral reef, turning into limestone, and then being thrust upward by tectonic activity to create a plateau.

The rugged south of the island is a result of more recent volcanic activity. Cocos Island off the southern tip of Guam is the largest of the many small islets along the coastline. Guam&#x27;s highest point is Mount Lamlam at above sea level. If its base is considered to be the nearby &quot;Challenger&quot; Deep, the deepest surveyed point in the Oceans, Mount Lamlam is the world&#x27;s tallest mountain at .

Politically, Guam is divided into 19 villages. The majority of the population lives on the coralline limestone plateaus of the north, with political and economic activity centered in the central and northern regions. The rugged geography of the south largely limits settlement to rural coastal areas. The western coast is leeward of the trade winds and is the location of Apra Harbor, the capital Hagåtña, and the tourist center of Tumon. The U.S. Defense Department owns about 29% of the island, under the management of Joint Region Marianas.

===Climate===
Guam has a tropical rainforest climate on the Köppen scale (Köppen &quot;Af&quot;). Its driest month of March almost qualifies as a tropical monsoon climate (Köppen &quot;Am&quot;). The weather is generally hot and humid throughout the year with little seasonal temperature variation. Guam is known to have equable temperatures year-round. Trade winds are fairly constant throughout the year. There is often a weak westerly monsoon influence in the summer months.

Guam has two distinct seasons: Wet and dry season. The dry season runs from January through May. June is the transitional period. The wet season runs from July through November. Guam&#x27;s average annual rainfall was between 1981 and 2010.

The wettest month on record at Guam Airport has been August 1997 with . The driest was February 2015 with . The wettest calendar year was 1976 with . The driest year was in 1998 with . The most rainfall in a single day occurred on October 15, 1953, when fell.

The mean high temperature is . The mean low is . Temperatures rarely exceed or fall below . The relative humidity commonly exceeds 84 percent at night throughout the year, but the average monthly humidity hovers near 66 percent.

The highest temperature ever recorded in Guam was on April 18, 1971, and April 1, 1990. A record low of was set on February 1, 2021. The lowest recorded temperature was 65 °F (18.3 °C), set on February 8, 1973.

Guam lies in the path of typhoons and it is common for the island to be threatened by tropical storms and possible typhoons during the wet season. The highest risk of typhoons is from August through November, where typhoons and tropical storms are most probable in the western Pacific. They can, however, occur year-round. Typhoons that have caused major damage on Guam in the American period include the Typhoon of 1900, Karen (1962), Pamela (1976), Paka (1997), Pongsona (2002), and Mawar (2023).

Since Typhoon Pamela in 1976, wooden structures have been largely replaced by concrete structures. During the 1980s, wooden utility poles began to be replaced by typhoon-resistant concrete and steel poles. After the local Government enforced stricter construction codes, many home and business owners have built their structures out of reinforced concrete with installed typhoon shutters.

=== Ecology ===

Guam is home to a diverse array of ecosystems, including coral reefs, deep seas, sea grasses, beach strand, mangroves, a variety of different limestone forest types, volcanic forests and grasslands, riparian systems, and caves. There are approximately 17 species of plant that are endemic only to the island of Guam, and many more that are endemic to the Mariana Islands. Numerous endemic insects have been described. There are approximately 29 land snails listed as endemic to the island of Guam, although many are now endangered or presumed extinct. Guam once hosted 14 kinds of terrestrial birds, 7 of which were endemic to Guam on the species or subspecies level, although all but one of the 14 are now extinct, extirpated, or endangered. Three locations on Guam (Guam National Wildlife Refuge, Cocos Island, and Mahlac Caves) have been identified as Important Bird Areas (IBA) by BirdLife International because they support populations of Micronesian starlings, Mariana swiftlets, Mariana crows, and Guam rails. The Guam rail became the second bird species to ever be downlisted from Extinct in the wild after a population was established on Cocos Island. Guam was home to three native bat species: the little Mariana fruit bat (&quot;Pteropus tokudae&quot;), now extinct; the endangered Pacific sheath-tailed bat (&quot;Emballonura semicaudata rotensis&quot;); and the endangered Mariana fruit bat (&quot;Pteropus mariannus mariannus&quot;).
Guam has experienced severe effects of invasive species upon the natural biodiversity of the island. These include the local extinction of endemic bird species after the introduction of the brown tree snake, an infestation of the coconut rhinoceros beetle destroying coconut palms, and the effect of introduced feral mammals and amphibians.

Wildfires plague the forested areas of Guam every dry season despite the island&#x27;s humid climate. Most fires are caused by humans with 80% resulting from arson. Poachers often start fires to attract deer to the new growth. Invasive grass species that rely on fire as part of their natural life cycle grow in many regularly burned areas. Grasslands and &quot;barrens&quot; have replaced previously forested areas leading to greater soil erosion.

During the rainy season, sediment is carried by the heavy rains into the Fena Lake Reservoir and Ugum River, leading to water quality problems for southern Guam. Eroded silt also destroys the marine life in reefs around the island. Soil stabilization efforts by volunteers and forestry workers (planting trees) have had little success in preserving natural habitats.
Efforts have been made to protect Guam&#x27;s coral reef habitats from pollution, eroded silt and overfishing, problems that have led to decreased fish populations. This has both ecological and economic value, as Guam is a significant vacation spot for scuba divers, and one study found that Guam&#x27;s reefs are worth $127 million per year. In recent years, the Department of Agriculture, Division of Aquatic and Wildlife Resources has established several new marine preserves where fish populations are monitored by biologists. These are located at Pati Point, Piti Bomb Holes, Sasa Bay, Achang Reef Flat, and Tumon Bay.

Before adopting U.S. Environmental Protection Agency standards, portions of Tumon Bay were dredged by the hotel chains to provide a better experience for hotel guests. Tumon Bay has since been made into a preserve. A federal Guam National Wildlife Refuge in northern Guam protects the decimated sea turtle population in addition to a small colony of Mariana fruit bats.

Harvest of sea turtle eggs was a common occurrence on Guam before World War II. The green sea turtle (&quot;Chelonia mydas&quot;) was harvested legally on Guam before August 1978, when it was listed as threatened under the Endangered Species Act. The hawksbill sea turtle (&quot;Eretmochelys imbricata&quot;) has been on the endangered list since 1970. In an effort to ensure the protection of sea turtles on Guam, routine sightings are counted during aerial surveys and nest sites are recorded and monitored for hatchlings.

==Demographics==
In the 2020 United States census, the largest ethnic group were the native Chamorros, accounting for 32.8% of the population. Asians, including Filipinos, Koreans, Chinese, and Japanese, accounted for 35.5% of the population. Other ethnic groups of Micronesia, including those of Chuukese, Palauan, and Pohnpeians, accounted for 13.2%. 10% of the population were multiracial, (two or more races). European Americans made up 6.8% of the population; 1% are African Americans, and 3% are Hispanic; there are 1,740 Mexicans in Guam, and there are other Hispanic ethnicities on the island. The estimated interracial marriage rate is over 40%.

The official languages of the island are English and Chamorro. Unlike most of its neighboring languages, Chamorro is not classified as Micronesian or Polynesian. Rather, like Palauan, it possibly constitutes an independent branch of the Malayo-Polynesian language family. Filipino is also commonly spoken across the island. Other Pacific and Asian languages are spoken in Guam as well. Spanish, which was the language of administration for 300 years, influenced the Chamorro language.

The predominant religion of Guam is Christianity. Three-quarters of the population adheres to Catholicism, while most of the remainder belong to Protestant churches. According to the Pew Research Center, the religious demography of Guam in 2010 was as follows:

* Catholicism: 75%
* Protestantism: 17.7%
* Other religions: 1.6%
* Folk religions: 1.5%
* Other Christianity: 1.4%
* Buddhism: 1.1%
* Eastern Orthodoxy: &lt;1%
* Hinduism: &lt;1%
* Islam: &lt;1%
* Judaism: &lt;1%
In 2020, the Vatican claimed that 87.72% of the population was Catholic, with 54 priests and 64 nuns across 27 parishes.

==Culture==

The culture of Guam is a reflection of traditional Chamorro customs, in combination with American, Spanish and Mexican traditions. Post-European-contact Chamorro Guamanian culture is a combination of American, Spanish, Filipino, other Micronesian Islander and Mexican traditions. Few indigenous pre-Hispanic customs remained following Spanish contact, but include plaiting and pottery. There has been a resurgence of interest among the Chamorro to preserve the language and culture.

Hispanic influences are manifested in the local language, music, dance, sea navigation, cuisine, fishing, games (such as , , , and ), songs, and fashion. The island&#x27;s original community are Chamorro natives, who have inhabited Guam for almost 4000 years. They had their own language related to the languages of Indonesia and southeast Asia. The Spanish later called them Chamorros. A derivative of the word, Chamorri, means &quot;noble race&quot;. They began to grow rice on the island.
Historically, the native people of Guam venerated the bones of their ancestors. They kept the skulls in their houses in small baskets, and practiced incantations before them when it was desired to attain certain objects. During Spanish rule (1668–1898) the majority of the population was converted to Catholicism and religious festivities such as Easter and Christmas became widespread. Many Chamorros have Spanish surnames, although few of the inhabitants are themselves descended from the Spaniards. Instead, Spanish names and surnames became commonplace after their conversion to Catholicism and the imposition of the Catálogo alfabético de apellidos in Guam.

Historically, the diet of the native inhabitants of Guam consisted of fish, fowl, rice, breadfruit, taro, yams, bananas, and coconuts used in a variety of dishes. Post-contact Chamorro cuisine is largely based on corn, and includes tortillas, tamales, atole, and chilaquiles, which are a clear influence from Mesoamerica, principally Mexico, from Spanish trade with Asia.

Due to foreign cultural influence from Spain, most aspects of the early indigenous culture have been lost, though there has been a resurgence in preserving any remaining pre-Hispanic culture in the last few decades. Some scholars have traveled throughout the Pacific Islands, conducting research to study what the original Chamorro cultural practices such as dance, language, and canoe building may have been like.

===Sports===

Guam&#x27;s most popular sport is American football, followed by basketball and baseball respectively. Soccer, Jiu Jitsu, and Rugby are also somewhat popular. Guam hosted the Pacific Games in 1975 and 1999. At the 2007 Games, Guam finished 7th of 22 countries in the medal count, and 14th at the 2011 Games.

Guam men&#x27;s national basketball team and the women&#x27;s team are traditional powerhouses in the Oceania region, behind the Australia men&#x27;s national basketball team and the New Zealand national basketball team. , the men&#x27;s team is the reigning champion of the Pacific Games Basketball Tournament. Guam is home to various basketball organizations, including the Guam Basketball Association.

The Guam national football team was founded in 1975 and joined FIFA in 1996. It was once considered one of FIFA&#x27;s weakest teams, and experienced their first victory over a FIFA-registered side in 2009. Guam hosted qualifying games on the island for the first time in 2015 and, in 2018, clinched their first FIFA World Cup Qualifying win. The Guam national rugby union team played its first match in 2005 and has never qualified for a Rugby World Cup.

As an aspect of cultural revival, sling competitions are also being organized on Guam. As a national pastime of cultural import, the ovoid shape on Guamanian flag is that of a sling stone.

==Economy==


Guam&#x27;s economy depends primarily on tourism, Department of Defense installations and locally owned businesses. Under the provisions of a special law by Congress, it is Guam&#x27;s treasury rather than the U.S. treasury that receives the federal income taxes paid by local taxpayers, including military and civilian federal employees assigned to Guam.

===Tourism===

Lying in the western Pacific, Guam is a popular destination for Japanese and South Koreans. Its tourist hub, Tumon, features over 20 large hotels, a Duty Free Shoppers Galleria, Pleasure Island district, indoor aquarium, Sandcastle Las Vegas–styled shows and other shopping and entertainment venues. It is a relatively short flight from Asia, with 3 to 4-star hotels and seven public golf courses accommodating over a million tourists per year.

75% of the tourists are Japanese. Guam also receives a sizable number of tourists from South Korea, the U.S., the Philippines, and Taiwan. Significant sources of revenue include duty-free designer shopping outlets, and the American-style malls: Micronesia Mall, Guam Premier Outlets, the Agana Shopping Center, and the world&#x27;s largest Kmart.
The economy had been stable since 2000 due to increased tourism. Previously, it was expected to stabilize with a planned transfer of U.S. Marine Corps&#x27; 3rd Marine Expeditionary Force, in Okinawa, Japan (approximately 8,000 Marines, along with their 10,000 dependents), to Guam between 2010 and 2015. However, the move was delayed until late 2020. Also, the number of Marines to be moved from Okinawa to Guam decreased from 10,000 to 5,000, with the move now expected to be complete in 2025.

, Guam&#x27;s largest single private sector employer with about 1,400 jobs, was Continental Micronesia, a subsidiary of Continental Airlines. Continental Airlines merged with and is now a part of United Airlines, a subsidiary of Chicago-based United Airlines Holdings, Inc. the Continental Micronesia annual payroll in Guam was $90 million.

=== Budget and unemployment ===
In 2003, Guam had a 14% unemployment rate, and the government suffered a $314 million budget shortfall. As of 2019 the unemployment rate had dropped to 6.1%. By September 2020, the unemployment rate had risen again to 17.9%. As of June 2023 the unemployment rate had fallen to 4.0%. The unemployment rate in Guam for September 2023 was 4.1%, an increase of 0.1 percentage points from the June 2023 figure of 4.0%, and a reduction of 0.3 percentage points from the September 2022 figure one year earlier of 4.4%.

=== Pacific migration to Guam ===
The Compacts of Free Association (COFA) between the United States, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, and the Republic of Palau accords the former entities of the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands a political status of &quot;free association&quot; with the United States. The Compacts generally allow citizens of these island nations to reside in the 50 United States, and in US territories. Many people from other Pacific islands were attracted to Guam due to its proximity, environmental, and cultural familiarity.

Due to the impact of increased utilization of public assistance programs due to immigration, aid has been provided to the nations receiving immigrants. In 2003, the amended COFA was enacted, which provided 30 million dollars annually to Guam, Hawaii, American Samoa and the Northern Mariana Islands, as well as to forgive 157 million dollars of Guam&#x27;s debt to the federal government to offset money already spent on public assistance programs. In 2024, the COFA was amended again to renew aid the freely associated nations as well as Guam and other U.S. Pacific territories.

=== Military bases ===

Joint Region Marianas maintains jurisdiction over installations, which cover approximately , or 29% of the island&#x27;s total land area. These include:
* U.S. Naval Base Guam, U.S. Navy (Santa Rita), comprising the Orote Peninsula, additional lands, and with jurisdiction of the majority of Apra Harbor
* Andersen Air Force Base, U.S. Air Force (Yigo), including Northwest Field
* Marine Corps Base Camp Blaz, U.S. Marine Corps (Dededo)
* Ordnance Annex, U.S. Navy – South Central Highlands (formerly known as Naval Magazine)
* Naval Computer and Telecommunications Station Guam, U.S. Navy (Dededo), sometimes referred to &quot;NCTS Finegayan&quot;
* Naval Radio Station Barrigada (Barrigada), often referred to as &quot;Radio Barrigada&quot;
* Joint Region Marianas Headquarters (Asan), at Nimitz Hill Annex
* Naval Hospital Guam (Agana Heights)
* South Finegayan (Dededo), a military housing complex
* Andersen South (Yigo), formerly Marine Barracks Guam until its closure in 1992
* Fort Juan Muña, Guam National Guard (Tamuning)

In 2010, the U.S. military proposed building a new aircraft carrier berth on Guam and moving 8,600 Marines, and 9,000 of their dependents, to Guam from Okinawa, Japan. Including the required construction workers, this buildup would increase Guam&#x27;s population by a total of 79,000, a 49% increase over its 2010 population of 160,000. In a February 2010 letter, the United States Environmental Protection Agency sharply criticized these plans because of a water shortfall, sewage problems and the impact on coral reefs. As of 2022, the Marine Corps has decided to place 5,000 Marines on the island within the first half of the 2020s, with 1,300 already stationed on the base.

==Government and politics==
Guam is governed by a popularly elected governor and a unicameral 15-member legislature, whose members are known as senators. Its judiciary is overseen by the Supreme Court of Guam.

The District Court of Guam is the court of United States federal jurisdiction in the territory. Guam elects one delegate to the United States House of Representatives, currently Republican James Moylan. The delegate does not have a vote on the final passage of legislation, but is accorded a vote in committee, and the privilege to speak to the House.

U.S. citizens in Guam vote in a presidential straw poll for their choice in the U.S. presidential general election, but since Guam has no votes in the Electoral College, the poll has no real effect. However, in sending delegates to the Republican and Democratic national conventions, Guam does have influence in the national presidential race. These delegates are elected by local party conventions.

===Political status===

In the 1980s and early 1990s, there was a significant movement in favor of this U.S. territory becoming a commonwealth, which would give it a level of self-government similar to Puerto Rico and the Northern Mariana Islands. In a 1982 plebiscite, voters indicated interest in seeking commonwealth status. However, the federal government rejected the version of a commonwealth that the government of Guam proposed, because its clauses were incompatible with the Territorial Clause (Art. IV, Sec. 3, cl. 2) of the U.S. Constitution. Other movements advocate U.S. statehood for Guam, union with the state of Hawaii, or union with the Northern Mariana Islands as a single territory, or independence.

The first Guam Constitutional Convention was funded by the 10th Guam Legislature and met from June 1, 1969, through June 29, 1970, with 43 elected delegates. The second Guam Constitutional Convention was convened on July 1, 1977, to create a constitution for Guam that would redefine the island&#x27;s relationship with the US rather than merely modifying the existing relationship. The convention met periodically through October 31, 1977. Although approved at the federal level, the people of Guam overwhelmingly rejected the Constitution in a referendum held in August 1979, with 82% opposed. No new convention has been held pursuant to US congressional authority since 1979.

A Commission on Decolonization was established in 1997 to educate the people of Guam about the various political status options in its relationship with the U.S.: statehood, free association, and independence. The island has been considering another non-binding plebiscite on decolonization since 1998. The group was dormant for some years. In 2013, the commission began seeking funding to start a public education campaign. There were few subsequent developments until late 2016. In early December 2016, the Commission scheduled a series of education sessions in various villages about the current status of Guam&#x27;s relationship with the U.S. and the self-determination options that might be considered. The commission&#x27;s current executive director is Edward Alvarez and there are ten members. The group is expected to release position papers on independence and statehood but the contents have not yet been completed.

The United Nations is in favor of greater self-determination for Guam and other such territories. The UN&#x27;s Special Committee on Decolonization has agreed to endorse the Governor&#x27;s education plan. The commission&#x27;s May 2016 report states: &quot;With academics from the University of Guam, [the Commission] was working to create and approve educational materials. The Office of the Governor was collaborating closely with the Commission&quot; in developing educational materials for the public.

The United States Department of the Interior approved a $300,000 grant for decolonization education, Edward Alvarez told the United Nations Pacific Regional Seminar in May 2016. &quot;We are hopeful that this might indicate a shift in [United States] policy to its Non-Self-Governing Territories such as Guam, where they will be more willing to engage in discussions about our future and offer true support to help push us towards true self-governances and self-determination.&quot;

On July 31, 2020, the Government of Guam joined the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization (UNPO).

Its future political status has been a matter of significant discussion, with public opinion polls indicating a strong preference of becoming a U.S state.

===Villages===

Guam is divided into 19 municipal villages:

* Agana Heights
* Asan‑Maina
* Barrigada
* Chalan Pago‑Ordot
* Dededo
* Hågat
* Hagåtña
* Humåtak
* Inalåhan
* Malesso&#x27;
* Mangilao
* Mongmong‑Toto‑Maite
* Piti
* Sånta Rita-Sumai
* Sinajana
* Talo&#x27;fo&#x27;fo
* Tamuning
* Yigo
* Yona
The entirety of Guam is treated as both a territory and a county equivalent by the US Census, but the USGS counts the villages as county equivalents.

==Transportation and communications==
Most of the island has state-of-the-art mobile phone services and high-speed internet widely available through either cable or DSL. Guam was added to the North American Numbering Plan (NANP) in 1997. The country code 671 became NANP area code 671. This removed the barrier of high-cost international long-distance calls to the continental U.S.

Guam is a major hub for submarine communications cables between the Western U.S., Hawaii, Australia and Asia. Guam currently serves twelve submarine cables, with most continuing to China. In 2012 &quot;Slate&quot; stated that the island has &quot;tremendous bandwidth&quot; and internet prices comparable to those of the U.S. Mainland due to being at the junction of undersea cables.

In 1899, the local postage stamps were overprinted &quot;Guam&quot; as was done for the other former Spanish colonies, but this was discontinued shortly thereafter and regular U.S. postage stamps have been used ever since. Guam is part of the U.S. Postal System (postal abbreviation: GU, ZIP code range: 96910–96932). Mail to Guam from the U.S. mainland is considered domestic and no additional charges are required. Private shipping companies, such as FedEx, UPS, and DHL, however, have no obligation to do so, and do not regard Guam as domestic.

The speed of mail traveling between Guam and the states varies depending on size and time of year. Light, first-class items generally take less than a week to or from the mainland. Larger first-class or Priority items can take a week or two. Fourth-class mail, such as magazines, are transported by sea after reaching Hawaii. Most residents use post office boxes or private mail boxes, although residential delivery is becoming increasingly available.
The Port of Guam is the island&#x27;s lifeline, because most products must be shipped into Guam for consumers. It receives the weekly calls of the Hawaii-based shipping line Matson, Inc. whose container ships connect Guam with Honolulu, Hawaii; Los Angeles, California; Oakland, California; and Seattle, Washington. The port is also the regional transhipment hub for over 500,000 customers throughout the Micronesian region. The port is the shipping and receiving point for containers designated for the island&#x27;s U.S. Department of Defense installations, Andersen Air Force Base and Commander, Naval Forces Marianas and eventually the Third Marine Expeditionary Force.

Guam is served by the Antonio B. Won Pat International Airport. The island is outside the United States customs zone, so Guam is responsible for establishing and operating its own customs and quarantine agency and jurisdiction. Therefore, the U.S. Customs and Border Protection only carries out immigration, but not customs functions. Since Guam is under federal immigration jurisdiction, passengers arriving directly from the United States skip immigration and proceed directly to Guam Customs and Quarantine.

Due to the Guam and CNMI visa waiver program for certain countries, an eligibility pre-clearance check is carried on Guam for flights to the States. For travel from the Northern Mariana Islands to Guam, a pre-flight passport and visa check is performed before boarding the flight to Guam. On flights from Guam to the Northern Mariana Islands, no immigration check is performed. Traveling between Guam and the States through a foreign point requires a passport.

Most residents travel within Guam using personally owned vehicles. The Guam Regional Transit Authority provides fixed route bus and paratransit services, and some commercial companies operate buses between tourist-frequented locations.

==Education==
Guam Public Library System operates the Nieves M. Flores Memorial Library in Hagåtña and five branch libraries.

The Guam Department of Education serves the entire island of Guam. In 2000, 32,000 students attended Guam&#x27;s public schools, including 26 elementary schools, eight middle schools, and six high schools and alternative schools. Guam Public Schools have struggled with problems such as high dropout rates and poor test scores.

Guam&#x27;s educational system has always faced unique challenges as a small community located from the U.S. mainland with a very diverse student body including many students who come from backgrounds without traditional American education. An economic downturn in Guam since the mid-1990s has compounded the problems in schools.

Before September 1997, the U.S. Department of Defense partnered with the Guam Board of Education. In September 1997, the Department of Defense Education Activity (DoDEA) opened its own schools for children of military personnel. DoDEA schools, which also serve children of some federal civilian employees, had an attendance of 2,500 in 2000. DoDEA Guam operates three elementary/middle schools and one high school.

The University of Guam (UOG) and Guam Community College, both fully accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges, offer courses in higher education. UOG is a member of the exclusive group of only 106 land-grant institutions in the entire United States. Pacific Islands University is a small Christian liberal arts institution, nationally accredited by the Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools.

==Health care==

The Government of Guam maintains the island&#x27;s main health care facility, Guam Memorial Hospital, in Tamuning. U.S. board certified doctors and dentists practice in all specialties. The U.S. Naval Hospital in Agana Heights serves active-duty members and dependents of the military community.

There is one subscriber-based air ambulance located on the island, CareJet, which provides emergency patient transportation across Guam and surrounding islands. A private hospital, the Guam Regional Medical City, opened in early 2016. Medicaid is accepted in Guam.

==See also==

* 51st state
* Index of Guam-related articles
* Lists of hospitals in the United States#Insular areas
* List of people from Guam
* Outline of Guam
* Voting in Guam

==Notes==
==References==
===Works cited===
* 

===Further reading===
* 

==External links==
* &quot;Guampedia&quot; – Guam&#x27;s online Encyclopedia
* &quot;Guam Society of America&quot;, fosters the Chamorro language, culture, and traditions
* &quot;The Insular Empire: America in the Mariana Islands&quot;, PBS documentary film website.
* Guam. &quot;The World Factbook&quot;. Central Intelligence Agency.
* U.S. Census Bureau: Island Areas Census 2000
* Geology and Hydrology of Guam
* Portals to the World: Guam from the U.S. Library of Congress. 
* 
* Guam Census ()</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="0" end="4" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352230" start="17" end="73" title="Territories of the United States" label="organized, unincorporated territory of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="81" end="91" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="117" end="130" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q30988" start="155" end="162" title="Hagåtña, Guam" label="Hagåtña"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182147" start="197" end="203" title="Dededo" label="Dededo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="215" end="232" title="List of extreme points of the United States#Westernmost points" label="westernmost point"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535053" start="287" end="316" title="geographic center of the United States" label="geographic center of the U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="320" end="327" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q153732" start="373" end="388" title="Mariana Islands" label="Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="415" end="425" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060991" start="634" end="642" title="Chamorro people" label="Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="667" end="679" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q208643" start="695" end="712" title="Malay Archipelago" label="Malay Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="718" end="729" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q216839" start="731" end="737" title="Taiwanese indigenous peoples" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="743" end="752" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33262" start="792" end="809" title="Chamorro language" label="Chamorro language"/>
<link wikidata="Q420591" start="833" end="844" title="Micronesian languages" label="Micronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q390979" start="848" end="858" title="Polynesian languages" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33776" start="882" end="889" title="Palauan language" label="Palauan"/>
<link wikidata="Q143158" start="944" end="977" title="Malayo-Polynesian languages" label="Malayo-Polynesian language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496" start="1087" end="1105" title="Ferdinand Magellan" label="Ferdinand Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="1237" end="1242" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q683846" start="1332" end="1347" title="Manila galleons" label="Manila galleons"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="1360" end="1380" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088199" start="1400" end="1413" title="Capture of Guam" label="captured Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q847137" start="1447" end="1462" title="Treaty of Paris (1898)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1527" end="1539" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43296" start="1618" end="1629" title="Wake Island" label="Wake Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q16641" start="1645" end="1659" title="American Samoa" label="American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="1664" end="1670" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="1743" end="1765" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q699897" start="1767" end="1784" title="Battle of Guam (1941)" label="Guam was captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="1792" end="1800" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158903" start="1806" end="1850" title="Japanese occupation of Guam" label="occupied the island for two and a half years"/>
<link wikidata="Q696900" start="1858" end="1887" title="Battle of Guam (1944)" label="American forces recaptured it"/>
<link wikidata="Q106307776" start="1937" end="1951" title="Liberation Day (Guam)" label="Liberation Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323113" start="1970" end="1989" title="Economy of Guam" label="Guam&amp;#x27;s economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="2038" end="2051" title="United States Armed Forces" label="U.S. military"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2100" end="2123" title="51st state#Guam" label="future political status"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="2230" end="2248" title="U.S. state" label="American statehood"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="2269" end="2277" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q131389" start="2389" end="2412" title="International Date Line" label="International Date Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q900119" start="2435" end="2494" title="United Nations list of non-self-governing territories" label="non-self-governing territories listed by the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q871511" start="2525" end="2542" title="Pacific Community" label="Pacific Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q153732" start="2808" end="2823" title="Mariana Islands" label="Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052998" start="2869" end="2883" title="Remote Oceania" label="Remote Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q861225" start="2960" end="2980" title="Austronesian peoples" label="Austronesian peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042001" start="3013" end="3023" title="Polynesian people" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="3145" end="3156" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q118350" start="3207" end="3223" title="Caroline Islands" label="Caroline Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="3291" end="3312" title="Island Southeast Asia" label="Island Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="3348" end="3357" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644" start="3411" end="3435" title="Northern Mariana Islands" label="Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060991" start="3453" end="3468" title="Chamorro people" label="Chamorro people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136773" start="4386" end="4397" title="matrilineality" label="matrilineal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370205" start="4925" end="4948" title="Rota Latte Stone Quarry" label="Rota Latte Stone Quarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q949090" start="4976" end="4980" title="Rota (island)" label="Rota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496" start="5065" end="5083" title="Ferdinand Magellan" label="Ferdinand Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q889833" start="5101" end="5114" title="Monarchy of Spain" label="King of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q318500" start="5315" end="5338" title="Miguel López de Legazpi" label="Miguel López de Legazpi"/>
<link wikidata="Q683846" start="5504" end="5519" title="Manila galleons" label="Manila galleons"/>
<link wikidata="Q81398" start="5574" end="5582" title="Acapulco" label="Acapulco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="5587" end="5593" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q785894" start="5682" end="5707" title="Diego Luis de San Vitores" label="Diego Luis de San Vitores"/>
<link wikidata="Q910648" start="5781" end="5800" title="Spanish East Indies" label="Spanish East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="5818" end="5842" title="Viceroyalty of New Spain" label="Viceroyalty of New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="5853" end="5864" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q105973572" start="5870" end="5891" title="Spanish-Chamorro Wars" label="Spanish-Chamorro Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="5945" end="5951" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="6086" end="6094" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q439123" start="6291" end="6307" title="Thomas Cavendish" label="Thomas Cavendish"/>
<link wikidata="Q962732" start="6309" end="6326" title="Olivier van Noort" label="Olivier van Noort"/>
<link wikidata="Q85771494" start="6328" end="6338" title="John Eaton (pirate)" label="John Eaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q221125" start="6340" end="6355" title="William Dampier" label="William Dampier"/>
<link wikidata="Q114206" start="6357" end="6370" title="Woodes Rogers" label="Woodes Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379722" start="6372" end="6387" title="John Clipperton" label="John Clipperton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544496" start="6389" end="6405" title="George Shelvocke" label="George Shelvocke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997093" start="6410" end="6441" title="Bully Hayes" label="William &amp;quot;Bully&amp;quot; Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="6478" end="6485" title="whaling" label="whalers"/>
<link wikidata="Q118350" start="6658" end="6674" title="Caroline Islands" label="Caroline Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070" start="6699" end="6706" title="tsunami" label="tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q106771272" start="6803" end="6822" title="1856 Guam smallpox epidemic" label="a smallpox epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="6989" end="7005" title="Kingdom of Spain" label="Kingdom of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088199" start="7025" end="7033" title="Capture of Guam" label="occupied"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="7087" end="7107" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q847137" start="7124" end="7147" title="Treaty of Paris (1898)" label="Treaty of Paris of 1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="7177" end="7195" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35041" start="7249" end="7265" title="William McKinley" label="William McKinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="7349" end="7360" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644" start="7423" end="7447" title="Northern Mariana Islands" label="Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="7512" end="7525" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482463" start="7563" end="7567" title="Piti, Guam" label="Piti"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="7579" end="7605" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q105764116" start="7634" end="7639" title="Sumay, Guam" label="Sumay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152516" start="7745" end="7777" title="Commercial Pacific Cable Company" label="Commercial Pacific Cable Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880476" start="7784" end="7813" title="Guam Cable Station" label="a telegraph/telephone station"/>
<link wikidata="Q8681" start="7884" end="7910" title="Pan American World Airways" label="Pan American World Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258108" start="7977" end="7990" title="China Clipper" label="China Clipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q326616" start="8053" end="8077" title="SMS Cormoran (1914)" label="SMS &amp;quot;Cormoran&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583713" start="8094" end="8109" title="merchant raider" label="merchant raider"/>
<link wikidata="Q621760" start="8138" end="8149" title="Apra Harbor" label="Apra Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918355" start="8480" end="8521" title="United States in World War I" label="U.S. Congress had declared war on Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q888795" start="8533" end="8549" title="Governor of Guam" label="Governor of Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372644" start="8551" end="8569" title="Roy Campbell Smith" label="Roy Campbell Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3911411" start="8702" end="8718" title="German prisoners of war in the United States" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q7874482" start="8774" end="8796" title="USS Supply (1872)" label="USS &amp;quot;Supply&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q105764116" start="9054" end="9059" title="Sumay, Guam" label="Sumay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823896" start="9294" end="9315" title="Adalbert Zuckschwerdt" label="Adalbert Zuckschwerdt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918355" start="10108" end="10136" title="United States in World War I" label="United States in World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10355" end="10367" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="10373" end="10388" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q699897" start="10417" end="10436" title="Battle of Guam (1941)" label="1941 Battle of Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="10476" end="10498" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158903" start="10553" end="10580" title="Japanese occupation of Guam" label="Japanese occupation of Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="10879" end="10892" title="United States Congress" label="Congressional"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="11019" end="11032" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q696900" start="11057" end="11076" title="Battle of Guam (1944)" label="1944 Battle of Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q106307776" start="11167" end="11181" title="Liberation Day (Guam)" label="Liberation Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613440" start="11227" end="11251" title="Guam Organic Act of 1950" label="Guam Organic Act of 1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352230" start="11275" end="11330" title="Territories of the United States" label="unincorporated organized territory of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q24526036" start="11507" end="11533" title="Guam Elective Governor Act" label="Guam Elective Governor Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613466" start="11827" end="11888" title="1969 Guamanian unification with the Northern Mariana Islands referendum" label="a referendum on unification with the Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781606" start="11930" end="11950" title="Maryly Van Leer Peck" label="Maryly Van Leer Peck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248737" start="11992" end="12010" title="University of Guam" label="University of Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613414" start="12024" end="12046" title="Guam Community College" label="Guam Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712877" start="12068" end="12080" title="Alby Mangels" label="Alby Mangels"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036128" start="12127" end="12139" title="World Safari" label="World Safari"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="12384" end="12391" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458014" start="12432" end="12457" title="U.S. Naval Base Subic Bay" label="U.S. Naval Base Subic Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095676" start="12462" end="12476" title="Clark Air Base" label="Clark Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="12490" end="12501" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q80880" start="12623" end="12650" title="1997 Asian financial crisis" label="1997 Asian financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307507" start="12882" end="12886" title="Typhoon Paka" label="Paka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360488" start="12899" end="12907" title="Typhoon Pongsona" label="Pongsona"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="12947" end="12977" title="September 11, 2001 attacks" label="September 11 terrorist attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q485120" start="12995" end="13016" title="Korean Air Flight 801" label="Korean Air Flight 801"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624516" start="13117" end="13157" title="List of islands of the United States by area" label="32nd largest island of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q153732" start="13208" end="13223" title="Mariana Islands" label="Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359409" start="13251" end="13261" title="Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q441128" start="13275" end="13286" title="Point Udall (Guam)" label="Point Udall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13294" end="13323" title="List of extreme points of the United States#Interpretation of easternmost and westernmost" label="westernmost point of the U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q5535053" start="13346" end="13384" title="geographic center of the United States" label="geographic center of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="13490" end="13504" title="tectonic plate" label="tectonic plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200990" start="13536" end="13549" title="Mariana Plate" label="Mariana Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q510" start="13604" end="13618" title="Mariana Trench" label="Mariana Trench"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="13629" end="13644" title="subduction" label="subduction zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161185" start="13708" end="13730" title="Volcanic island" label="the base of the island"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="13738" end="13744" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="13856" end="13866" title="coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="13881" end="13890" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q193343" start="13924" end="13932" title="Tectonics" label="tectonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105476" start="14041" end="14053" title="Cocos Island (Guam)" label="Cocos Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q207524" start="14116" end="14121" title="islet" label="islet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380977" start="14173" end="14185" title="Mount Lamlam" label="Mount Lamlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q459173" start="14249" end="14276" title="Challenger Deep" label="&amp;quot;Challenger&amp;quot; Deep"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="14312" end="14318" title="Oceans" label="Oceans"/>
<link wikidata="Q246526" start="14340" end="14369" title="List of tallest mountains on Earth" label="world&amp;#x27;s tallest mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258753" start="14410" end="14421" title="villages of Guam" label="19 villages"/>
<link wikidata="Q372001" start="14698" end="14705" title="Windward and leeward" label="leeward"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="14713" end="14724" title="trade winds" label="trade winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q621760" start="14748" end="14759" title="Apra Harbor" label="Apra Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q30988" start="14773" end="14780" title="Hagåtña, Guam" label="Hagåtña"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120935" start="14808" end="14813" title="Tumon, Guam" label="Tumon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="14819" end="14842" title="United States Department of Defense" label="U.S. Defense Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269350" start="14897" end="14918" title="Joint Region Marianas" label="Joint Region Marianas"/>
<link wikidata="Q209531" start="14946" end="14973" title="tropical rainforest climate" label="tropical rainforest climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="14981" end="14993" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q863882" start="15067" end="15091" title="tropical monsoon climate" label="tropical monsoon climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="15275" end="15286" title="Trade winds" label="Trade winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="15999" end="16016" title="relative humidity" label="relative humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q140588" start="16370" end="16377" title="typhoon" label="typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16750" end="16765" title="1900 Pacific typhoon season#Guam typhoon" label="Typhoon of 1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861223" start="16767" end="16772" title="Typhoon Karen" label="Karen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861287" start="16781" end="16787" title="Typhoon Pamela (1976)" label="Pamela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307507" start="16796" end="16800" title="Typhoon Paka" label="Paka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360488" start="16809" end="16817" title="Typhoon Pongsona" label="Pongsona"/>
<link wikidata="Q118513171" start="16830" end="16835" title="Typhoon Mawar" label="Mawar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861287" start="16851" end="16865" title="Typhoon Pamela (1976)" label="Typhoon Pamela"/>
<link wikidata="Q5948431" start="17216" end="17232" title="typhoon shutters" label="typhoon shutters"/>
<link wikidata="Q102435780" start="17394" end="17410" title="Marianas tropical dry forests" label="limestone forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392846" start="17451" end="17467" title="List of rivers of Guam" label="riparian systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q120999142" start="17592" end="17622" title="List of endemic plants in the Mariana Islands" label="endemic to the Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17697" end="17708" title="List of land snails of the Mariana Islands" label="land snails"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607671" start="17845" end="17850" title="List of birds of Guam" label="birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q130403891" start="17959" end="17993" title="List of threatened, endangered and extinct species in the Mariana Islands" label="extinct, extirpated, or endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q25185619" start="18020" end="18049" title="Guam National Wildlife Refuge" label="Guam National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105476" start="18051" end="18063" title="Cocos Island (Guam)" label="Cocos Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139892" start="18107" end="18127" title="Important Bird Area" label="Important Bird Areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q210108" start="18137" end="18159" title="BirdLife International" label="BirdLife International"/>
<link wikidata="Q657815" start="18196" end="18217" title="Micronesian starling" label="Micronesian starlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q27581" start="18219" end="18236" title="Mariana swiftlet" label="Mariana swiftlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196375" start="18238" end="18251" title="Mariana crow" label="Mariana crows"/>
<link wikidata="Q924911" start="18273" end="18282" title="Guam rail" label="Guam rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q239509" start="18341" end="18360" title="Extinct in the wild" label="Extinct in the wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552684" start="18460" end="18484" title="Guam flying fox" label="little Mariana fruit bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q305649" start="18545" end="18570" title="Pacific sheath-tailed bat" label="Pacific sheath-tailed bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765832" start="18638" end="18655" title="Mariana fruit bat" label="Mariana fruit bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="18739" end="18755" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="18773" end="18785" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q945835" start="18819" end="18835" title="local extinction" label="local extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q900781" start="18890" end="18906" title="brown tree snake" label="brown tree snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188841" start="18930" end="18955" title="Oryctes rhinoceros" label="coconut rhinoceros beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="18967" end="18974" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739176" start="19011" end="19016" title="feral" label="feral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="19017" end="19023" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="19029" end="19038" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="19042" end="19050" title="Wildfire" label="Wildfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q146575" start="19092" end="19102" title="dry season" label="dry season"/>
<link wikidata="Q327541" start="19200" end="19205" title="arson" label="arson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442963" start="19565" end="19574" title="Fena Lake" label="Fena Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q4002975" start="19589" end="19599" title="Ugum River" label="Ugum River"/>
<link wikidata="Q106412654" start="20094" end="20124" title="Underwater diving on Guam" label="vacation spot for scuba divers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535153" start="20411" end="20421" title="Pati Point" label="Pati Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q106421587" start="20423" end="20438" title="Piti Bomb Holes" label="Piti Bomb Holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q621760" start="20440" end="20448" title="Sasa Bay" label="Sasa Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q25185570" start="20472" end="20481" title="Tumon Bay" label="Tumon Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="20500" end="20536" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="U.S. Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q25185619" start="20709" end="20738" title="Guam National Wildlife Refuge" label="Guam National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q219329" start="20779" end="20789" title="sea turtle" label="sea turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765832" start="20834" end="20852" title="Mariana fruit bats" label="Mariana fruit bats"/>
<link wikidata="Q199458" start="20939" end="20955" title="green sea turtle" label="green sea turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q203538" start="21106" end="21126" title="hawksbill sea turtle" label="hawksbill sea turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="21405" end="21430" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060991" start="21473" end="21482" title="Chamorro people" label="Chamorros"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="21524" end="21530" title="Asian Americans" label="Asians"/>
<link wikidata="Q702" start="21647" end="21657" title="Federated States of Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568155" start="21678" end="21686" title="Chuukese people" label="Chuukese"/>
<link wikidata="Q629716" start="21688" end="21695" title="Palauans" label="Palauan"/>
<link wikidata="Q629716" start="21701" end="21711" title="Pohnpeians" label="Pohnpeians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378555" start="21761" end="21772" title="multiracial people" label="multiracial"/>
<link wikidata="Q43103" start="21795" end="21813" title="European Americans" label="European Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="21853" end="21870" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="21883" end="21891" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209676" start="21909" end="21917" title="Mexicans" label="Mexicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q33262" start="22090" end="22098" title="Chamorro language" label="Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q420591" start="22172" end="22183" title="Micronesian languages" label="Micronesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q390979" start="22187" end="22197" title="Polynesian languages" label="Polynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33776" start="22212" end="22219" title="Palauan language" label="Palauan"/>
<link wikidata="Q143158" start="22274" end="22307" title="Malayo-Polynesian languages" label="Malayo-Polynesian language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q33298" start="22309" end="22317" title="Filipino language" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="22423" end="22430" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q33262" start="22503" end="22520" title="Chamorro language" label="Chamorro language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="22559" end="22571" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015838" start="22617" end="22628" title="Catholic Church in Guam" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="22668" end="22678" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="22706" end="22725" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="22787" end="22798" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="22806" end="22819" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="22903" end="22911" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="22920" end="22937" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Eastern Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="22948" end="22956" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="22967" end="22972" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="22983" end="22990" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060991" start="23185" end="23193" title="Chamorro people" label="Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060991" start="23287" end="23295" title="Chamorro people" label="Chamorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="24411" end="24422" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q259614" start="24517" end="24533" title="Spanish name" label="Spanish surnames"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544558" start="24731" end="24763" title="Catálogo alfabético de apellidos" label="Catálogo alfabético de apellidos"/>
<link wikidata="Q14677" start="24862" end="24872" title="breadfruit" label="breadfruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q227997" start="24874" end="24878" title="taro" label="taro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047551" start="24880" end="24884" title="Yam (vegetable)" label="yams"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="25083" end="25094" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="25611" end="25628" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="25642" end="25652" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="25657" end="25665" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="25680" end="25686" title="Soccer" label="Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q163770" start="25688" end="25697" title="Jujutsu" label="Jiu Jitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378" start="25703" end="25708" title="Rugby football" label="Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q114699" start="25752" end="25765" title="Pacific Games" label="Pacific Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358344" start="25769" end="25773" title="1975 South Pacific Games" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q11879539" start="25778" end="25782" title="1999 South Pacific Games" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q113590" start="25791" end="25801" title="2007 Pacific Games" label="2007 Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q549823" start="25873" end="25883" title="2011 Pacific Games" label="2011 Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590235" start="25886" end="25926" title="Guam men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Guam men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="25935" end="25952" title="Guam women&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="women&amp;#x27;s team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361246" start="25988" end="26002" title="FIBA Oceania" label="Oceania region"/>
<link wikidata="Q782856" start="26015" end="26060" title="Australia men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team" label="Australia men&amp;#x27;s national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q162406" start="26069" end="26105" title="New Zealand national basketball team" label="New Zealand national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q16568057" start="26161" end="26196" title="Pacific Games Basketball Tournament" label="Pacific Games Basketball Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q30688457" start="26262" end="26289" title="Guam Basketball Association" label="Guam Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q270203" start="26296" end="26323" title="Guam national football team" label="Guam national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="26355" end="26359" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8346779" start="26604" end="26629" title="2018 FIFA World Cup qualification" label="FIFA World Cup Qualifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q637404" start="26639" end="26669" title="Guam national rugby union team" label="Guam national rugby union team"/>
<link wikidata="Q16640" start="26731" end="26746" title="Rugby World Cup" label="Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q199771" start="26783" end="26788" title="Sling (weapon)" label="sling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="27110" end="27118" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120935" start="27434" end="27439" title="Tumon" label="Tumon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="27557" end="27566" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q545609" start="27949" end="27958" title="duty-free" label="duty-free"/>
<link wikidata="Q6120858" start="28016" end="28031" title="Micronesia Mall" label="Micronesia Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613444" start="28033" end="28053" title="Guam Premier Outlets" label="Guam Premier Outlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691185" start="28059" end="28080" title="Agana Shopping Center" label="Agana Shopping Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753080" start="28111" end="28116" title="Kmart (United States)" label="Kmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q491478" start="28275" end="28305" title="3rd Marine Expeditionary Force" label="3rd Marine Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="28310" end="28317" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128848" start="28695" end="28717" title="Continental Micronesia" label="Continental Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216486" start="28735" end="28755" title="Continental Airlines" label="Continental Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="28811" end="28826" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478583" start="29540" end="29568" title="Compact of Free Association" label="Compacts of Free Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q702" start="29607" end="29637" title="Federated States of Micronesia" label="Federated States of Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="29659" end="29675" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q695" start="29697" end="29702" title="Palau" label="Palau"/>
<link wikidata="Q129237" start="29738" end="29776" title="Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands" label="Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16641" start="30349" end="30363" title="American Samoa" label="American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644" start="30372" end="30396" title="Northern Mariana Islands" label="Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269350" start="30703" end="30724" title="Joint Region Marianas" label="Joint Region Marianas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981760" start="30863" end="30878" title="Naval Base Guam" label="Naval Base Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="30880" end="30889" title="United States Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638702" start="30919" end="30934" title="Orote Peninsula" label="Orote Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q621760" start="30995" end="31006" title="Apra Harbor" label="Apra Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q491372" start="31009" end="31032" title="Andersen Air Force Base" label="Andersen Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="31034" end="31048" title="United States Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060035" start="31067" end="31082" title="Northwest Field" label="Northwest Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q105750380" start="31085" end="31112" title="Marine Corps Base Camp Blaz" label="Marine Corps Base Camp Blaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="31114" end="31131" title="United States Marine Corps" label="U.S. Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100871" start="31143" end="31157" title="Ordnance Annex" label="Ordnance Annex"/>
<link wikidata="Q106216990" start="31232" end="31282" title="Naval Computer and Telecommunications Station Guam" label="Naval Computer and Telecommunications Station Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q106696235" start="31355" end="31384" title="Naval Radio Station Barrigada" label="Naval Radio Station Barrigada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269350" start="31449" end="31470" title="Joint Region Marianas" label="Joint Region Marianas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7037699" start="31495" end="31512" title="Nimitz Hill Annex" label="Nimitz Hill Annex"/>
<link wikidata="Q106087357" start="31515" end="31534" title="Naval Hospital Guam" label="Naval Hospital Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613435" start="31705" end="31724" title="Guam National Guard" label="Guam National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="31889" end="31896" title="Okinawa Prefecture" label="Okinawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="32106" end="32151" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q888795" start="32485" end="32493" title="Governor of Guam" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="32500" end="32510" title="unicameral" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563896" start="32521" end="32532" title="Legislature of Guam" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644911" start="32604" end="32625" title="Supreme Court of Guam" label="Supreme Court of Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283300" start="32632" end="32654" title="District Court of Guam" label="District Court of Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253588" start="32740" end="32794" title="delegate (United States Congress)" label="delegate to the United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q114108969" start="32817" end="32829" title="James Moylan" label="James Moylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q96412690" start="33013" end="33036" title="United States presidential straw polls in Guam" label="presidential straw poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q47586" start="33132" end="33149" title="United States Electoral College" label="Electoral College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33368" end="33379" title="United States presidential primary#Types of primaries and caucuses" label="conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q609591" start="33512" end="33524" title="commonwealth (United States insular area)" label="commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="33584" end="33595" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644" start="33604" end="33628" title="Northern Mariana Islands" label="Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="33640" end="33650" title="Referendum" label="plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q48412" start="33866" end="33884" title="Territorial Clause" label="Territorial Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="33917" end="33934" title="U.S. Constitution" label="U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="34798" end="34812" title="Decolonization" label="Decolonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="35715" end="35729" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q530843" start="35823" end="35858" title="Special Committee on Decolonization" label="Special Committee on Decolonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="36223" end="36263" title="United States Department of the Interior" label="United States Department of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589214" start="36725" end="36743" title="Government of Guam" label="Government of Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q215613" start="36755" end="36801" title="Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization" label="Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36815" end="36838" title="51st state#Guam" label="future political status"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="36955" end="36964" title="U.S. state" label="U.S state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714496" start="37030" end="37043" title="Agana Heights, Guam" label="Agana Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385952" start="37046" end="37056" title="Asan-Maina, Guam" label="Asan‑Maina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714489" start="37059" end="37068" title="Barrigada, Guam" label="Barrigada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482483" start="37071" end="37088" title="Chalan Pago-Ordot, Guam" label="Chalan Pago‑Ordot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182147" start="37091" end="37097" title="Dededo, Guam" label="Dededo"/>
<link wikidata="Q665845" start="37100" end="37105" title="Hågat, Guam" label="Hågat"/>
<link wikidata="Q30988" start="37108" end="37115" title="Hagåtña, Guam" label="Hagåtña"/>
<link wikidata="Q531529" start="37118" end="37125" title="Humåtak, Guam" label="Humåtak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482456" start="37128" end="37136" title="Inalåhan, Guam" label="Inalåhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482497" start="37139" end="37152" title="Malesso, Guam" label="Malesso&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637935" start="37155" end="37163" title="Mangilao, Guam" label="Mangilao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780393" start="37166" end="37185" title="Mongmong-Toto-Maite, Guam" label="Mongmong‑Toto‑Maite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482463" start="37188" end="37192" title="Piti, Guam" label="Piti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780381" start="37195" end="37211" title="Sånta Rita-Sumai, Guam" label="Sånta Rita-Sumai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482489" start="37214" end="37222" title="Sinajana, Guam" label="Sinajana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482468" start="37225" end="37245" title="Talo&amp;#x27;fo&amp;#x27;fo, Guam" label="Talo&amp;#x27;fo&amp;#x27;fo"/>
<link wikidata="Q933714" start="37248" end="37256" title="Tamuning, Guam" label="Tamuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482473" start="37259" end="37263" title="Yigo, Guam" label="Yigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638381" start="37266" end="37270" title="Yona, Guam" label="Yona"/>
<link wikidata="Q47168" start="37329" end="37346" title="county equivalent" label="county equivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345528" start="37354" end="37363" title="US Census" label="US Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="37373" end="37377" title="United States Geological Survey" label="USGS"/>
<link wikidata="Q104534" start="37587" end="37590" title="DSL" label="DSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562566" start="37614" end="37643" title="North American Numbering Plan" label="North American Numbering Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150255" start="37693" end="37706" title="area code 671" label="area code 671"/>
<link wikidata="Q578170" start="37787" end="37802" title="Continental United States" label="continental U.S"/>
<link wikidata="Q506572" start="37829" end="37860" title="submarine communications cables" label="submarine communications cables"/>
<link wikidata="Q60497" start="38007" end="38012" title="Slate (magazine)" label="Slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240721" start="38453" end="38472" title="List of U.S. state abbreviations" label="postal abbreviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q136208" start="38478" end="38492" title="ZIP code" label="ZIP code range"/>
<link wikidata="Q105742449" start="39195" end="39207" title="Port of Guam" label="Port of Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787989" start="39365" end="39377" title="Matson, Inc." label="Matson, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1136355" start="39888" end="39928" title="Antonio B. Won Pat International Airport" label="Antonio B. Won Pat International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q368804" start="40109" end="40143" title="U.S. Customs and Border Protection" label="U.S. Customs and Border Protection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40389" end="40422" title="Visa waiver program#Guam and Northern Mariana Islands Visa Waiver Program" label="Guam and CNMI visa waiver program"/>
<link wikidata="Q153732" start="40704" end="40719" title="Mariana Islands" label="Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613445" start="40911" end="40942" title="Guam Regional Transit Authority" label="Guam Regional Transit Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613441" start="41091" end="41117" title="Guam Public Library System" label="Guam Public Library System"/>
<link wikidata="Q30988" start="41168" end="41175" title="Hagåtña" label="Hagåtña"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613447" start="41208" end="41236" title="Guam Department of Education" label="Guam Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="41891" end="41917" title="U.S. Department of Defense" label="U.S. Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260231" start="41985" end="42025" title="Department of Defense Education Activity" label="Department of Defense Education Activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613430" start="42262" end="42277" title="Guam High School (Guam)" label="one high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248737" start="42284" end="42302" title="University of Guam" label="University of Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613414" start="42313" end="42335" title="Guam Community College" label="Guam Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987478" start="42366" end="42409" title="Western Association of Schools and Colleges" label="Western Association of Schools and Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q615150" start="42497" end="42520" title="land-grant university" label="land-grant institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122532" start="42550" end="42576" title="Pacific Islands University" label="Pacific Islands University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834704" start="42653" end="42712" title="Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools" label="Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q16891909" start="42810" end="42832" title="Guam Memorial Hospital" label="Guam Memorial Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q933714" start="42837" end="42845" title="Tamuning, Guam" label="Tamuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q106087357" start="42922" end="42941" title="Naval Hospital Guam" label="U.S. Naval Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714496" start="42945" end="42958" title="Agana Heights, Guam" label="Agana Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q763256" start="43059" end="43072" title="air ambulance" label="air ambulance"/>
<link wikidata="Q91232024" start="43214" end="43240" title="Guam Regional Medical City" label="Guam Regional Medical City"/>
<link wikidata="Q46993" start="43311" end="43321" title="51st state" label="51st state"/>
<link wikidata="Q15298197" start="43324" end="43354" title="Index of Guam-related articles" label="Index of Guam-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43357" end="43410" title="Lists of hospitals in the United States#Insular areas" label="Lists of hospitals in the United States#Insular areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632449" start="43413" end="43437" title="List of people from Guam" label="List of people from Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112278" start="43440" end="43455" title="Outline of Guam" label="Outline of Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942184" start="43458" end="43472" title="Voting in Guam" label="Voting in Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="43828" end="43846" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="43854" end="43881" title="Central Intelligence Agency" label="Central Intelligence Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="44005" end="44024" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11982" wikidata="Q752799" url="?curid=11982" title="Gemini 10">
<text>Gemini 10 (officially Gemini X) was a 1966 crewed spaceflight in NASA&#x27;s Gemini program. It was the 8th crewed Gemini flight, the 16th crewed American flight, and the 24th spaceflight of all time (includes X-15 flights over ). During the mission, flown by future STS-1 Commander John Young and future Apollo 11 Command Module Pilot Michael Collins, Collins became the first person to perform two extravehicular activities.

==Crew==
===Backup crew===
===Support crew===
*Edwin E. &quot;Buzz&quot; Aldrin (Houston CAPCOM)
*L. Gordon Cooper Jr. (Cape and Houston CAPCOM)

Jim Lovell and Buzz Aldrin had originally been named the backup crew, but after Charles Bassett and Elliot See died in a T-38 crash, they were moved to the backup crew for Gemini 9 and Alan Bean and Clifton Williams were moved to the Gemini 10 flight.

==Mission parameters==
*Mass: 
*Perigee: 
*Apogee: 
*Inclination: 28.87°
*Period: 88.79 min

===Docking===
*Docked: July 19, 1966 - 04:15:00 UTC
*Undocked: July 20, 1966 - 19:00:00 UTC

===Space walk===
* Collins - EVA 1 (stand up)
**Start: July 19, 1966, 21:44:00 UTC
**End: July 19, 1966, 22:33:00 UTC
**Duration: 0 hours, 49 minutes
* Collins - EVA 2
**Start: July 20, 1966, 23:01:00 UTC
**End: July 20, 1966, 23:40:00 UTC
**Duration: 0 hours, 39 minutes

==Objectives==

Gemini 10 was designed to achieve rendezvous and docking with an Agena Target Vehicle (ATV), and EVA. It was also planned to dock with the ATV from the Gemini 8 mission. This Agena&#x27;s battery power had failed months earlier, and an approach and docking would demonstrate the ability to rendezvous with a passive object. It would also be the first mission to fire the Agena&#x27;s own rocket, allowing them to reach higher orbits.

Gemini 10 established that radiation at high altitude was not a problem. After docking with their Agena booster in low orbit, Young and Collins used it to climb temporarily to . After leaving the first Agena, they then rendezvoused with the derelict Agena left over from the aborted Gemini 8 flight—thus executing the program&#x27;s first double rendezvous. With no electricity on board the second Agena, the rendezvous was accomplished with eyes only—no radar.

After the rendezvous, Collins spacewalked over to the dormant Agena at the end of a tether, making him the first person to meet another spacecraft in orbit. Collins then retrieved a cosmic dust-collecting panel from the side of the Agena. As he was concentrating on keeping his tether clear of the Gemini and Agena, Collins&#x27; Hasselblad camera worked itself free and drifted away, so he was unable to take photographs during the spacewalk.

==Flight==
The Agena launched perfectly for the second time, after problems had occurred with the targets for Gemini 6 and 9. Gemini 10 followed 100 minutes later and entered a orbit. They were behind the Agena. Two anomalous events occurred during the launch. At liftoff, a propellant fill umbilical became snared with its release lanyard. It ripped out of the LC-19 service tower and remained attached to the second stage during ascent. Tracking camera footage also showed that the first stage oxidizer tank dome ruptured after staging and released a cloud of nitrogen tetroxide. The telemetry package on the first stage had been disabled at staging, so visual evidence was the only data available. Film review of the Titan II ICBM launches found at least seven other instances of post-staging tank ruptures, most likely caused by flying debris, second stage engine exhaust, or structural bending. NASA finally decided that this phenomenon did not pose any safety risk to the astronauts and took no corrective action.


===First rendezvous===
Collins was unable to use the sextant for navigation as it did not seem to work as expected. At first he mistook airglow as the real horizon when trying to make some fixes on stars. When the image didn&#x27;t seem right he tried another instrument, but this was not practical to use as it had a very small field of view.

They had a backup in the form of the computers on the ground. They made their first burn to put them into a orbit. However Young didn&#x27;t realize that during the next burn, he had the spacecraft turned slightly, which meant that they introduced an out-of-plane error. This meant two extra burns were necessary, and by the time they had docked with the Agena, 60% of their fuel had been consumed. It was decided to keep the Gemini docked to the Agena as long as possible, as this would mean that they could use the fuel on board the Agena for attitude control.

The first burn of the Agena engine lasted 80 seconds and put them in a orbit. This was the highest a person had ever been, although the record was soon surpassed by Gemini 11, which went to over . This burn was quite a ride for the crew. Because the Gemini and Agena docked nose-to-nose, the forces experienced were &quot;eyeballs out&quot; as opposed to &quot;eyeballs in&quot; for a launch from Earth. The crew took a couple of pictures when they reached apogee but were more interested in what was going on in the spacecraft — checking the systems and watching the radiation dosage meter.

After this they had their sleep period which lasted for eight hours and then they were ready for another busy day. The crew&#x27;s first order of business was to make a second burn with the Agena engine to put them into the same orbit as the Gemini 8 Agena. This was at 20:58 UTC on July 19 and lasted 78 seconds and took off their speed, putting them into a orbit. They made one more burn of the Agena to circularize their orbit to .

===EVA 1===
The first of two EVAs on Gemini 10 was a standup EVA, where Collins would stand in the open hatch and take photographs of stars as part of experiment S-13. They used a 70 mm general purpose camera to image the southern Milky Way in ultraviolet. After orbital sunrise Collins photographed a color plate on the side of the spacecraft (MSC-8) to see whether film reproduced colors accurately in space. He reentered the spacecraft six minutes early when both astronauts found that their eyes were irritated, which was caused by a minor leak of lithium hydroxide in the astronauts&#x27; oxygen supply. After repressurizing the cabin, they ran the oxygen at high rates and flushed the environment system.

After the exercise of the EVA Young and Collins slept in their second &#x27;night&#x27; in space. The next &#x27;morning&#x27; they started preparing for the second rendezvous and another EVA.

===Second rendezvous===
After undocking from their Agena, the crew thought they sighted the Gemini 8 Agena. It however turned out to be their own Agena away, while their target was away. It was not until just over away that they saw it as a faint star. After a few more correction burns, they were station-keeping away from the Gemini 8 Agena. They found the Agena to be very stable and in good condition.

===EVA 2===
At 48 hours and 41 minutes into the mission, the second EVA began. Collins&#x27; first task was to retrieve a Micrometeorite Collector (S-12) from the side of the spacecraft. This he accomplished with some difficulty (similar to that encountered by Eugene Cernan on Gemini 9A). The collector floated out of the cabin at some time during the EVA, and was lost.

Collins next traveled over to the Agena and tried to grab onto the docking cone but found this impossible as it was smooth and had no grip. He used a nitrogen-propelled Hand-Held Maneuvering Unit (HHMU) to move himself towards the Gemini and then back to the Agena. This time he was able to grab hold of some wire bundles and retrieved the Micrometeorite Collector (S-10) from the Agena. He decided against replacing it as a piece of shroud had come loose on the Agena which could have snared the umbilical, and returning to the Gemini was deemed the safest course of action.

The last tasks remaining on this EVA were to test out the HHMU, test orbital mechanics using a tether between the Gemini and Agena, and for Young in the spacecraft to translate over to a passive Collins. However, due to low propellant quantity remaining, combined with intermittent telemetry to monitor it, these fuel costly manoeuvres were abandoned and the EVA was finished after only 39 minutes. During this time, it took the crew eight minutes to close the hatch as they had some difficulty with the umbilical. It was jettisoned along with the chestpack used by Collins an hour later when they opened the hatch for the third and final time.

===Experiments===
There were ten other experiments that the crew performed during the mission. Three were interested in radiation: MSC-3 was the Tri-Axis Magnetometer which measured levels in the South Atlantic Anomaly. There was also MSC-6, a beta spectrometer, which measured potential radiation doses for Apollo missions, and MSC-7, a bremsstrahlung spectrometer which detected radiation flux as a function of energy when the spacecraft passed through the South Atlantic Anomaly.

S-26 investigated the ion and electron wake of the spacecraft. This provided limited results due to the lack of fuel for attitude control, but found that electron and ion temperatures were higher than expected and it registered shock effects during docking and undocking.

The S-5 and S-6 experiments were performed, which were previously carried on Gemini 9A; these were Synoptic Terrain and Synoptic Weather photography respectively. There was also S-1 which was intended to image the Zodiacal light. All of these experiments were of little use as the film used was only half as sensitive as Gemini 9A and the dirty windows lowered the transmission of light by a factor of six.

The crew also tried to perform D-5, a navigation experiment. They were only able to track five stars, with six needed for accurate measurements. The last experiment, D-10, was to investigate an ion-sensing attitude control system. This experiment measured the attitude of the spacecraft from the flow of ions and electrons around the spacecraft in orbit. The results from this experiment showed the system to be accurate and responsive.

===Re-entry===
The last day of the mission was short and retrofire came at 70 hours and 10 minutes into the mission. They landed only away from the intended landing site and were recovered by .

The Gemini 10 mission was supported by the following U.S. Department of Defense resources: 9,067 personnel, 78 aircraft and 13 ships.
==Insignia==

The patch is simple in design but highly symbolic. The main feature is a large X with a Gemini and Agena orbiting around it. The two stars have a variety of meanings: the two rendezvous attempts, Castor and Pollux in Gemini or the two crew members. This is one of the few crew patches without the crew&#x27;s name. It is able to be displayed &quot;upside down&quot; but is correctly shown with the spacecraft to the right. It was designed by Young&#x27;s first wife, Barbara.

==Spacecraft location==

For many years the spacecraft was the centerpiece of a space exhibition at Norsk Teknisk Museum, Oslo, Norway. It was returned on request in 2002.

The spacecraft is currently on display at the Cosmosphere in Hutchinson, Kansas.

==See also==

* Agena Target Vehicle
* Extra-vehicular activity
* List of spacewalks
* Splashdown
* Space exploration
* U.S. space exploration history on U.S. stamps
* Space suit
* Space capsule

== References ==
==External links==

*NASA Gemini 10 press kit - July 15, 1966
* Gemini 10 Mission Report (PDF) August 1966
* U.S. Space Objects Registry https://web.archive.org/web/20090521121750/http://usspaceobjectsregistry.state.gov/search/index.cfm</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q752799" start="0" end="9" title="Gemini 10" label="Gemini 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q752799" start="22" end="30" title="Gemini 10" label="Gemini X"/>
<link wikidata="Q752783" start="43" end="61" title="crewed spaceflight" label="crewed spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="65" end="69" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q214996" start="77" end="91" title="Gemini program" label="Gemini program"/>
<link wikidata="Q214996" start="115" end="121" title="Project Gemini" label="Gemini"/>
<link wikidata="Q221269" start="210" end="214" title="X-15" label="X-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q217543" start="267" end="272" title="STS-1" label="STS-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q107667" start="283" end="293" title="John Young (astronaut)" label="John Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="305" end="314" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q104859" start="336" end="351" title="Michael Collins (astronaut)" label="Michael Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q182020" start="400" end="425" title="Extravehicular activity" label="extravehicular activities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252" start="475" end="507" title="Buzz Aldrin" label="Edwin E. &amp;quot;Buzz&amp;quot; Aldrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q312833" start="526" end="546" title="L. Gordon Cooper Jr." label="L. Gordon Cooper Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q111240" start="574" end="584" title="Jim Lovell" label="Jim Lovell"/>
<link wikidata="Q704355" start="654" end="669" title="Charles Bassett" label="Charles Bassett"/>
<link wikidata="Q621462" start="674" end="684" title="Elliot See" label="Elliot See"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572362" start="693" end="705" title="1966 NASA T-38 crash" label="a T-38 crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q519533" start="746" end="754" title="Gemini 9" label="Gemini 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="851" end="855" title="Mass" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="859" end="866" title="Perigee" label="Perigee"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="870" end="876" title="Apogee" label="Apogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112212" start="880" end="891" title="Inclination" label="Inclination"/>
<link wikidata="Q37640" start="901" end="907" title="Orbital period" label="Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093759" start="1336" end="1346" title="space rendezvous" label="rendezvous"/>
<link wikidata="Q557450" start="1351" end="1358" title="docking and berthing of spacecraft" label="docking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094450" start="1367" end="1387" title="Agena Target Vehicle" label="Agena Target Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q182020" start="1399" end="1402" title="Extra-vehicular activity" label="EVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094450" start="1835" end="1840" title="Agena target vehicle" label="Agena"/>
<link wikidata="Q617651" start="2020" end="2028" title="Gemini 8" label="Gemini 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q382984" start="3207" end="3225" title="nitrogen tetroxide" label="nitrogen tetroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q836047" start="4741" end="4750" title="Gemini 11" label="Gemini 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="5033" end="5039" title="apogee" label="apogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="5836" end="5845" title="Milky Way Galaxy" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q407613" start="6157" end="6174" title="lithium hydroxide" label="lithium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q158486" start="7179" end="7192" title="Eugene Cernan" label="Eugene Cernan"/>
<link wikidata="Q519533" start="7196" end="7205" title="Gemini 9A" label="Gemini 9A"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="7441" end="7449" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647091" start="7460" end="7486" title="Hand-Held Maneuvering Unit" label="Hand-Held Maneuvering Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468412" start="8710" end="8732" title="South Atlantic Anomaly" label="South Atlantic Anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q103531" start="8758" end="8762" title="Beta particle" label="beta"/>
<link wikidata="Q188463" start="8763" end="8775" title="spectrometer" label="spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q655904" start="8852" end="8866" title="bremsstrahlung" label="bremsstrahlung"/>
<link wikidata="Q830654" start="8895" end="8909" title="radiation flux" label="radiation flux"/>
<link wikidata="Q204079" start="9485" end="9499" title="Zodiacal light" label="Zodiacal light"/>
<link wikidata="Q7061184" start="11037" end="11057" title="Norsk Teknisk Museum" label="Norsk Teknisk Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="11059" end="11063" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q847637" start="11156" end="11167" title="Cosmosphere" label="Cosmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q958555" start="11171" end="11189" title="Hutchinson, Kansas" label="Hutchinson, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094450" start="11208" end="11228" title="Agena Target Vehicle" label="Agena Target Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q182020" start="11231" end="11255" title="Extra-vehicular activity" label="Extra-vehicular activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q450077" start="11258" end="11276" title="List of spacewalks" label="List of spacewalks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642255" start="11279" end="11289" title="Splashdown (spacecraft landing)" label="Splashdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q180046" start="11292" end="11309" title="Space exploration" label="Space exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4349914" start="11312" end="11357" title="U.S. space exploration history on U.S. stamps" label="U.S. space exploration history on U.S. stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q223571" start="11360" end="11370" title="Space suit" label="Space suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q957055" start="11373" end="11386" title="Space capsule" label="Space capsule"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11984" wikidata="Q124946" url="?curid=11984" title="Gardening">
<text>Gardening is the process of growing plants for their vegetables, fruits, flowers, herbs, and appearances within a designated space. Gardens fulfill a wide assortment of purposes, notably the production of aesthetically pleasing areas, medicines, cosmetics, dyes, foods, poisons, wildlife habitats, and saleable goods (see market gardening). People often partake in gardening for its therapeutic, health, educational, cultural, philosophical, environmental, and religious benefits.

Gardening varies in scale from the 800 hectare Versailles gardens down to container gardens grown inside. Gardens take many forms, some only contain one type of plant while others involve a complex assortment of plants with no particular order.

Gardening can be difficult to differentiate from farming. They are most easily differentiated based on their primary objectives. Farming prioritizes saleable goods and may include livestock production whereas gardening often prioritizes aesthetics and leisure. As it pertains to food production, gardening generally happens on a much smaller scale with the intent of personal or community consumption. There are cultures which do not differentiate between farming and gardening. This is primarily because subsistence agriculture has been the main method of farming throughout its 12,000 year history and is virtually indistinguishable from gardening.

== Prehistory ==

Plant domestication is seen as the birth of agriculture. However, it is arguably proceeded by a very long history of gardening wild plants. While the 12,000 year-old date is the commonly accepted timeline describing plant domestication, there is now evidence from the Ohalo II hunter-gatherer site showing earlier signs of disturbing the soil and cultivation of pre-domesticated crop species. This evidence pushes early stage plant domestication to 23,000 years ago which aligns with research done by Allaby (2022) showing slight selection pressure of desirable traits in Southwest Asian cereals (einkorn, emmer, barley). Despite not qualifying as plant domestication, there are many archaeological studies pushing the potential date of hominin selective ecosystem disturbance back up to 125,000 years ago. Much of these early recorded ecosystem disturbances were made through hominin use of fire, which dates back to 1.5 Mya (although at this time fire was not likely being wielded as a landscape-changing tool by hominids). This anthropogenic ecosystem disturbance may be the origins of gardening.

Every hunter-gatherer society has developed a niche of some sort, allowing them to thrive or even just survive amongst their environments. Many of these prehistoric hunter-gatherers had constructed a niche allowing for easier access to, or a higher amount of edible plant species. This shift from hunting and gathering to increasingly modifying the environment in a way which produces an abundance of edible plant species marks the beginning of gardening. One of the most documented hominin niches is the use of off-site fire. When done intentionally, this is often called forest gardening or fire stick farming in Australia. The modern study of fire ecology describes the many benefits off-site fires may have granted these early humans. Some of these agroecological practices have been well documented and studied during colonial contact. However, they are vastly under represented in research done on early hominin fire use. Based on current research, it is evident that these niches developed separately in different societies across different times and locations. Many of the Indigenous gardening methods were and still are often overlooked by colonizers due to the lack of resemblance to western gardens with well defined borders and non-naturalized plant species.

=== The Americas ===
There are long traditions of gardening within Indigenous societies spanning from the northernmost parts of Canada down to the southernmost tip of Chile and Argentina. The Arctic and Subarctic societies relied primarily on hunting and fishing due to the harsh climate although they have been known to collectively use at least 311 different plants as foods or medicines. The substantial knowledge and use of these plants along with the communal harvesting sites and emphasis on reciprocity between humans and plants indicates a basic level of gardening. Similarly, the Fuegian Indigenous groups in South America had developed seemingly comparable niches due to a similar tundra ecosystem. While there are very few studies on the Fuegians, Darwin mentioned wild edible plants such as fungi, kelp, and wild celery growing next to the various Fuegian shelters.

Horticulture plays a relatively small role in these northern and southern tundra inhabitants compared with Indigenous societies in grassland and forest ecosystems. From the boreal forests of Canada to the temperate forests and grasslands of Chile and Argentina different communities have developed food production niches. These include the use of fire for ecosystem maintenance and resetting successional sequences, the sowing of wild annuals, the sowing of domesticated annuals (e.g. three sisters, New World crops), creating berry patches and orchards, manipulation of plants to encourage desired traits(e.g. increased nut, fruit, or root production), and landscape modification to encourage plant and animal growth (e.g. complex irrigation, sea gardens, or terraces). These modified landscapes as recorded by early American philosophers such as Thoreau, and Emmerson were described as exhibiting pristine beauty. Indigenous gardens such as forest gardens therefore do not only serve as a producer of foods, medicines, or materials, but also pleasant aesthetics.

Many popular crops originate from pre-colonial Indigenous agricultural societies. Some of these include maize, quinoa, common bean, peanut, pumpkin, squash, pepper, tomato, cassava, potato, blueberry, cactus pear, cashew, papaya, pineapple, strawberry, cacao, sunflower, cotton, Pará rubber, and tobacco.

==History==
===Ancient times===
Forest gardening, a forest-based food production system, is the world&#x27;s oldest form of gardening.

After the emergence of the first civilizations, wealthy individuals began to create gardens for aesthetic purposes. Ancient Egyptian tomb paintings from the New Kingdom (around 1500 BC) provide some of the earliest physical evidence of ornamental horticulture and landscape design; they depict lotus ponds surrounded by symmetrical rows of acacias and palms. A notable example of ancient ornamental gardens were the Hanging Gardens of Babylon—one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World —while ancient Rome had dozens of gardens.

Wealthy ancient Egyptians used gardens for providing shade. Egyptians associated trees and gardens with gods, believing that their deities were pleased by gardens. Gardens in ancient Egypt were often surrounded by walls with trees planted in rows. Among the most popular species planted were date palms, sycamores, fig trees, nut trees, and willows. These gardens were a sign of higher socioeconomic status. In addition, wealthy ancient Egyptians grew vineyards, as wine was a sign of the higher social classes. Roses, poppies, daisies and irises could all also be found in the gardens of the Egyptians.

Assyria was renowned for its beautiful gardens. These tended to be wide and large, some of them used for hunting game—rather like a game reserve today—and others as leisure gardens. Cypresses and palms were some of the most frequently planted types of trees.

Gardens were also available in Kush. In Musawwarat es-Sufra, the Great Enclosure dated to the 3rd century BC included splendid gardens.

Ancient Roman gardens were laid out with hedges and vines and contained a wide variety of flowers—acanthus, cornflowers, crocus, cyclamen, hyacinth, iris, ivy, lavender, lilies, myrtle, narcissus, poppy, rosemary and violets—as well as statues and sculptures. Flower beds were popular in the courtyards of rich Romans.

===The Middle Ages===
The Middle Ages represent a period of decline in gardens for aesthetic purposes. After the fall of Rome, gardening was done for the purpose of growing medicinal herbs and/or decorating church altars. Monasteries carried on a tradition of garden design and intense horticultural techniques during the medieval period in Europe.
Generally, monastic garden types consisted of kitchen gardens, infirmary gardens, cemetery orchards, cloister garths and vineyards. Individual monasteries might also have had a &quot;green court&quot;, a plot of grass and trees where horses could graze, as well as a cellarer&#x27;s garden or private gardens for obedientiaries, monks who held specific posts within the monastery.

Islamic gardens were built after the model of Persian gardens and they were usually enclosed by walls and divided in four by watercourses. Commonly, the centre of the garden would have a reflecting pool or pavilion. Specific to the Islamic gardens are the mosaics and glazed tiles used to decorate the rills and fountains that were built in these gardens.

By the late 13th century, rich Europeans began to grow gardens for leisure and for medicinal herbs and vegetables. They surrounded the gardens by walls to protect them from animals and to provide seclusion. During the next two centuries, Europeans started planting lawns and raising flowerbeds and trellises of roses. Fruit trees were common in these gardens and also in some, there were turf seats. At the same time, the gardens in the monasteries were a place to grow flowers and medicinal herbs but they were also a space where the monks could enjoy nature and relax.

The gardens in the 16th and 17th century were symmetric, proportioned and balanced with a more classical appearance. Most of these gardens were built around a central axis and they were divided into different parts by hedges. Commonly, gardens had flowerbeds laid out in squares and separated by gravel paths.

Gardens in Renaissance were adorned with sculptures, topiary and fountains. In the 17th century, knot gardens became popular along with the hedge mazes. By this time, Europeans started planting new flowers such as tulips, marigolds and sunflowers.

===Cottage gardens===
Cottage gardens, which emerged in Elizabethan times, appear to have originated as a local source for herbs and fruits. One theory is that they arose out of the Black Death of the 1340s, when the death of so many laborers made land available for small cottages with personal gardens. According to the late 19th-century legend of origin, these gardens were originally created by the workers that lived in the cottages of the villages, to provide them with food and herbs, with flowers planted among them for decoration. Farm workers were provided with cottages that had architectural quality set in a small garden—about —where they could grow food and keep pigs and chickens.

Authentic gardens of the yeoman cottager would have included a beehive and livestock, and frequently a pig and sty, along with a well. The peasant cottager of medieval times was more interested in meat than flowers, with herbs grown for medicinal use rather than for their beauty. By Elizabethan times there was more prosperity, and thus more room to grow flowers. Even the early cottage garden flowers typically had their practical use—violets were spread on the floor (for their pleasant scent and keeping out vermin); calendulas and primroses were both attractive and used in cooking. Others, such as sweet William and hollyhocks, were grown entirely for their beauty.

===18th century===
In the 18th century, gardens were laid out more naturally, without any walls. This style of smooth undulating grass, which would run straight to the house, clumps, belts and scattering of trees and serpentine lakes formed by invisibly damming small rivers, were a new style within the English landscape. This was a &quot;gardenless&quot; form of landscape gardening, which swept away almost all the remnants of previous formally patterned styles. The English landscape garden usually included a lake, lawns set against groves of trees, and often contained shrubberies, grottoes, pavilions, bridges and follies such as mock temples, Gothic ruins, bridges, and other picturesque architecture, designed to recreate an idyllic pastoral landscape. This new style emerged in England in the early 18th century, and spread across Europe, replacing the more formal, symmetrical garden à la française of the 17th century as the principal gardening style of Europe. The English garden presented an idealized view of nature. They were often inspired by paintings of landscapes by Claude Lorraine and Nicolas Poussin, and some were Influenced by the classic Chinese gardens of the East, which had recently been described by European travelers. The work of Lancelot &#x27;Capability&#x27; Brown was particularly influential. Also, in 1804 the Horticultural Society was formed.

Gardens of the 19th century contained plants such as the monkey puzzle or Chile pine. This is also the time when the so-called &quot;gardenesque&quot; style of gardens evolved. These gardens displayed a wide variety of flowers in a rather small space. Rock gardens increased in popularity in the 19th century.

In ancient India, patterns from sacred geometry and mandalas were used to design gardens. Distinct mandala patterns denoted specific deities, planets, or even constellations. Such a garden was also referred to as a &#x27;Mandala Vaatika&#x27;. The word &#x27;Vaatika&#x27; can mean garden, plantation or parterre.

==Types==
Residential gardening takes place near the home, in a space referred to as the garden. Although a garden typically is located on the land near a residence, it may also be located on a roof, in an atrium, on a balcony, in a window box, on a patio or vivarium.
Gardening also takes place in non-residential green areas, such as parks, public or semi-public gardens (botanical gardens or zoological gardens), amusement parks, along transportation corridors, and around tourist attractions and garden hotels. In these situations, a staff of gardeners or groundskeepers maintains the gardens.

* Indoor gardening is concerned with the growing of houseplants within a residence or building, in a conservatory, or in a greenhouse. Indoor gardens are sometimes incorporated as part of air conditioning or heating systems. Indoor gardening extends the growing season in the fall and spring and can be used for winter gardening.
* Native plant gardening is concerned with the use of native plants with or without the intent of creating wildlife habitat. The goal is to create a garden in harmony with, and adapted to a given area. This type of gardening typically reduces water usage, maintenance, and fertilization costs, while increasing native faunal interest.
* Water gardening is concerned with growing plants adapted to pools and ponds. Bog gardens are also considered a type of water garden. These all require special conditions and considerations. A simple water garden may consist solely of a tub containing the water and plant(s). In aquascaping, a garden is created within an aquarium tank.
* Container gardening is concerned with growing plants in any type of container either indoors or outdoors. Common containers are pots, hanging baskets, and planters. Container gardening is usually used in atriums and on balconies, patios, and roof tops.
* Hügelkultur is concerned with growing plants on piles of rotting wood, as a form of raised bed gardening and composting in situ. An English loanword from German, it means &quot;mound garden&quot;. Toby Hemenway, noted permaculture author and teacher, considers wood buried in trenches to also be a form of hugelkultur referred to as a dead wood swale. Hugelkultur is practiced by Sepp Holzer as a method of forest gardening and agroforestry, and by Geoff Lawton as a method of dryland farming and desert greening. When used as a method of disposing of large volumes of waste wood and woody debris, hugelkultur accomplishes carbon sequestration. It is also a form of xeriscaping.
* Community gardening is a social activity in which an area of land is gardened by a group of people, providing access to fresh produce, herbs, flowers and plants as well as access to satisfying labor, neighborhood improvement, sense of community and connection to the environment. Community gardens are typically owned in trust by local governments or nonprofits.
* Garden sharing partners landowners with gardeners in need of land. These shared gardens, typically front or back yards, are usually used to produce food that is divided between the two parties. 
* Organic gardening uses natural, sustainable methods, fertilizers and pesticides to grow non-genetically modified crops.
*Biodynamic gardening or biodynamic agriculture is similar to organic gardening, but includes various esoteric concepts drawn from the ideas of Rudolf Steiner, such as astrological sowing and planting calendar and particular field and compost preparations.
*Commercial gardening is a more intensive type of gardening that involves the production of vegetables, non-tropical fruits, and flowers from local farmers. Commercial gardening began because farmers would sell locally to stop food from spoiling faster because of the transportation of goods from a far distance. Mediterranean agriculture is also a common practice that commercial gardeners use. Mediterranean agriculture is the practice of cultivating animals such as sheep to help weed and provide manure for vine crops, grains, or citrus. Gardeners can easily train these animals to not eat the actual plant.
*No-dig gardening (or no till gardening) is a method of gardening that avoids tillage as much as possible. This method of gardening is gaining popularity in part due to celebrated figures such as Charles Dowding, Masanobu Fukuoka, Jean-Martin Fortier, Connor Crickmore, Jesse Frost, Elaine Ingham, and many other market gardeners. Minimal tillage has been documented to help with promoting diverse soil biology, water retention and drainage, healthier vigorous plants, reduction in weed pressure, reduction in labor, increased fertility and nutrient availability, increase carbon sequestration, reduction in cost, reduction in soil erosion, and reduction in pollution.

== Tools ==
Regardless of historical time period, location, scale, or type of garden, all gardening requires some basic tools. For the majority of human history, people have managed with significantly fewer resources compared to modern times. Agriculture was built on the use of hands, stones, sticks, human ingenuity, and fire. The essential tools used in pre-Bronze Age gardening were non-metal (primarily stone, bone, wood, or copper) knives, axes, adzes, foot ploughs, sickles, hoes, baskets, pottery, digging sticks, animal-driven ploughs, animals, and fire for clearing land. Up until the green revolution these simple tools, although continually improved upon, would continue to be the backbone of agricultural societies.

The industrial revolution created a large increase in availability and impact of agricultural tools. These tools include tractors with modern implements, manure spreaders, cultivators, mowers, earth-moving machines, hedge trimmers, strimmer&#x27;s, wood-chippers, two-wheel tractors, complex irrigation systems, plastic mulch, plastic shelters, seeding trays, indoor grow lights, packaging, chemical fertilizers, pesticides, genetically modified seeds, and many more.

== Plant Propagation ==
Plants may be propagated through many different methods. These methods are classified as either sexual or asexual propagation.

=== Asexual reproduction ===
Asexual reproduction occurs when plants produce clonal offspring. This method of reproduction is often more simplistic and provides rapid population growth. Cloning may result in highly vulnerable plant populations if they do not also reproduce sexually in order to create genetic diversity thus allowing for certain levels of natural selection and hybrid vigor. There are various methods of asexual plant propagation taken advantage of by gardeners. These include vegetative propagation which involves the growth of new plants from vegetative parts of the parent plant, such as roots, stems, and leaves. Certain plants such as strawberries and raspberries produce stolons or rhizomes which are stems which grow horizontally above or below ground, developing new plants at nodes. Another common method of asexual reproduction in garden plants is fragmentation which involves a separation from the parent plant. This is common for shrubs, and trees such as willows which may shed their branches which is termed cladoptosis. Placing the shed limb into water or soil produces budding and causes roots to form.

Perhaps the most commonly-known method of asexual reproduction in gardening and farming is grafting. A human may choose to graft an excellent fruit producing cultivar on a selected rootstock cultivar of the same species. This involves cutting each plant and connecting the cuttings by mechanical means until they inosculate or fuse together. Grafting is done for many purposes. Firstly, the scion (portion of the plant above the graft site) can undergo artificial selection for specific desirable traits such as flavor while the rootstock can undergo selection for traits such as disease resistance or cold tolerance. This effectively allows for much more efficiency in the artificial selection process as certain traits such as fruit taste can be ignored altogether in the rootstock allowing for a focused selection with less backcrossing to a plant that had good tasting fruit. Secondly, grafting allows for plants that require cross pollination for fruit generation, such as apples, to all grow together as one tree. Thirdly, this allows for quick reproduction where one mother plant can produce many semi-developed clones each year.

=== Sexual reproduction ===
Sexual reproduction occurs through the pollination of an ovule. This pollination must occur between female and male parts of a single flower or between flowers. A plant may undergo self pollination as a sexual means of reproduction where the genes of the mother plant will not perfectly match those of the progeny. Progeny from self pollination will however have less genetic diversity which may result in inbreeding depression versus plants from cross pollination. Pollen is typically carried by wind, insects, or animals to complete pollination. Some greenhouses may have to manually pollinate their plants to produce fruit and seeds due to a lack of these conditions. Sexual reproduction can only be done by members of the same species and this produces varying levels of genetic diversity in the plants offspring. This genetic diversity is responsible for the survival of every plant as we know them today. The diversity allows for disease resistance, adaptations to changing climate, changes in soil, changes in pollination methods, changes in animal grazing pressure, changes in weed pressure, and any other variations that arise in their growing conditions. Crossing plants, or hybridizing, results in hybrid vigor and will increase the genetic diversity.

Many commercially grown plants are F1 hybrids which ensures certain desirable traits. A common alternative to growing hybrid plants is to grow heirloom or open pollinated plants which, unlike F1 hybrids, will produce viable seed with progeny similar to its parent. Many modern gardeners will save seeds from heirloom varieties but not hybrids due to the certainty of desirable traits heirloom seeds provide. Historically a lack of plant breeding knowledge would have led to more hybridization and the creation of new genetically diverse landraces. Each plant varies in its likelihood of outcrossing. Highly outcrossing plants such as spinach are more likely to create landraces. Many landraces and heirloom varieties along with their genetics are being lost due to the decrease in seed saving by modern farmers. This leads plant geneticists to search for desirable genetics in wild ancestral varieties of commonly grown plants. Plants have been artificially selected and bred since at least 7800 BCE. Despite the decrease in farmer seed saving, many landraces are also being created through artificial selection and genetic modification. Gardeners remain vital in the preservation of diverse genetics whether they maintain a family heirloom variety bred to fit conditions from the distant past, or they breed new landraces with traits matching their modern climate and growing condition.

Certain seeds may not sprout without certain environmental conditions. These seeds either require scarification or stratification. Gardeners may grow frustrated if they lack this crucial knowledge before attempting to propagate certain plants such as hard neck garlic (asexual reproduction), which requires a cold dormant period to sprout, or saskatoon berries which have improved germination after being digested by bears through a process called endozoochory.

=== Transplanting ===

Many gardeners, especially those who live in colder climates, will start seeds indoors prior to transplanting the young plant outside. This provides many benefits such as elongating the growing season, ensuring adequate quantities and quality of light, ensuring seedlings have adequate nutrients in the seed starting mix, ensuring seeds stay at correct humidity, heat, and moisture level for germination, and saving space in the garden. Many crops will not be harvestable unless they are started inside so if a gardener wants to plant these crops in their garden without starting the plants themselves, they will need to purchase transplants which are commonly available at garden centers, plant nurseries, and big-box stores. It is crucial that transplanting is done correctly. This generally implies providing the plants with enough soil so they do not become root-bound (roots wrapping in circles around transplant container), providing a hardening-off period (slow exposure to sun, wind, and cold), providing sufficient light, water, and nutrients, and choosing the correct plants to start indoors as some plants do not do well with the transplanting process.

There are varying methods of starting your seeds. The most prevalent method would be to start seeds in transplant (plug) trays or in planters/pots. Another method is starting seeds in soil blocks (small cubes of compressed potting soil, compost, and/or other seed-starting media), which may reduce transplant shock and stop root-binding because they allow air pruning of the roots. Some plants such as onions and various herbs may be efficiently started by scattering their seeds on top of soil in a large tray where the seedlings will later be teased apart from each other and replanted in the garden or pots.

== Pests ==
Garden pests are generally plants, fungi, or animals (frequently insects) that engage in activity that the gardener considers undesirable. A pest may crowd out desirable plants, disturb soil, stunt the growth of young seedlings, steal or damage fruit, or otherwise kill plants, hamper their growth, damage their appearance, or reduce the quality of the edible or ornamental portions of the plant. Aphids, spider mites, slugs, snails, ants, birds, and even cats are commonly considered to be garden pests.

Throughout history ecosystems that have undergone rapid changes are typically those which harbor the most pests. For example, a highly and rapidly altered landscape such as modern canola fields in the Americas can be a breeding ground for pests of the Brassicaceae family. A natural ecosystem will typically regulate pest levels through many biological means whether that be the natural introduction of a disease or an increase in the population of a predator species of animal. 

Because gardeners may have different goals, organisms considered &quot;garden pests&quot; vary from gardener to gardener. &quot;Tropaeolum speciosum&quot;, for example, may be considered a desirable and ornamental garden plant, or it may be considered a pest if it seeds and starts to grow where it is not wanted. As another example, in lawns, moss can become dominant and be impossible to eradicate. In some lawns, lichens, especially very damp lawn lichens such as &quot;Peltigera lactucfolia&quot; and &quot;P. membranacea&quot;, can become difficult to control and are considered pests.

===Pest control===
There are many ways by which unwanted pests are removed from a garden. The techniques vary depending on the pest, the gardener&#x27;s goals, and the gardener&#x27;s philosophy. For example, snails may be dealt with through the use of a chemical pesticide, an organic pesticide, hand-picking, barriers, or simply growing snail-resistant plants.

On a large scale pest control is often done through the use of pesticides and herbicides, which may be either organic or artificially synthesized. Pesticides may affect the ecology of a garden due to their effects on the populations of both target and non-target species. For example, unintended exposure to some neonicotinoid pesticides has been proposed as a factor in the recent decline in honey bee populations. Pesticides and herbicides are also known to cause medical issues, typically to those in proximity during their application. While farm workers are by far the most affected by the use of pesticides and herbicides, they are often under-informed or accept the consequences due to financial necessity. Fungicides may be applied to the seed coat to reduce mortality of germinating seedlings. The improper use of pesticides often leads to pesticide resistance which poses a risk in global food security. With climate change affecting the distribution of pests, a global increase in pesticide usage has been observed which in turn has caused an increase of human health risks due to exposure. Creating new pesticides in order to manage resistant organisms is an immense expense and is often heavily criticized as an ineffective method of pest control.

Other means of control include the removal of infected plants, using fertilizers and bio stimulants to improve the health and vigor of plants so they better resist attack, practicing crop rotation to prevent pest build-up, using foliar sprays, companion planting, and practicing good garden hygiene, such as disinfecting tools and clearing debris and weeds which may harbor pests. Another common method of pest control, used frequently in market gardening, is using insect netting or plastic greenhouse covers. Gardeners may rely on one type of pest in order to eliminate another. Some examples of this are cats which hunt mice and rats, wild birds, bats, chickens, and ducks which hunt insects and slugs, or thorny hedges to deter deer and other creatures. Using these organisms to help control pests is called biological pest control. There are also targeted measures of animal pest control such as a mole vibrator which can deter mole activity in a garden, or automated gun shots to scare off birds.
==== Garden guns ====
Garden guns are smooth-bore shotguns specifically made to fire .22 caliber snake shot, and are commonly used by gardeners and farmers for pest control. Garden guns are short-range weapons that can do little harm past and are relatively quiet when fired with snake shot, compared to a standard ammunition. These guns are especially effective inside of barns and sheds, as the snake shot will not shoot holes in the roof or walls, or more importantly injure livestock with a ricochet. They are also used for pest control at airports, warehouses, and stockyards.

==Social aspects==
People can express their political or social views in gardens, intentionally or not. The lawn vs. garden issue is played out in urban planning as the debate over the &quot;land ethic&quot; that is to determine urban land use and whether hyper hygienist bylaws (e.g. weed control) should apply, or whether land should generally be allowed to exist in its natural wild state. In a famous Canadian Charter of Rights case, &quot;Sandra Bell vs. City of Toronto&quot;, 1997, the right to cultivate all native species, even most varieties deemed noxious or allergenic, was upheld as part of the right of free expression.

Community gardening comprises a wide variety of approaches to sharing land and gardens.

People often surround their house and garden with a hedge. Common hedge plants are privet, hawthorn, beech, yew, leyland cypress, hemlock, arborvitae, barberry, box, holly, oleander, forsythia and lavender. The idea of open gardens without hedges may be distasteful to those who enjoy privacy.
The Slow Food movement has sought in some countries to add an edible school yard and garden classrooms to schools, e.g. in Fergus, Ontario, where these were added to a public school to augment the kitchen classroom. Garden sharing, where urban landowners allow gardeners to grow on their property in exchange for a share of the harvest, is associated with the desire to control the quality of one&#x27;s food, and reconnect with soil and community.

In US and British usage, the production of ornamental plantings around buildings is called &quot;landscaping&quot;, &quot;landscape maintenance&quot; or &quot;grounds keeping&quot;, while international usage uses the term &quot;gardening&quot; for these same activities.

Also gaining popularity is the concept of &quot;Green Gardening&quot; which involves growing plants using organic fertilizers and pesticides so that the gardening process – or the flowers and fruits produced thereby – doesn&#x27;t adversely affect the environment or people&#x27;s health in any manner.

Gardening can be a very pleasant and relaxing activity with rewarding results. it allows for a connection with nature and creating a green space that presents a vision of beauty but also contributes to the eco system. A thriving and flourishing garden can be created, by understanding and adapting to the climate and environmental changes.

Plants and flowers grow in varying temperatures and weather conditions. Most plants thrive in temperatures between 18 and 24 °C during the day and slightly cooler at night. This range allows for optimal photosynthesis and overall growth for many common plant species. Usually there is a variety of plants in a garden, therefore it is always best to learn about the best weather for your plants to have success with your planting.

===Laws and restrictions===
In some parts of the world, particularly the United States, gardening can be restricted by law or by rules and regulations imposed by a home-owner&#x27;s association. In the United States, such rules may prohibit homeowners from growing vegetable gardens, prohibit xeriscaping or meadow gardens, or require garden plants to be chosen from a pre-approved list, to preserve the aesthetics of the neighborhood. Numerous challenges to these laws, ordinances and regulations have emerged in recent years, with some resulting in legislation protecting a homeowner&#x27;s right to cultivate native plants or grow vegetables. Laws protecting a homeowner&#x27;s right to grow food plants have been termed &quot;right to garden&quot; laws.

== Benefits ==
Gardening is considered by many people to be a relaxing activity. There are also many studies about the positive effects on mental and physical health in relation to gardening. Specifically, gardening is thought to increase self-esteem and reduce stress. As writer and former teacher Sarah Biddle notes, one&#x27;s garden may become a &quot;tiny oasis to relax and recharge [one&#x27;s] batteries.&quot; Involving in gardening activities aid in creativity, observational skills, learning, planning and physical movement.

Others consider gardening to be a good hedge against supply chain disruptions with increased worries that the public cannot always trust that the grocery store shelves will be fully stocked. In April 2022, about 31% of grocery products were out of stock which is an 11% increase from November 2021.

Gardening can also support good numbers and a wide range of pollinators, but worryingly bees and other pollinators are in decline. Gardeners can make a difference to help reverse this trend. The main thing that matters is that they get their share of nectar to fuel their busy lifestyles, and this is where gardening can help them.

A way to both positively impacts humans and pollinators can be implementing pollinator gardens. Including native flowers has shown to increase pollinators, and even protects bee populations against urbanization and landscapes that do not include flowers. Small patches in urban landscapes that are diverse in flowers have been noted to match or even exceed wild landscapes when it comes to bees pollinating. Areas like golf courses, cemeteries, community gardens as well as residential gardens are all areas in urban settings that could benefit pollinator diversity by implementing native flowers to the landscape.

==Ornaments and accessories==

There is a wide range of garden ornaments and accessories available in the market for both the professional gardener and the amateur to exercise their creativity for example sculptures, lights or fountains. These are used to add decoration or functionality, and may be made from a wide range of materials such as copper, stone, wood, bamboo, stainless steel, clay, stained glass, concrete, or iron. Examples include trellis, garden furniture, gnomes, statues, outdoor fireplaces, fountains, rain chains, urns, bird baths and feeders, wind chimes, and garden lighting such as candle lanterns and oil lamps. The use of these items can be part of the expression of a gardener&#x27;s gardening personality.

==As art==
Garden design is considered to be an art in most cultures, distinguished from gardening, which generally means &quot;garden maintenance&quot;. Garden design can include different themes such as perennial, butterfly, wildlife, Japanese, water, tropical, or shade gardens.

In Japan, Samurai and Zen monks were often required to build decorative gardens or practice related skills like flower arrangement known as &quot;ikebana&quot;. In 18th-century Europe, country estates were refashioned by landscape gardeners into formal gardens or landscaped park lands, such as at Versailles, France, or Stowe, England. Today, landscape architects and garden designers continue to produce artistically creative designs for private garden spaces. In the US, professional landscape designers are certified by the Association of Professional Landscape Designers.

==See also==

* Arboretum
* Bonsai
* Cultigen
* Eyecatchers
* Garden writing
* Growbag
* Introduced species
* Impact gardening
* List of gardening topics
* List of horticulture and gardening books
* List of professional gardeners
* Master gardener program
* No-dig gardening

==References==
==External links==
* National Gardening Association (USA)
* Manual of Gardening (1910)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q124946" start="0" end="9" title="Gardening" label="Gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="53" end="62" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="65" end="70" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="73" end="79" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q207123" start="82" end="86" title="herb" label="herb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107656" start="132" end="138" title="Garden" label="Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="205" end="218" title="Aesthetics" label="aesthetically"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="235" end="244" title="Medication" label="medicines"/>
<link wikidata="Q131207" start="246" end="255" title="cosmetics" label="cosmetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q189720" start="257" end="260" title="dye" label="dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095" start="263" end="267" title="food" label="food"/>
<link wikidata="Q40867" start="270" end="276" title="poison" label="poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="288" end="295" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q143970" start="322" end="335" title="market garden" label="market garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q179661" start="383" end="394" title="Therapy" label="therapeutic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12147" start="396" end="402" title="health" label="health"/>
<link wikidata="Q8434" start="404" end="413" title="education" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="417" end="425" title="Culture" label="cultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="427" end="440" title="Philosophy" label="philosophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q832237" start="442" end="455" title="Environmental protection" label="environmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="461" end="470" title="Religion" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="529" end="539" title="Palace of Versailles" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164897" start="556" end="572" title="container garden" label="container garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="777" end="784" title="Agriculture" label="farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="908" end="917" title="livestock" label="livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q180910" start="980" end="987" title="leisure" label="leisure"/>
<link wikidata="Q251958" start="1107" end="1128" title="Community gardening" label="community consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="1233" end="1256" title="subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517652" start="1666" end="1674" title="Ohalo II" label="Ohalo II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="1986" end="1992" title="cereal" label="cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868366" start="2046" end="2065" title="History of plant breeding" label="plant domestication"/>
<link wikidata="Q107588" start="2135" end="2142" title="Hominini" label="hominin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="2153" end="2162" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q912205" start="2275" end="2294" title="Control of fire by early humans" label="hominin use of fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139192" start="2699" end="2704" title="Niche construction" label="niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="2796" end="2817" title="Hunter-gatherer" label="hunting and gathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q397350" start="3072" end="3088" title="forest gardening" label="forest gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451268" start="3092" end="3110" title="Fire-stick farming" label="fire stick farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409472" start="3145" end="3157" title="fire ecology" label="fire ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q396338" start="3252" end="3266" title="Agroecology" label="agroecological"/>
<link wikidata="Q815962" start="3322" end="3330" title="Colonization" label="colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="3693" end="3700" title="Western world" label="western"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="3838" end="3858" title="Indigenous peoples" label="Indigenous societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="3899" end="3905" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="3938" end="3943" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="3948" end="3957" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="3963" end="3969" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342399" start="3974" end="3983" title="Subarctic" label="Subarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="4014" end="4021" title="hunting" label="hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="4026" end="4033" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302484" start="4269" end="4280" title="Reciprocity (evolution)" label="reciprocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q735064" start="4360" end="4367" title="Fuegians" label="Fuegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="4530" end="4536" title="Charles Darwin" label="Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="4574" end="4579" title="Fungus" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055316" start="4581" end="4585" title="kelp" label="kelp"/>
<link wikidata="Q23012379" start="4596" end="4602" title="celery" label="celery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="4781" end="4790" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421" start="4795" end="4801" title="forest" label="forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078747" start="4823" end="4837" title="Boreal forest of Canada" label="boreal forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q188230" start="5042" end="5054" title="Ecological succession" label="successional"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478954" start="5135" end="5148" title="Three Sisters (agriculture)" label="three sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012611" start="5150" end="5165" title="New World crops" label="New World crops"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="5382" end="5392" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q60742738" start="5394" end="5405" title="Clam garden" label="sea gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q838625" start="5410" end="5418" title="Terrace (earthworks)" label="terraces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="5477" end="5489" title="Philosophy" label="philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q131149" start="5498" end="5505" title="Henry David Thoreau" label="Thoreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q48226" start="5511" end="5519" title="Ralph Waldo Emerson" label="Emmerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="5820" end="5825" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q139925" start="5827" end="5833" title="quinoa" label="quinoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q42339" start="5835" end="5846" title="Phaseolus vulgaris" label="common bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q37383" start="5848" end="5854" title="peanut" label="peanut"/>
<link wikidata="Q165308" start="5856" end="5863" title="pumpkin" label="pumpkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339301" start="5865" end="5871" title="Cucurbita" label="squash"/>
<link wikidata="Q201959" start="5873" end="5879" title="Capsicum" label="pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="5881" end="5887" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="5889" end="5896" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="5898" end="5904" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q13178" start="5906" end="5915" title="blueberry" label="blueberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q158991" start="5917" end="5928" title="Opuntia" label="cactus pear"/>
<link wikidata="Q34007" start="5930" end="5936" title="cashew" label="cashew"/>
<link wikidata="Q34887" start="5938" end="5944" title="papaya" label="papaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493" start="5946" end="5955" title="pineapple" label="pineapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q13158" start="5957" end="5967" title="strawberry" label="strawberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q42385" start="5969" end="5974" title="Theobroma cacao" label="cacao"/>
<link wikidata="Q171497" start="5976" end="5985" title="Common sunflower" label="sunflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="5987" end="5993" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q156538" start="5995" end="6006" title="Hevea brasiliensis" label="Pará rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="6012" end="6019" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q397350" start="6054" end="6070" title="Forest gardening" label="Forest gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="6191" end="6203" title="civilization" label="civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="6274" end="6287" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q180568" start="6315" end="6326" title="New Kingdom of Egypt" label="New Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803" start="6405" end="6417" title="horticulture" label="horticulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348520" start="6452" end="6457" title="Egyptian lotus" label="lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q81666" start="6498" end="6504" title="acacia" label="acacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14080" start="6510" end="6515" title="palm tree" label="palms"/>
<link wikidata="Q41931" start="6574" end="6600" title="Hanging Gardens of Babylon" label="Hanging Gardens of Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q489772" start="6612" end="6646" title="Seven Wonders of the Ancient World" label="Seven Wonders of the Ancient World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="6654" end="6666" title="ancient Rome" label="ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q25292" start="6983" end="6993" title="date palms" label="date palms"/>
<link wikidata="Q59798" start="7006" end="7015" title="Ficus" label="fig trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q36050" start="7032" end="7039" title="willows" label="willows"/>
<link wikidata="Q34687" start="7203" end="7207" title="Rose" label="Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q25400" start="7219" end="7226" title="Asteraceae" label="daisies"/>
<link wikidata="Q156901" start="7231" end="7237" title="Iris (plant)" label="irises"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="7296" end="7303" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q146911" start="7478" end="7487" title="Cupressus" label="Cypresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q241790" start="7587" end="7591" title="Kingdom of Kush" label="Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q286426" start="7596" end="7615" title="Musawwarat es-Sufra" label="Musawwarat es-Sufra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="7693" end="7706" title="Ancient Roman" label="Ancient Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q158091" start="7791" end="7799" title="Acanthus (plant)" label="acanthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156921" start="7801" end="7812" title="cornflowers" label="cornflowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q157806" start="7814" end="7820" title="crocus" label="crocus"/>
<link wikidata="Q147295" start="7822" end="7830" title="cyclamen" label="cyclamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q171892" start="7853" end="7861" title="lavender" label="lavender"/>
<link wikidata="Q102240169" start="7897" end="7905" title="rosemary" label="rosemary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="8039" end="8050" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q188840" start="8186" end="8201" title="medicinal herbs" label="medicinal herbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q101687" start="8227" end="8233" title="altars" label="altars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964546" start="8273" end="8286" title="garden design" label="garden design"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="8354" end="8360" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q236371" start="8453" end="8460" title="orchard" label="orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114508" start="8744" end="8758" title="Islamic garden" label="Islamic garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460" start="8790" end="8805" title="Persian gardens" label="Persian gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328914" start="8931" end="8946" title="reflecting pool" label="reflecting pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q276173" start="8950" end="8958" title="pavilion" label="pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="9000" end="9006" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q483453" start="9056" end="9064" title="fountain" label="fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815274" start="9297" end="9306" title="seclusion" label="seclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="9538" end="9549" title="monasteries" label="monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="9636" end="9640" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q12485" start="9719" end="9728" title="symmetric" label="symmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437791" start="10037" end="10044" title="topiary" label="topiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777480" start="10081" end="10092" title="knot garden" label="knot garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q13406558" start="10124" end="10134" title="hedge maze" label="hedge maze"/>
<link wikidata="Q93201" start="10198" end="10204" title="tulips" label="tulips"/>
<link wikidata="Q26949" start="10220" end="10230" title="sunflowers" label="sunflowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q811252" start="10255" end="10269" title="Cottage garden" label="Cottage garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q912595" start="10289" end="10306" title="Elizabethan times" label="Elizabethan times"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="10415" end="10426" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060555" start="10773" end="10785" title="Farmworker" label="Farm workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q862823" start="10955" end="10961" title="yeoman" label="yeoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="11005" end="11014" title="livestock" label="livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q147281" start="11451" end="11460" title="calendula" label="calendula"/>
<link wikidata="Q159537" start="11466" end="11475" title="primula vulgaris" label="primroses"/>
<link wikidata="Q161745" start="11534" end="11547" title="Dianthus barbatus" label="sweet William"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148371" start="11552" end="11561" title="hollyhock" label="hollyhock"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="11907" end="11914" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q12783" start="12073" end="12097" title="English landscape garden" label="English landscape garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510380" start="12141" end="12156" title="Grove (nature)" label="groves of trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q180174" start="12224" end="12231" title="folly" label="follies"/>
<link wikidata="Q12774" start="12491" end="12512" title="garden à la française" label="garden à la française"/>
<link wikidata="Q214074" start="12690" end="12705" title="Claude Lorraine" label="Claude Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41554" start="12710" end="12725" title="Nicolas Poussin" label="Nicolas Poussin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47692" start="12767" end="12782" title="Chinese gardens" label="Chinese gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q454635" start="12865" end="12902" title="Capability Brown" label="Lancelot &amp;#x27;Capability&amp;#x27; Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q158780" start="13060" end="13070" title="Chile pine" label="Chile pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522444" start="13119" end="13130" title="gardenesque" label="gardenesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141231" start="13238" end="13249" title="Rock garden" label="Rock garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q583915" start="13329" end="13344" title="sacred geometry" label="sacred geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q191431" start="13349" end="13356" title="mandala" label="mandala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156696" start="13801" end="13810" title="roof garden" label="on a roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q189265" start="13818" end="13824" title="Atrium (architecture)" label="atrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q170552" start="13831" end="13838" title="balcony" label="balcony"/>
<link wikidata="Q23583755" start="13845" end="13855" title="window box" label="window box"/>
<link wikidata="Q737988" start="13857" end="13867" title="Patio" label="on a patio"/>
<link wikidata="Q315630" start="13871" end="13879" title="vivarium" label="vivarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q167346" start="13986" end="14002" title="botanical garden" label="botanical garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q43501" start="14007" end="14025" title="zoo" label="zoological gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="14028" end="14042" title="amusement park" label="amusement park"/>
<link wikidata="Q570116" start="14088" end="14106" title="tourist attraction" label="tourist attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522369" start="14112" end="14125" title="garden hotels" label="garden hotels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098937" start="14172" end="14185" title="groundskeeper" label="groundskeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q203834" start="14263" end="14273" title="houseplant" label="houseplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077174" start="14312" end="14324" title="conservatory (greenhouse)" label="conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q165044" start="14334" end="14344" title="greenhouse" label="greenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="14399" end="14415" title="air conditioning" label="air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587693" start="14523" end="14539" title="winter gardening" label="winter gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980718" start="14543" end="14565" title="Native plant gardening" label="Native plant gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q169480" start="14595" end="14608" title="native plants" label="native plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="14648" end="14664" title="wildlife habitat" label="wildlife habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q735035" start="14852" end="14864" title="native fauna" label="native fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q113574" start="14878" end="14890" title="Water garden" label="Water garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937319" start="14955" end="14965" title="Bog garden" label="Bog garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q623189" start="15156" end="15167" title="aquascaping" label="aquascaping"/>
<link wikidata="Q45782" start="15199" end="15207" title="aquarium" label="aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164897" start="15216" end="15232" title="Container garden" label="Container garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648023" start="15350" end="15364" title="hanging basket" label="hanging basket"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069101" start="15471" end="15482" title="Hügelkultur" label="Hügelkultur"/>
<link wikidata="Q26520" start="15555" end="15575" title="raised bed gardening" label="raised bed gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q212254" start="15580" end="15587" title="compost" label="compost"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15591" end="15598" title="In situ#Biology and biomedical engineering" label="in situ"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="15611" end="15619" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811820" start="15668" end="15681" title="Toby Hemenway" label="Toby Hemenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572" start="15689" end="15701" title="permaculture" label="permaculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344823" start="15816" end="15821" title="Swale (landform)" label="swale"/>
<link wikidata="Q79145" start="15851" end="15862" title="Sepp Holzer" label="Sepp Holzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q397350" start="15878" end="15894" title="forest gardening" label="forest gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q397350" start="15899" end="15911" title="agroforestry" label="agroforestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q651838" start="15920" end="15932" title="Geoff Lawton" label="Geoff Lawton"/>
<link wikidata="Q926906" start="15948" end="15963" title="dryland farming" label="dryland farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115648" start="15968" end="15983" title="desert greening" label="desert greening"/>
<link wikidata="Q15305550" start="16094" end="16114" title="carbon sequestration" label="carbon sequestration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706851" start="16137" end="16148" title="xeriscaping" label="xeriscaping"/>
<link wikidata="Q251958" start="16152" end="16171" title="Community gardening" label="Community gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522420" start="16517" end="16531" title="Garden sharing" label="Garden sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623285" start="16630" end="16635" title="yard (land)" label="yards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162639" start="16714" end="16731" title="Organic horticulture" label="Organic gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503477" start="16806" end="16832" title="genetically modified crops" label="genetically modified crops"/>
<link wikidata="Q847611" start="16835" end="16855" title="Biodynamic gardening" label="Biodynamic gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="16936" end="16944" title="esoteric" label="esoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q78484" start="16978" end="16992" title="Rudolf Steiner" label="Rudolf Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413684" start="17704" end="17720" title="No-dig gardening" label="No-dig gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q64513700" start="17899" end="17914" title="Charles Dowding" label="Charles Dowding"/>
<link wikidata="Q334997" start="17916" end="17932" title="Masanobu Fukuoka" label="Masanobu Fukuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q16645301" start="17934" end="17953" title="Jean-Martin Fortier" label="Jean-Martin Fortier"/>
<link wikidata="Q107370715" start="17955" end="17971" title="Conor Crickmore" label="Connor Crickmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353226" start="17986" end="17999" title="Elaine Ingham" label="Elaine Ingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7554913" start="18101" end="18113" title="Soil food web" label="soil biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q39546" start="18493" end="18497" title="tool" label="tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="18734" end="18744" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940737" start="18832" end="18843" title="foot plough" label="foot plough"/>
<link wikidata="Q186050" start="18968" end="18984" title="Green Revolution" label="green revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="19107" end="19128" title="Industrial Revolution" label="industrial revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q39495" start="19224" end="19231" title="tractor" label="tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273840" start="19275" end="19285" title="cultivator" label="cultivator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150400" start="19367" end="19384" title="two-wheel tractor" label="two-wheel tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q908942" start="19415" end="19428" title="plastic mulch" label="plastic mulch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611613" start="19470" end="19480" title="grow light" label="grow light"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="19503" end="19513" title="fertilizer" label="fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="19516" end="19525" title="pesticide" label="pesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q18340432" start="19528" end="19554" title="Genetically modified plant" label="genetically modified seeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479412" start="19610" end="19620" title="Plant propagation" label="propagated"/>
<link wikidata="Q173432" start="19753" end="19773" title="Asexual reproduction" label="Asexual reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q120877" start="19801" end="19817" title="Cloning" label="clonal offspring"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="20080" end="20097" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q339051" start="20102" end="20114" title="Heterosis" label="hybrid vigor"/>
<link wikidata="Q464666" start="20218" end="20240" title="Vegetative reproduction" label="vegetative propagation"/>
<link wikidata="Q633912" start="20418" end="20424" title="stolon" label="stolon"/>
<link wikidata="Q184208" start="20429" end="20436" title="rhizome" label="rhizome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274559" start="20599" end="20612" title="Fragmentation (reproduction)" label="fragmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124951" start="20763" end="20774" title="cladoptosis" label="cladoptosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q845312" start="20826" end="20833" title="budding" label="budding"/>
<link wikidata="Q222958" start="20952" end="20960" title="grafting" label="grafting"/>
<link wikidata="Q17216" start="21042" end="21051" title="rootstock" label="rootstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722903" start="21174" end="21184" title="Inosculation" label="inosculate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004691" start="21688" end="21700" title="backcrossing" label="backcrossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917508" start="21935" end="21947" title="mother plant" label="mother plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q182353" start="22027" end="22046" title="Sexual reproduction" label="Sexual reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q134624" start="22066" end="22077" title="pollination" label="pollination"/>
<link wikidata="Q380138" start="22084" end="22089" title="ovule" label="ovule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503359" start="22208" end="22224" title="Self-pollination" label="self pollination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481109" start="22433" end="22454" title="inbreeding depression" label="inbreeding depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="22758" end="22765" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q585259" start="22802" end="22819" title="genetic diversity" label="genetic diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q788558" start="23192" end="23207" title="Plant breeding" label="Crossing plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293576" start="23326" end="23335" title="F1 hybrid" label="F1 hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5700975" start="23434" end="23442" title="Heirloom plant" label="heirloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096401" start="23446" end="23468" title="Open pollination" label="open pollinated plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q174030" start="23828" end="23836" title="landrace" label="landrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q779009" start="23878" end="23889" title="outcrossing" label="outcrossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126128" start="24120" end="24130" title="geneticist" label="geneticist"/>
<link wikidata="Q995745" start="24236" end="24257" title="Selective breeding" label="artificially selected"/>
<link wikidata="Q159236" start="24407" end="24427" title="Genetic engineering" label="genetic modification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994711" start="24778" end="24791" title="Scarification (botany)" label="scarification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893382" start="24795" end="24809" title="Stratification (seeds)" label="stratification"/>
<link wikidata="Q23400" start="24931" end="24947" title="Garlic" label="hard neck garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q164158" start="25023" end="25040" title="Amelanchier alnifolia" label="saskatoon berries"/>
<link wikidata="Q943313" start="25128" end="25140" title="Seed dispersal" label="endozoochory"/>
<link wikidata="Q260569" start="25840" end="25854" title="Garden centre" label="garden centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q155511" start="25856" end="25871" title="Plant nursery" label="plant nurseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q16766413" start="25877" end="25890" title="big-box store" label="big-box store"/>
<link wikidata="Q886220" start="26554" end="26566" title="potting soil" label="potting soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q212254" start="26568" end="26575" title="compost" label="compost"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="26982" end="26987" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="26990" end="26995" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="27000" end="27006" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="27020" end="27026" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q183350" start="27352" end="27357" title="Aphid" label="Aphid"/>
<link wikidata="Q676204" start="27360" end="27371" title="spider mite" label="spider mite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953597" start="27374" end="27378" title="slug" label="slug"/>
<link wikidata="Q308841" start="27381" end="27386" title="snail" label="snail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386" start="27389" end="27392" title="ant" label="ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="27395" end="27399" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="27411" end="27414" title="cat" label="cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q697248" start="27641" end="27647" title="Rapeseed oil" label="canola"/>
<link wikidata="Q156888" start="27713" end="27725" title="Brassicaceae" label="Brassicaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7845601" start="28070" end="28090" title="Tropaeolum speciosum" label="Tropaeolum speciosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="28207" end="28211" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q207766" start="28279" end="28283" title="lawn" label="lawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q43142" start="28358" end="28364" title="lichen" label="lichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716168" start="28415" end="28424" title="Peltigera" label="Peltigera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306047" start="28915" end="28927" title="pest control" label="pest control"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="28961" end="28970" title="pesticide" label="pesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q178266" start="28976" end="28985" title="herbicide" label="herbicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q165647" start="29008" end="29015" title="Organic agriculture" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="29071" end="29078" title="ecology" label="ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q902225" start="29211" end="29224" title="neonicotinoid" label="neonicotinoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q102857" start="29291" end="29300" title="honey bee" label="honey bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q193237" start="29612" end="29621" title="Fungicide" label="Fungicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610615" start="29747" end="29767" title="pesticide resistance" label="pesticide resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="30229" end="30239" title="fertilizer" label="fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191258" start="30343" end="30356" title="crop rotation" label="crop rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935508" start="30404" end="30422" title="companion planting" label="companion planting"/>
<link wikidata="Q101879" start="30511" end="30515" title="weed" label="weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q116890" start="30972" end="30995" title="biological pest control" label="biological pest control"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027895" start="31248" end="31259" title=".22 caliber" label=".22 caliber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295371" start="31260" end="31270" title="snake shot" label="snake shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q323227" start="31658" end="31666" title="ricochet" label="ricochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248784" start="31707" end="31714" title="airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q181623" start="31717" end="31726" title="warehouse" label="warehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q955043" start="31733" end="31743" title="Meat packing industry" label="stockyards"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="31893" end="31907" title="urban planning" label="urban planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484063" start="31937" end="31947" title="land ethic" label="land ethic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165944" start="31981" end="31989" title="land use" label="land use"/>
<link wikidata="Q162297" start="32008" end="32017" title="hygiene" label="hygienist"/>
<link wikidata="Q679847" start="32018" end="32023" title="bylaw" label="bylaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739141" start="32031" end="32043" title="weed control" label="weed control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="32151" end="32159" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q784786" start="32160" end="32177" title="Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms" label="Charter of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="32354" end="32378" title="Freedom of speech" label="right of free expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q251958" start="32381" end="32400" title="Community gardening" label="Community gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q753099" start="32553" end="32559" title="privet" label="privet"/>
<link wikidata="Q132557" start="32561" end="32569" title="Crataegus" label="hawthorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q25403" start="32571" end="32576" title="beech" label="beech"/>
<link wikidata="Q27355" start="32578" end="32581" title="Taxus" label="yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290970" start="32583" end="32598" title="Leyland Cypress" label="leyland cypress"/>
<link wikidata="Q739430" start="32600" end="32607" title="Tsuga" label="hemlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q147468" start="32609" end="32619" title="Thuja occidentalis" label="arborvitae"/>
<link wikidata="Q158503" start="32621" end="32629" title="Berberis" label="barberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q158703" start="32631" end="32634" title="Buxus" label="box"/>
<link wikidata="Q117085" start="32636" end="32641" title="holly" label="holly"/>
<link wikidata="Q155833" start="32643" end="32651" title="Nerium oleander" label="oleander"/>
<link wikidata="Q672980" start="32653" end="32662" title="forsythia" label="forsythia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171892" start="32667" end="32675" title="lavender" label="lavender"/>
<link wikidata="Q335823" start="32768" end="32777" title="Slow Food" label="Slow Food"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251180" start="32833" end="32844" title="School garden" label="school yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444155" start="32887" end="32902" title="Fergus, Ontario" label="Fergus, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522420" start="32980" end="32994" title="Garden sharing" label="Garden sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8070591" start="33311" end="33322" title="landscaping" label="landscaping"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485105" start="33336" end="33357" title="landscape maintenance" label="landscape maintenance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706851" start="34855" end="34866" title="xeriscaping" label="xeriscaping"/>
<link wikidata="Q10981881" start="35560" end="35571" title="self-esteem" label="self-esteem"/>
<link wikidata="Q123414" start="35583" end="35589" title="Stress (biology)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141466" start="36218" end="36228" title="pollinator" label="pollinator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391" start="36246" end="36249" title="bee" label="bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="36409" end="36415" title="nectar" label="nectar"/>
<link wikidata="Q28597527" start="37163" end="37178" title="garden ornament" label="garden ornament"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="37480" end="37495" title="stainless steel" label="stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="37497" end="37501" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473346" start="37503" end="37516" title="stained glass" label="stained glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q277151" start="37554" end="37561" title="Trellis (architecture)" label="trellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744736" start="37563" end="37579" title="garden furniture" label="garden furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425332" start="37581" end="37587" title="Garden gnome" label="gnomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4404699" start="37589" end="37596" title="Garden sculpture" label="statues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111942" start="37598" end="37615" title="outdoor fireplace" label="outdoor fireplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q483453" start="37618" end="37626" title="fountain" label="fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137358" start="37629" end="37639" title="rain chain" label="rain chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083119" start="37642" end="37646" title="urns" label="urns"/>
<link wikidata="Q371452" start="37648" end="37657" title="bird bath" label="bird bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441616" start="37663" end="37670" title="Bird feeder" label="feeders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621499" start="37672" end="37682" title="wind chime" label="wind chime"/>
<link wikidata="Q862454" start="37720" end="37728" title="lanterns" label="lanterns"/>
<link wikidata="Q821952" start="37733" end="37742" title="oil lamps" label="oil lamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243966" start="38058" end="38067" title="Butterfly gardening" label="butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q735035" start="38069" end="38077" title="Wildlife garden" label="wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q15835" start="38079" end="38087" title="Japanese garden" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q113574" start="38089" end="38094" title="Water garden" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108101" start="38096" end="38104" title="Tropical garden" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460277" start="38109" end="38114" title="Shade garden" label="shade"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="38135" end="38142" title="Samurai" label="Samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="38147" end="38150" title="Zen" label="Zen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460219" start="38237" end="38255" title="flower arrangement" label="flower arrangement"/>
<link wikidata="Q178459" start="38271" end="38278" title="ikebana" label="ikebana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="38423" end="38433" title="Palace of Versailles" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003761" start="38446" end="38451" title="Stowe, Buckinghamshire" label="Stowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815948" start="38469" end="38488" title="landscape architect" label="landscape architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q15432439" start="38494" end="38509" title="garden designer" label="garden designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q272231" start="38719" end="38728" title="Arboretum" label="Arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q64365" start="38731" end="38737" title="Bonsai" label="Bonsai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362373" start="38740" end="38748" title="Cultigen" label="Cultigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422756" start="38751" end="38762" title="Eyecatcher (landscape)" label="Eyecatchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q98713658" start="38765" end="38779" title="Garden writing" label="Garden writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611614" start="38782" end="38789" title="Growbag" label="Growbag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065449" start="38792" end="38810" title="Introduced species" label="Introduced species"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080224" start="38813" end="38829" title="Impact gardening" label="Impact gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479799" start="38832" end="38856" title="List of gardening topics" label="List of gardening topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623525" start="38859" end="38899" title="List of horticulture and gardening books" label="List of horticulture and gardening books"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635010" start="38902" end="38932" title="List of professional gardeners" label="List of professional gardeners"/>
<link wikidata="Q6785135" start="38935" end="38958" title="Master gardener program" label="Master gardener program"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413684" start="38961" end="38977" title="No-dig gardening" label="No-dig gardening"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11985" wikidata="Q17514" url="?curid=11985" title="Graffiti">
<text>Graffiti (singular graffiti or graffito, the latter only used in graffiti archeology) is writing or drawings made on a wall or other surface, usually without permission and within public view. Graffiti ranges from simple written &quot;monikers&quot; to elaborate wall paintings, and has existed since ancient times, with examples dating back to ancient Egypt, ancient Greece, and the Roman Empire.

Modern graffiti is a controversial subject. In most countries, marking or painting property without permission is considered vandalism. Modern graffiti began in the New York City subway system and Philadelphia in the early 1970s and later spread to the rest of the United States and throughout the world.

== Etymology ==
&quot;Graffiti&quot; (usually both singular and plural) and the rare singular form &quot;graffito&quot; are from the Italian word &quot;graffiato&quot; (&quot;scratched&quot;). In ancient times graffiti were carved on walls with a sharp object, although sometimes chalk or coal were used. The word originates from Greek —&quot;graphein&quot;—meaning &quot;to write&quot;.

== History ==


=== Prehistoric graffiti ===

Most petroglyphs and geoglyphs date between 40,000 and 10,000 years old, the oldest being cave paintings in Australia. Paintings in the Chauvet Cave were made 35,000 years ago, but little is known about who made them or why. Early artists created stencil graffiti of their hands with paint blown through a tube. These stencils may have functioned similarly to a modern-day tag.

=== Ancient graffiti ===

The oldest written graffiti was found in Ancient Rome around 2500 years ago. Most graffiti from the time was boasts about sexual experiences, but also includes word games such as the Sator Square, &quot;I was here&quot; type markings, and comments on gladiators. Graffiti in Ancient Rome was a form of communication, and was generally not considered vandalism. Certain graffiti was seen as blasphemous and was removed, such as the Alexamenos graffito, which may contain one of the earliest depictions of Jesus. The graffito features a human with the head of a donkey on a cross with the text &quot;Alexamenos worships [his] god.&quot;

=== Medieval graffiti ===
The only known source of the Safaitic language, an ancient form of Arabic, is from graffiti: inscriptions scratched on to the surface of rocks and boulders in the predominantly basalt desert of southern Syria, eastern Jordan and northern Saudi Arabia. Safaitic dates from the first century BC to the fourth century AD.

Ancient tourists visiting the 5th-century citadel at Sigiriya in Sri Lanka write their names and commentary over the &quot;mirror wall&quot;, adding up to over 1800 individual graffiti produced there between the 6th and 18th centuries. Most of the graffiti refer to the frescoes of semi-nude females found there.

Among the ancient political graffiti examples were Arab satirist poems. Yazid al-Himyari, an Umayyad Arab and Persian poet, was most known for writing his political poetry on the walls between Sajistan and Basra, manifesting a strong hatred towards the Umayyad regime and its &quot;walis&quot;, and people used to read and circulate them very widely.

Graffiti, known as Tacherons, were frequently scratched on Romanesque Scandinavian church walls. When Renaissance artists such as Pinturicchio, Raphael, Michelangelo, Ghirlandaio, or Filippino Lippi descended into the ruins of Nero&#x27;s Domus Aurea, they carved or painted their names and returned to initiate the &quot;grottesche&quot; style of decoration.

=== Contemporary graffiti ===
In the 1790s, French soldiers carved their names on monuments during the Napoleonic campaign of Egypt. Lord Byron&#x27;s survives on one of the columns of the Temple of Poseidon at Cape Sounion in Attica, Greece.

The oldest known example of graffiti monikers were found on traincars created by hobos and railworkers since the late 1800s. The Bozo Texino monikers were documented by filmmaker Bill Daniel in his 2005 film, &quot;Who is Bozo Texino?&quot;.

Contemporary graffiti has been seen on landmarks in the US, such as Independence Rock, a national landmark along the Oregon Trail.

In World War II, an inscription on a wall at the fortress of Verdun was seen as an illustration of the US response twice in a generation to the wrongs of the Old World:

During World War II and for decades after, the phrase &quot;Kilroy was here&quot; with an accompanying illustration was widespread throughout the world, due to its use by American troops and ultimately filtering into American popular culture. Shortly after the death of Charlie Parker (nicknamed &quot;Yardbird&quot; or &quot;Bird&quot;), graffiti began appearing around New York with the words &quot;Bird Lives&quot;.

=== Modern Graffiti ===
Modern graffiti style has been heavily influenced by hip hop culture and started with young people in 1960s and 70s in New York City and Philadelphia. Tags were the first form of stylised contemporary graffiti, starting with artists like TAKI 183 and Cornbread. Later, artists began to paint throw-ups and pieces on trains on the sides subway trains. and eventually moved into the city after the NYC metro began to buy new trains and paint over graffiti.

While the art had many advocates and appreciators—including the cultural critic Norman Mailer—others, including New York City mayor Ed Koch, considered it to be defacement of public property, and saw it as a form of public blight. While those who did early modern graffiti called it &quot;writing&quot;, the 1974 essay &quot;The Faith of Graffiti&quot; referred to it using the term &quot;graffiti&quot;, which stuck.

An early graffito outside of New York or Philadelphia was the inscription in London reading &quot;Clapton is God&quot; in reference to the guitarist Eric Clapton. Creating the cult of the guitar hero, the phrase was spray-painted by an admirer on a wall in Islington, north London, in the autumn of 1967. The graffito was captured in a photograph, in which a dog is urinating on the wall.

Films like Style Wars in the 80s depicting famous writers such as Skeme, Dondi, MinOne, and ZEPHYR reinforced graffiti&#x27;s role within New York&#x27;s emerging hip-hop culture. Although many officers of the New York City Police Department found this film to be controversial, Style Wars is still recognized as the most prolific film representation of what was going on within the young hip hop culture of the early 1980s. Fab5 Freddy and Futura 2000 took hip hop graffiti to Paris and London as part of the New York City Rap Tour in 1983.

=== Commercialization and entrance into mainstream pop culture ===
With the popularity and legitimization of graffiti has come a level of commercialization. In 2001, computer giant IBM launched an advertising campaign in Chicago and San Francisco which involved people spray painting on sidewalks a peace symbol, a heart, and a penguin (Linux mascot), to represent &quot;Peace, Love, and Linux.&quot; IBM paid Chicago and San Francisco collectively US$120,000 for punitive damages and clean-up costs.

In 2005, a similar ad campaign was launched by Sony and executed by its advertising agency in New York, Chicago, Atlanta, Philadelphia, Los Angeles, and Miami, to market its handheld PSP gaming system. In this campaign, taking notice of the legal problems of the IBM campaign, Sony paid building owners for the rights to paint on their buildings &quot;a collection of dizzy-eyed urban kids playing with the PSP as if it were a skateboard, a paddle, or a rocking horse&quot;.

== Global movements ==

When graffiti is done as an art form, it often utitlises the Latin script even in countries where it is not the primary writing system. English words are also often used as monikers.

=== Europe ===
Stencil graffiti artists such as Blek le Rat existed in Western Europe, especially in Paris, before the arrival of American graffiti and was associated more with the punk rock scene than with hip-hop. In the 1980s, American graffiti and hiphop began to influence the European graffiti scene. Modern graffiti reached Eastern Europe in the 1990s.

Some of the earliest graffiti exhibitions outside of the USA were in Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

=== Middle East ===
Graffiti in the Middle East has emerged slowly, with taggers operating in Egypt, Lebanon, the Gulf countries like Bahrain or the United Arab Emirates, Israel, and in Iran. The major Iranian newspaper &quot;Hamshahri&quot; has published two articles on illegal writers in the city with photographic coverage of Iranian artist A1one&#x27;s works on Tehran walls. Tokyo-based design magazine, &quot;PingMag&quot;, has interviewed A1one and featured photographs of his work. The Israeli West Bank barrier has become a site for graffiti, reminiscent in this sense of the Berlin Wall. Many writers in Israel come from other places around the globe, such as JUIF from Los Angeles and DEVIONE from London. The religious reference &quot;נ נח נחמ נחמן מאומן&quot; (&quot;Na Nach Nachma Nachman Meuman&quot;) is commonly seen in graffiti around Israel.
Graffiti has played an important role within the street art scene in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA), especially following the events of the Arab Spring of 2011 or the Sudanese Revolution of 2018/19. Graffiti is a tool of expression in the context of conflict in the region, allowing people to raise their voices politically and socially. Famous street artist Banksy has had an important effect in the street art scene in the MENA area, especially in Palestine where some of his works are located in the West Bank barrier and Bethlehem.

=== South America ===
South America has a very active graffiti culture, and graffiti are very common in Brazilian cities. This is blamed on the high uneven distribution of income, changing laws, and disenfranchisement. &quot;Pichação&quot; is a form of graffiti found in Brazil, which involves tall characters and is usually used as a form of protest. It contrasts with the more conventionally artistic values of the practitioners of &quot;grafite&quot;.

Prominent Brazilian writers include Os Gêmeos, Boleta, Nunca, Nina, Speto, Tikka, and T.Freak.

=== Southeast Asia ===
There are also a large number of graffiti influences in Southeast Asian countries that mostly come from modern Western culture, such as Malaysia, where graffiti have long been a common sight in Malaysia&#x27;s capital city, Kuala Lumpur. Since 2010, the country has begun hosting a street festival to encourage all generations and people from all walks of life to enjoy and encourage Malaysian street culture.

== Types of graffiti ==
=== Tools ===
Spray paint and markers are the main tools used for tagging, throw ups, and pieces. Paint markers, paint dabbers, and scratching tools are also used. Some art companies, such as Montana Colors, make art supplies specifically for graffiti and street art. Many major cities have graffiti art stores.

=== Stencil graffiti ===

Stencil graffiti is created by cutting out shapes and designs in a stiff material (such as cardboard or subject folders) to form an overall design or image. The stencil is then placed on the &quot;canvas&quot; gently and with quick, easy strokes of the aerosol can, the image begins to appear on the intended surface. Some of the first examples were created in 1981 by artists Blek le Rat in Paris, in 1982 by Jef Aerosol in Tours (France); by 1985 stencils had appeared in other cities including New York City, Sydney, and Melbourne, where they were documented by American photographer Charles Gatewood and Australian photographer Rennie Ellis.

=== Stickers ===

Stickers, also known as slaps, are drawn or written on before being put up in public. Traditionally, free paper stickers like the United States Postal Service&#x27;s Label 228 or name tags were used. Eggshell stickers, which are very difficult to remove, are also frequent. Stickers allow artists to put up their art quickly and discreetly, making them a relatively safer option for illegal graffiti.

=== Tags ===

Tagging is the practice of writing ones &quot;their name, initial or logo onto a public surface&quot; in a handstyle unique to the writer. Tags were the first form of modern graffiti.

A number of recent examples of graffiti make use of hashtags.
=== Throw ups ===

Throw ups, or throwies are large, bubble-writing graffiti which aim to be &quot;throw onto&quot; a surface as largely and quickly as possible. Throw ups can have fills or be &quot;hollow&quot;. They prioritise minimal negative space and consistency or letter space and height.

=== Pieces ===

Pieces are large, elaborate, letter-based graffiti which usually use spray paint or rollers. Pieces often have multi-coloured fills and outlines, and may use highlights, shadows, backgrounds, extensions, 3D effects, and sometimes characters.

=== Wildstyle ===

Wildstyle is the most complex form of modern graffiti. It can be difficult for those unfamiliar with the art form to read. Wildstyle draws inspiration from calligraphy and has been described as partially abstract. The term &quot;wildstyle&quot; was popularized by the Wild Style graffiti crew formed by Tracy 168 of the Bronx, New York in 1974.

=== Modern experimentation ===

Modern graffiti art often incorporates additional arts and technologies. For example, Graffiti Research Lab has encouraged the use of projected images and magnetic light-emitting diodes (throwies) as new media for graffitists. Yarnbombing is another recent form of graffiti. Yarnbombers occasionally target previous graffiti for modification, which had been avoided among the majority of graffitists.

== Purpose ==
Theories on the use of graffiti by avant-garde artists have a history dating back at least to the Asger Jorn, who in 1962 painting declared in a graffiti-like gesture &quot;the avant-garde won&#x27;t give up&quot;.

=== Public art ===
People who appreciate graffiti often believe that it should be on display for everyone in public spaces, not hidden away in a museum or a gallery. Art should color the streets, not the inside of some building. Graffiti is a form of art that cannot be owned or bought. It does not last forever, it is temporary, yet one of a kind. It is a form of self promotion for the artist that can be displayed anywhere from sidewalks, roofs, subways, building wall, etc. Art to them is for everyone and should be shown to everyone for free.

=== Personal expression ===
Graffiti is a way of communicating and a way of expressing onesself. It is both art and a functional thing that can warn people of something or inform people of something. However, graffiti is to some people a form of art, but to some a form of vandalism. And many graffitists choose to protect their identities and remain anonymous to hinder prosecution.

With the commercialization of graffiti (and hip hop in general), in most cases, even with legally painted &quot;graffiti&quot; art, graffitists tend to choose anonymity. This may be attributed to various reasons or a combination of reasons. Graffiti still remains the one of four hip hop elements that is not considered &quot;performance art&quot; despite the image of the &quot;singing and dancing star&quot; that sells hip hop culture to the mainstream. Being a graphic form of art, it might also be said that many graffitists still fall in the category of the introverted archetypal artist.

Banksy is one of the world&#x27;s most notorious and popular street artists who continues to remain faceless in today&#x27;s society. He is known for his political, anti-war stencil art mainly in Bristol, England, but his work may be seen anywhere from Los Angeles to Palestine. In the UK, Banksy is the most recognizable icon for this cultural artistic movement and keeps his identity a secret to avoid arrest. Much of Banksy&#x27;s artwork may be seen around the streets of London and surrounding suburbs, although he has painted pictures throughout the world, including the Middle East, where he has painted on Israel&#x27;s controversial West Bank barrier with satirical images of life on the other side. One depicted a hole in the wall with an idyllic beach, while another shows a mountain landscape on the other side. A number of exhibitions also have taken place since 2000, and recent works of art have fetched vast sums of money. Banksy&#x27;s art is a prime example of the classic controversy: vandalism vs. art. Art supporters endorse his work distributed in urban areas as pieces of art and some councils, such as Bristol and Islington, have officially protected them, while officials of other areas have deemed his work to be vandalism and have removed it.

Graffiti artists may become offended if photographs of their art are published in a commercial context without their permission. In March 2020, the Finnish graffiti artist Psyke expressed his displeasure at the newspaper &quot;Ilta-Sanomat&quot; publishing a photograph of a Peugeot 208 in an article about new cars, with his graffiti prominently shown on the background. The artist claims he does not want his art being used in commercial context, not even if he were to receive compensation.

=== Territorial ===
Territorial graffiti marks urban neighborhoods with tags and logos to differentiate certain groups from others. These images are meant to show outsiders a stern look at whose turf is whose. The subject matter of gang-related graffiti consists of cryptic symbols and initials strictly fashioned with unique calligraphies. Gang members use graffiti to designate membership throughout the gang, to differentiate rivals and associates and, most commonly, to mark borders which are both territorial and ideological.

=== Radical and political ===

Many analysts and art critics see artistic value in some graffiti and recognize it as a form of public art. According to many art researchers, particularly in the Netherlands and in Los Angeles graffiti is an effective tool of social emancipation, or for the achievement of a political goal.

In times of conflict graffiti has offered a means of communication and self-expression for members of these socially, ethnically, or racially divided communities, and has been an effective tool for establishing dialog. The Berlin Wall was extensively covered by graffiti reflecting social pressures related to the oppressive Soviet rule over the GDR.

Graffiti often has a reputation as part of a subculture that rebels against authority, although the considerations of the practitioners often diverge and can relate to a wide range of attitudes. It can express a political practice and can form just one tool in an array of resistance techniques. One early example includes the anarcho-punk band Crass, who conducted a campaign of stenciling anti-war, anarchist, feminist, and anti-consumerist messages throughout the London Underground system during the late 1970s and early 1980s. In Amsterdam, graffiti was a major part of the punk scene. The city was covered in names such as &quot;De Zoot&quot;, &quot;Vendex&quot;, and &quot;Dr Rat&quot;. To document the graffiti, a punk magazine was started that was called &quot;Gallery Anus&quot;. So when hip hop came to Europe in the early 1980s, there was already a vibrant graffiti culture.
The student protests and general strike of May 1968 saw Paris bedecked in revolutionary, anarchistic, and situationist slogans such as &quot;L&#x27;ennui est contre-révolutionnaire&quot; (&quot;Boredom is counterrevolutionary&quot;) and &quot;Lisez moins, vivez plus&quot; (&quot;Read less, live more&quot;). While not exhaustive, the graffiti gave a sense of the &#x27;millenarian&#x27; and rebellious spirit, tempered with a good deal of verbal wit, of the strikers.

The developments of graffiti art which took place in art galleries and colleges as well as &quot;on the street&quot; or &quot;underground&quot;, contributed to the resurfacing in the 1990s of a far more overtly politicized art form in the subvertising, culture jamming, or tactical media movements. These movements or styles tend to classify the artists by their relationship to their social and economic contexts, since, in most countries, graffiti art remains illegal in many forms except when using non-permanent paint. Since the 1990s with the rise of Street Art, a growing number of artists are switching to non-permanent paints and non-traditional forms of painting.

Contemporary practitioners, accordingly, have varied and often conflicting practices. Some individuals, such as Alexander Brener, have used the medium to politicize other art forms, and have used the prison sentences enforced on them as a means of further protest.
The practices of anonymous groups and individuals also vary widely, and practitioners by no means always agree with each other&#x27;s practices. For example, the anti-capitalist art group the Space Hijackers did a piece in 2004 about the contradiction between the capitalistic elements of Banksy and his use of political imagery.

Berlin human rights activist Irmela Mensah-Schramm has received global media attention and numerous awards for her 35-year campaign of effacing neo-Nazi and other right-wing extremist graffiti throughout Germany, often by altering hate speech in humorous ways.

=== Genocide denial ===

In the Serbian capital, Belgrade, the graffiti depicting a uniformed former general of Serb army and war criminal, convicted at ICTY for war crimes and crimes against humanity, including genocide and ethnic cleansing in Bosnian War, Ratko Mladić, appeared in a military salute alongside the words &quot;General, thanks to your mother&quot;. 
Aleks Eror, Berlin-based journalist, explains how &quot;veneration of historical and wartime figures&quot; through street art is not a new phenomenon in the region of former Yugoslavia, and that &quot;in most cases is firmly focused on the future, rather than retelling the past&quot;. Eror is not only analyst pointing to danger of such an expressions for the region&#x27;s future. In a long expose on the subject of Bosnian genocide denial, at Balkan Diskurs magazine and multimedia platform website, Kristina Gadže and Taylor Whitsell referred to these experiences as a young generations&#x27; &quot;cultural heritage&quot;, in which youths are being exposed to the celebration and affirmation of war-criminals as part of their &quot;formal education&quot; and &quot;inheritance&quot;.

There are numerous examples of genocide denial through the celebration and affirmation of war criminals throughout the region of Western Balkans, inhabited by Serbs, using this form of artistic expression. Several more of these graffiti are found in the Serbian capital, and many more across Serbia and the Bosnian and Herzegovinian administrative entity, Republika Srpska, which is the ethnic Serbian majority enclave. Critics point that Serbia as a state, is willing to defend the mural of convicted war criminal, and have no intention to react on cases of genocide denial, noting that Interior Minister of Serbia, Aleksandar Vulin decision to ban any gathering with an intent to remove the mural, with the deployment of riot police, sends the message of &quot;tacit endorsement&quot;. Consequently, on 9 November 2021, Serbian heavy police in riot gear, with the graffiti creators and their supporters, blocked the access to the mural to prevent human rights groups and other activists to paint over it and mark the International Day Against Fascism and Antisemitism in that way, and even arrested two civic activist for throwing eggs at the graffiti.

=== Offensive graffiti ===
Graffiti may also be used as an offensive expression. This form of graffiti may be difficult to identify, as it is mostly removed by the local authority (as councils which have adopted strategies of criminalization also strive to remove graffiti quickly). Therefore, existing racist graffiti is mostly more subtle and at first sight, not easily recognized as &quot;racist&quot;. It can then be understood only if one knows the relevant &quot;local code&quot; (social, historical, political, temporal, and spatial), which is seen as heteroglot and thus a &#x27;unique set of conditions&#x27; in a cultural context.

A spatial local code for example, could be that there is a certain youth group in an area that is engaging heavily in racist activities. So, for residents (knowing the local code), a graffiti containing only the name or abbreviation of this gang already is a racist expression, reminding the offended people of their gang activities. Also a graffiti is in most cases, the herald of more serious criminal activity to come. A person who does not know these gang activities would not be able to recognize the meaning of this graffiti. Also if a tag of this youth group or gang is placed on a building occupied by asylum seekers, for example, its racist character is even stronger.

By making the graffiti less explicit (as adapted to social and legal constraints), these drawings are less likely to be removed, but do not lose their threatening and offensive character.

Elsewhere, activists in Russia have used painted caricatures of local officials with their mouths as potholes, to show their anger about the poor state of the roads. In Manchester, England, a graffitists painted obscene images around potholes, which often resulted in them being repaired within 48 hours.

== Decorative and high art ==

In the early 1980s, the first art galleries to show graffitists to the public were Fashion Moda in the Bronx, Now Gallery and Fun Gallery, both in the East Village, Manhattan.

A 2006 exhibition at the Brooklyn Museum displayed graffiti as an art form that began in New York&#x27;s outer boroughs and reached great heights in the early 1980s with the work of Crash, Lee, Daze, Keith Haring, and Jean-Michel Basquiat. It displayed 22 works by New York graffitists, including Crash, Daze, and Lady Pink. In an article about the exhibition in the magazine &quot;Time Out&quot;, curator Charlotta Kotik said that she hoped the exhibition would cause viewers to rethink their assumptions about graffiti.

From the 1970s onwards, Burhan Doğançay photographed urban walls all over the world; these he then archived for use as sources of inspiration for his painterly works. The project today known as &quot;Walls of the World&quot; grew beyond even his own expectations and comprises about 30,000 individual images. It spans a period of 40 years across five continents and 114 countries. In 1982, photographs from this project comprised a one-man exhibition titled &quot;Les murs murmurent, ils crient, ils chantent...&quot; (The walls whisper, shout and sing...) at the Centre Georges Pompidou in Paris.

In Australia, art historians have judged some local graffiti of sufficient creative merit to rank them firmly within the arts. Oxford University Press&#x27;s art history text &quot;Australian Painting 1788–2000&quot; concludes with a long discussion of graffiti&#x27;s key place within contemporary visual culture, including the work of several Australian practitioners.

Between March and April 2009, 150 artists exhibited 300 pieces of graffiti at the Grand Palais in Paris.


== Environmental effects ==

Spray paint has many negative environmental effects. The paint contains toxic chemicals, and the can uses volatile hydrocarbon gases to spray the paint onto a surface.

Volatile organic compound (VOC) leads to ground level ozone formation and most of graffiti related emissions are VOCs. A 2010 paper estimates 4,862 tons of VOCs were released in the United States in activities related to graffiti.

== Government responses ==
=== Asia ===

In China, Mao Zedong in the 1920s used revolutionary slogans and paintings in public places to galvanize the country&#x27;s communist movement.

Based on different national conditions, many people believe that China&#x27;s attitude towards Graffiti is fierce, but in fact, according to Lance Crayon in his film &quot;Spray Paint Beijing: Graffiti in the Capital of China&quot;, Graffiti is generally accepted in Beijing, with artists not seeing much police interference. Political and religiously sensitive graffiti, however, is not allowed.

In Hong Kong, Tsang Tsou Choi was known as the &quot;King of Kowloon&quot; for his calligraphy graffiti over many years, in which he claimed ownership of the area. Now some of his work is preserved officially.

In Taiwan, the government has made some concessions to graffitists. Since 2005 they have been allowed to freely display their work along some sections of riverside retaining walls in designated &quot;Graffiti Zones&quot;. From 2007, Taipei&#x27;s department of cultural affairs also began permitting graffiti on fences around major public construction sites. Department head Yong-ping Lee (李永萍) stated, &quot;We will promote graffiti starting with the public sector, and then later in the private sector too. It&#x27;s our goal to beautify the city with graffiti&quot;. The government later helped organize a graffiti contest in Ximending, a popular shopping district. Graffitists caught working outside of these designated areas still face fines up to NT$6,000 under a department of environmental protection regulation. However, Taiwanese authorities can be relatively lenient, one veteran police officer stating anonymously, &quot;Unless someone complains about vandalism, we won&#x27;t get involved. We don&#x27;t go after it proactively.&quot;

In 1993, after several expensive cars in Singapore were spray-painted, the police arrested a student from the Singapore American School, Michael P. Fay, questioned him, and subsequently charged him with vandalism. Fay pleaded guilty to vandalizing a car in addition to stealing road signs. Under the 1966 Vandalism Act of Singapore, originally passed to curb the spread of communist graffiti in Singapore, the court sentenced him to four months in jail, a fine of S$3,500 (US$2,233), and a caning. &quot;The New York Times&quot; ran several editorials and op-eds that condemned the punishment and called on the American public to flood the Singaporean embassy with protests. Although the Singapore government received many calls for clemency, Fay&#x27;s caning took place in Singapore on 5 May 1994. Fay had originally received a sentence of six strokes of the cane, but the presiding president of Singapore, Ong Teng Cheong, agreed to reduce his caning sentence to four lashes.

In South Korea, Park Jung-soo was fined two million South Korean won by the Seoul Central District Court for spray-painting a rat on posters of the G-20 Summit a few days before the event in November 2011. Park alleged that the initial in &quot;G-20&quot; sounds like the Korean word for &quot;rat&quot;, but Korean government prosecutors alleged that Park was making a derogatory statement about the president of South Korea, Lee Myung-bak, the host of the summit. This case led to public outcry and debate on the lack of government tolerance and in support of freedom of expression. The court ruled that the painting, &quot;an ominous creature like a rat&quot; amounts to &quot;an organized criminal activity&quot; and upheld the fine while denying the prosecution&#x27;s request for imprisonment for Park.

=== Europe ===

In Europe, community cleaning squads have responded to graffiti, in some cases with reckless abandon, as when in 1992 in France a local Scout group, attempting to remove modern graffiti, damaged of bison in the Cave of Mayrière supérieure near the French village of Bruniquel in Tarn-et-Garonne, earning them the 1992 Ig Nobel Prize in archeology.

In September 2006, the European Parliament directed the European Commission to create urban environment policies to prevent and eliminate dirt, litter, graffiti, animal excrement, and excessive noise from domestic and vehicular music systems in European cities, along with other concerns over urban life.

In Budapest, Hungary, both a city-backed movement called &quot;I Love Budapest&quot; and a special police division tackle the problem, including the provision of approved areas.

=== United Kingdom ===

The Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003 became Britain&#x27;s latest anti-graffiti legislation. In August 2004, the Keep Britain Tidy campaign issued a press release calling for zero tolerance of graffiti and supporting proposals such as issuing &quot;on the spot&quot; fines to graffiti offenders and banning the sale of aerosol paint to anyone under the age of 16. The press release also condemned the use of graffiti images in advertising and in music videos, arguing that real-world experience of graffiti stood far removed from its often-portrayed &quot;cool&quot; or &quot;edgy&#x27;&quot; image.

To back the campaign, 123 Members of Parliament (MPs) (including then Prime Minister Tony Blair), signed a charter which stated: &quot;Graffiti is not art, it&#x27;s crime. On behalf of my constituents, I will do all I can to rid our community of this problem.&quot;

In the UK, city councils have the power to take action against the owner of any property that has been defaced under the Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003 (as amended by the Clean Neighbourhoods and Environment Act 2005) or, in certain cases, the Highways Act. This is often used against owners of property that are complacent in allowing protective boards to be defaced so long as the property is not damaged.

In July 2008, a conspiracy charge was used to convict graffitists for the first time. After a three-month police surveillance operation, nine members of the DPM crew were convicted of conspiracy to commit criminal damage costing at least £1 million. Five of them received prison sentences, ranging from eighteen months to two years. The unprecedented scale of the investigation and the severity of the sentences rekindled public debate over whether graffiti should be considered art or crime.

Some councils, like those of Stroud and Loerrach, provide approved areas in the town where graffitists can showcase their talents, including underpasses, car parks, and walls that might otherwise prove a target for the &quot;spray and run&quot;.

=== Australia ===

Ancient rock art in Australia is seen as a sacred part of First Nations histories, and many of it is legally protected, and some are given National Heritage status.

In an effort to reduce vandalism, many cities in Australia have designated walls or areas exclusively for use by writers. One early example is the &quot;Graffiti Tunnel&quot; located at the Camperdown Campus of the University of Sydney, which is available for use by any student at the university to tag, advertise, poster, and paint. Advocates of this idea suggest that this discourages petty vandalism yet encourages artists to take their time and produce great art, without worry of being caught or arrested for vandalism or trespassing. Others disagree with this approach, arguing that the presence of legal graffiti walls does not demonstrably reduce illegal graffiti elsewhere. Some local government areas throughout Australia have introduced &quot;anti-graffiti squads&quot;, who clean graffiti in the area, and such crews as BCW (Buffers Can&#x27;t Win) have taken steps to keep one step ahead of local graffiti cleaners.

Many state governments have banned the sale or possession of spray paint to those under the age of 18 (age of majority). However, a number of local governments in Victoria have taken steps to recognize the cultural heritage value of some examples of graffiti, such as prominent political graffiti. Tough new graffiti laws have been introduced in Australia with fines of up to A$26,000 and two years in prison.

Melbourne is a prominent graffiti city of Australia with many of its lanes being tourist attractions, such as Hosier Lane in particular, a popular destination for photographers, wedding photography, and backdrops for corporate print advertising. The Lonely Planet travel guide cites Melbourne&#x27;s street as a major attraction. All forms of graffiti, including sticker art, poster, stencil art, and wheatpasting, can be found in many places throughout the city. Prominent street art precincts include; Fitzroy, Collingwood, Northcote, Brunswick, St. Kilda, and the CBD, where stencil and sticker art is prominent. As one moves farther away from the city, mostly along suburban train lines, graffiti tags become more prominent. Many international artists such as Banksy have left their work in Melbourne and in early 2008 a perspex screen was installed to prevent a Banksy stencil art piece from being destroyed, it has survived since 2003 through the respect of local street artists avoiding posting over it, although it has recently had paint tipped over it.

=== New Zealand ===

In February 2008 Helen Clark, the New Zealand prime minister at that time, announced a government crackdown on tagging and other forms of graffiti vandalism, describing it as a destructive crime representing an invasion of public and private property. New legislation subsequently adopted included a ban on the sale of paint spray cans to persons under 18 and increases in maximum fines for the offence from NZ$200 to NZ$2,000 or extended community service. The issue of tagging become a widely debated one following an incident in Auckland during January 2008 in which a middle-aged property owner stabbed one of two teenage taggers to death and was subsequently convicted of manslaughter.

=== United States ===


==== Tracker databases ====

Graffiti databases have increased in the past decade because they allow vandalism incidents to be fully documented against an offender and help the police and prosecution charge and prosecute offenders for multiple counts of vandalism. They also provide law enforcement the ability to rapidly search for an offender&#x27;s moniker or tag in a simple, effective, and comprehensive way. These systems can also help track costs of damage to a city to help allocate an anti-graffiti budget. The theory is that when an offender is caught putting up graffiti, they are not just charged with one count of vandalism; they can be held accountable for all the other damage for which they are responsible. This has two main benefits for law enforcement. One, it sends a signal to the offenders that their vandalism is being tracked. Two, a city can seek restitution from offenders for all the damage that they have committed, not merely a single incident. These systems give law enforcement personnel real-time, street-level intelligence that allows them not only to focus on the worst graffiti offenders and their damage, but also to monitor potential gang violence that is associated with the graffiti.

==== Gang injunctions ====

Many restrictions of civil gang injunctions are designed to help address and protect the physical environment and limit graffiti. Provisions of gang injunctions include things such as restricting the possession of marker pens, spray paint cans, or other sharp objects capable of defacing private or public property; spray painting, or marking with marker pens, scratching, applying stickers, or otherwise applying graffiti on any public or private property, including, but not limited to the street, alley, residences, block walls, and fences, vehicles or any other real or personal property. Some injunctions contain wording that restricts damaging or vandalizing both public and private property, including but not limited to any vehicle, light fixture, door, fence, wall, gate, window, building, street sign, utility box, telephone box, tree, or power pole.

==== Hotlines and reward programs ====

To help address many of these issues, many local jurisdictions have set up graffiti abatement hotlines, where citizens can call in and report vandalism and have it removed. San Diego&#x27;s hotline receives more than 5,000 calls per year, in addition to reporting the graffiti, callers can learn more about prevention. One of the complaints about these hotlines is the response time; there is often a lag time between a property owner calling about the graffiti and its removal. The length of delay should be a consideration for any jurisdiction planning on operating a hotline. Local jurisdictions must convince the callers that their complaint of vandalism will be a priority and cleaned off right away. If the jurisdiction does not have the resources to respond to complaints in a timely manner, the value of the hotline diminishes. Crews must be able to respond to individual service calls made to the graffiti hotline as well as focus on cleanup near schools, parks, and major intersections and transit routes to have the biggest impact. Some cities offer a reward for information leading to the arrest and prosecution of suspects for tagging or graffiti related vandalism. The amount of the reward is based on the information provided, and the action taken.

==== Search warrants ====

When police obtain search warrants in connection with a vandalism investigation, they are often seeking judicial approval to look for items such as cans of spray paint and nozzles from other kinds of aerosol sprays; etching tools, or other sharp or pointed objects, which could be used to etch or scratch glass and other hard surfaces; permanent marking pens, markers, or paint sticks; evidence of membership or affiliation with any gang or tagging crew; paraphernalia including any reference to &quot;(tagger&#x27;s name)&quot;; any drawings, writing, objects, or graffiti depicting taggers&#x27; names, initials, logos, monikers, slogans, or any mention of tagging crew membership; and any newspaper clippings relating to graffiti crime.

== In media ==

=== Documentaries ===

* &quot;80 Blocks from Tiffany&#x27;s&quot; (1979), a rare glimpse of the late 1970s in New York City toward the end of the notorious South Bronx gangs, the documentary shows many aspects of the South Bronx&#x27;s predominantly Puerto Rican community, including reformed gang members, current gang members, the police, and the community leaders who try to reach out to them.
* &quot;Stations of the Elevated&quot; (1980), the earliest documentary about subway graffiti in New York City, with music by Charles Mingus
* &quot;Style Wars&quot; (1983), an early documentary on hip hop culture, made in New York City
* &quot;Piece by Piece&quot; (2005), a feature-length documentary on the history of San Francisco graffiti from the early 1980s
* &quot;Infamy&quot; (2005), a feature-length documentary about graffiti culture as told through the experiences of six well-known graffiti writers and a graffiti buffer
* &quot;&quot; (2005), a documentary about global graffiti culture
* &quot;RASH&quot; (2005), a feature documentary about Melbourne, Australia, and the artists who make it a living host for street art
* &quot;Jisoe&quot; (2007), a glimpse into the life of a Melbourne, Australia, graffiti writer shows the audience an example of graffiti in struggling Melbourne Areas.
* &quot;Roadsworth: Crossing the Line&quot; (2009), about Montréal artist Peter Gibson and his controversial stencil art on public roads
* &quot;Exit Through The Gift Shop&quot; (2010) was produced by the notorious artist Banksy. It tells the story of Thierry Guetta, a French immigrant in Los Angeles, and his obsession with street art; Shepard Fairey and Invader, whom Guetta discovers is his cousin, are also in the film.
* &quot;Still on and non the wiser&quot; (2011) is a ninety-minute-long documentation that accompanies the exhibition with the same name in the Kunsthalle Barmen of the Von der Heydt-Museum in Wuppertal (Germany). It draws vivid portrayals of the artists by means of very personal interviews and also catches the creation process of the works before the exhibition was opened.
* &quot;Graffiti Wars&quot; (2011), a documentary detailing King Robbo&#x27;s feud with Banksy as well as the authorities&#x27; differing attitude towards graffiti and street art

=== Dramas ===

* &quot;Wild Style&quot; (1983), about hip hop and graffiti culture in New York City
* &quot;Turk 182&quot; (1985), about graffiti as political activism
* &quot;Bomb the System&quot; (2002), about a crew of graffitists in modern-day New York City
* &quot;Quality of Life&quot; (2004) was shot in the Mission District of San Francisco, co-written by and starring a retired graffiti writer.
* &quot;Wholetrain&quot; (2006), a German film

== See also ==
* Anti-graffiti coating
* Stencil graffiti
* Street art
* Yarn bombing
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Baird, J. A.; C. Taylor (eds.), 2011, &quot;Ancient Graffiti in Context&quot;. New York: Routledge.

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="0" end="8" title="Graffiti" label="Graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567529" start="65" end="84" title="Graffito (archaeology)" label="graffiti archeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900243" start="229" end="249" title="Moniker (graffiti)" label="&amp;quot;monikers&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567529" start="295" end="314" title="Graffito (archaeology)" label="since ancient times"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="345" end="358" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="360" end="374" title="ancient Greece" label="ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="384" end="396" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6160" start="524" end="533" title="vandalism" label="vandalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013302" start="564" end="584" title="New York City Subway nomenclature" label="New York City subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="596" end="608" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="985" end="990" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="994" end="998" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42195" start="1145" end="1155" title="petroglyph" label="petroglyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q45791" start="1161" end="1169" title="geoglyph" label="geoglyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q214334" start="1230" end="1244" title="cave paintings" label="cave paintings"/>
<link wikidata="Q374096" start="1276" end="1288" title="Chauvet Cave" label="Chauvet Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q15218879" start="1387" end="1403" title="stencil graffiti" label="stencil graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529977" start="1513" end="1516" title="Tag (graffiti)" label="tag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1586" end="1598" title="Ancient Rome" label="Ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q41898" start="1728" end="1740" title="Sator Square" label="Sator Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q577890" start="1976" end="1995" title="Alexamenos graffito" label="Alexamenos graffito"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="2049" end="2054" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q472586" start="2236" end="2244" title="Safaitic" label="Safaitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21661186" start="2258" end="2280" title="Old Arabic" label="ancient form of Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="2410" end="2415" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="2425" end="2431" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="2445" end="2457" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q272153" start="2580" end="2588" title="Sigiriya" label="Sigiriya"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="2892" end="2896" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="2934" end="2941" title="Umayyad" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="2951" end="2958" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q757169" start="3034" end="3042" title="Sistan" label="Sajistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="3047" end="3052" title="Basra" label="Basra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="3094" end="3101" title="Umayyad" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231368" start="3123" end="3127" title="wali" label="wali"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="3295" end="3306" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591" start="3323" end="3335" title="Pinturicchio" label="Pinturicchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="3337" end="3344" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="3346" end="3358" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q191423" start="3360" end="3371" title="Domenico Ghirlandaio" label="Ghirlandaio"/>
<link wikidata="Q296265" start="3376" end="3391" title="Filippino Lippi" label="Filippino Lippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q622438" start="3432" end="3443" title="Domus Aurea" label="Domus Aurea"/>
<link wikidata="Q218248" start="3515" end="3525" title="Grotesque" label="grottesche"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3668" end="3685" title="French Revolutionary Wars: Campaigns of 1798" label="campaign of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="3687" end="3697" title="Lord Byron" label="Lord Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="3753" end="3761" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136637" start="3765" end="3777" title="Cape Sounion" label="Cape Sounion"/>
<link wikidata="Q122443" start="3781" end="3787" title="Attica" label="Attica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900243" start="3826" end="3843" title="Moniker (graffiti)" label="graffiti monikers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908680" start="3977" end="3988" title="Bill Daniel (filmmaker)" label="Bill Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378152" start="4109" end="4126" title="Independence Rock" label="Independence Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q862312" start="4158" end="4170" title="Oregon Trail" label="Oregon Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4176" end="4188" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q154748" start="4234" end="4240" title="Verdun" label="Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q597180" start="4403" end="4418" title="Kilroy was here" label="Kilroy was here"/>
<link wikidata="Q103767" start="4613" end="4627" title="Charlie Parker" label="Charlie Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132127" start="4840" end="4855" title="hip hop culture" label="hip hop culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="4906" end="4919" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="4924" end="4936" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529977" start="4938" end="4942" title="Tag (graffiti)" label="Tags"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034550" start="5025" end="5033" title="TAKI 183" label="TAKI 183"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171088" start="5038" end="5047" title="Cornbread (graffiti artist)" label="Cornbread"/>
<link wikidata="Q122423325" start="5093" end="5099" title="Piece (graffiti)" label="pieces"/>
<link wikidata="Q180962" start="5323" end="5336" title="Norman Mailer" label="Norman Mailer"/>
<link wikidata="Q467122" start="5375" end="5382" title="Ed Koch" label="Ed Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q85847694" start="5547" end="5595" title="The Faith of Graffiti" label="the 1974 essay &amp;quot;The Faith of Graffiti&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088978" start="5760" end="5774" title="Clapton is God" label="Clapton is God"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="5811" end="5823" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q125163" start="5919" end="5928" title="Islington" label="Islington"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6028" end="6049" title="Urine marking#Canidae" label="urinating on the wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492937" start="6063" end="6073" title="Style Wars" label="Style Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241112" start="6125" end="6130" title="DONDI" label="Dondi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4024198" start="6144" end="6150" title="Zephyr (artist)" label="ZEPHYR"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="6776" end="6779" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q510345" start="6894" end="6906" title="peace symbol" label="peace symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q826930" start="6910" end="6915" title="Heart (symbol)" label="heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q9147" start="6923" end="6930" title="penguin" label="penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131200" start="6932" end="6944" title="Tux (mascot)" label="Linux mascot"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="7144" end="7148" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q170325" start="7280" end="7283" title="PlayStation Portable" label="PSP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7302" end="7315" title="PlayStation Portable#Controversial advertising campaigns" label="this campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="7658" end="7670" title="Latin script" label="Latin script"/>
<link wikidata="Q613236" start="7829" end="7840" title="Blek le Rat" label="Blek le Rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="7882" end="7887" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="7962" end="7971" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="8211" end="8220" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="8276" end="8287" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="8334" end="8339" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="8341" end="8348" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218629" start="8354" end="8368" title="Arab states of the Persian Gulf" label="Gulf countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="8374" end="8381" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="8389" end="8409" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="8411" end="8417" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="8426" end="8430" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574046" start="8466" end="8475" title="Hamshahri" label="Hamshahri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648982" start="8585" end="8590" title="A1one" label="A1one"/>
<link wikidata="Q524253" start="8735" end="8760" title="Israeli West Bank barrier" label="Israeli West Bank barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="8826" end="8837" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778162" start="9021" end="9050" title="Na Nach Nachma Nachman Meuman" label="Na Nach Nachma Nachman Meuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q17516" start="9151" end="9161" title="street art" label="street art"/>
<link wikidata="Q984212" start="9205" end="9209" title="MENA" label="MENA"/>
<link wikidata="Q33761" start="9251" end="9262" title="Arab Spring" label="Arab Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q60289711" start="9278" end="9297" title="Sudanese Revolution" label="Sudanese Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q133600" start="9470" end="9476" title="Banksy" label="Banksy"/>
<link wikidata="Q219060" start="9561" end="9570" title="Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q524253" start="9614" end="9631" title="Israeli West Bank barrier" label="West Bank barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5776" start="9636" end="9645" title="Bethlehem" label="Bethlehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182035" start="9873" end="9881" title="Pichação" label="Pichação"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159029" start="10140" end="10149" title="OSGEMEOS" label="Os Gêmeos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5483878" start="10159" end="10164" title="Francisco Rodrigues da Silva" label="Nunca"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="10279" end="10293" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="10334" end="10349" title="Western culture" label="Western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="10447" end="10459" title="Kuala Lumpur" label="Kuala Lumpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055935" start="10672" end="10683" title="Spray paint" label="Spray paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q493615" start="10688" end="10695" title="Marker pen" label="markers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529977" start="10724" end="10731" title="Tag (graffiti)" label="tagging"/>
<link wikidata="Q122722992" start="10733" end="10742" title="Throw up (graffiti)" label="throw ups"/>
<link wikidata="Q122423325" start="10748" end="10754" title="Piece (graffiti)" label="pieces"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125097" start="10756" end="10768" title="Paint marker" label="Paint marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322419" start="10850" end="10864" title="Montana Colors" label="Montana Colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7463524" start="11088" end="11097" title="Corrugated fiberboard" label="cardboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429918" start="11109" end="11115" title="File folder" label="folder"/>
<link wikidata="Q613236" start="11374" end="11385" title="Blek le Rat" label="Blek le Rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176391" start="11407" end="11418" title="Jef Aerosol" label="Jef Aerosol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="11521" end="11530" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="11792" end="11820" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6466880" start="11828" end="11837" title="Label 228" label="Label 228"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056101" start="11841" end="11849" title="name tag" label="name tag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529977" start="12078" end="12085" title="Tag (graffiti)" label="Tagging"/>
<link wikidata="Q16873917" start="12185" end="12194" title="handstyle" label="handstyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q278485" start="12315" end="12323" title="hashtags" label="hashtags"/>
<link wikidata="Q130049736" start="12868" end="12878" title="Character (graffiti)" label="characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q12681" start="13056" end="13067" title="calligraphy" label="calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q739127" start="13203" end="13212" title="Tracy 168" label="Tracy 168"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="13216" end="13225" title="the Bronx" label="the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="13227" end="13235" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100455" start="13364" end="13385" title="Graffiti Research Lab" label="Graffiti Research Lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798004" start="13465" end="13473" title="LED art" label="throwies"/>
<link wikidata="Q579816" start="13505" end="13516" title="Yarnbombing" label="Yarnbombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="13729" end="13740" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q83578" start="13792" end="13802" title="Asger Jorn" label="Asger Jorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="14888" end="14895" title="Hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15112" end="15140" title="hip hop#Culture" label="one of four hip hop elements"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15407" end="15436" title="Extraversion and introversion#Introversion" label="introverted archetypal artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q133600" start="15439" end="15445" title="Banksy" label="Banksy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="15635" end="15642" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="15707" end="15716" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="16081" end="16090" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q667276" start="16275" end="16286" title="Art exhibition" label="exhibitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="16858" end="16865" title="Finland" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001384" start="16937" end="16949" title="Ilta-Sanomat" label="Ilta-Sanomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164784" start="16985" end="16996" title="Peugeot 208" label="Peugeot 208"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="17479" end="17486" title="symbols" label="symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q378408" start="17491" end="17499" title="initials" label="initials"/>
<link wikidata="Q12681" start="17531" end="17544" title="calligraphies" label="calligraphies"/>
<link wikidata="Q557141" start="17864" end="17874" title="public art" label="public art"/>
<link wikidata="Q380351" start="18002" end="18014" title="emancipation" label="emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="18284" end="18295" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="18386" end="18392" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="18407" end="18410" title="East Germany" label="GDR"/>
<link wikidata="Q486365" start="18740" end="18752" title="anarcho-punk" label="anarcho-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q842336" start="18758" end="18763" title="Crass" label="Crass"/>
<link wikidata="Q794691" start="18804" end="18812" title="anti-war" label="anti-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="18814" end="18823" title="anarchism" label="anarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="18825" end="18833" title="feminism" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783091" start="18839" end="18855" title="Anti-consumerism" label="anti-consumerist"/>
<link wikidata="Q20075" start="18880" end="18898" title="London Underground" label="London Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="18948" end="18957" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6743" start="19343" end="19351" title="May 1968 in France" label="May 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q643190" start="20009" end="20021" title="subvertising" label="subvertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143564" start="20023" end="20038" title="culture jamming" label="culture jamming"/>
<link wikidata="Q17516" start="20326" end="20336" title="Street Art" label="Street Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q268482" start="20556" end="20572" title="Alexander Brener" label="Alexander Brener"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572377" start="20901" end="20916" title="Space Hijackers" label="Space Hijackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817665" start="21030" end="21037" title="imagery" label="imagery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281626" start="21069" end="21090" title="Irmela Mensah-Schramm" label="Irmela Mensah-Schramm"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="21184" end="21192" title="Neo-Nazism" label="neo-Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="21203" end="21223" title="Far-right politics" label="right-wing extremist"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="21334" end="21340" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="21351" end="21359" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="21403" end="21410" title="General officer" label="general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125372" start="21414" end="21423" title="Army of Republika Srpska" label="Serb army"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="21428" end="21440" title="War Criminal" label="war criminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q183219" start="21455" end="21459" title="International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" label="ICTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288108" start="21514" end="21522" title="Bosnian genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4533032" start="21527" end="21543" title="Ethnic cleansing in the Bosnian War" label="ethnic cleansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q181533" start="21547" end="21558" title="Bosnian War" label="Bosnian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q93167" start="21560" end="21572" title="Ratko Mladić" label="Ratko Mladić"/>
<link wikidata="Q48772314" start="22087" end="22110" title="Bosnian genocide denial" label="Bosnian genocide denial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22115" end="22129" title="Balkan Diskurs" label="Balkan Diskurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198998" start="23047" end="23074" title="Ministry of Internal Affairs (Serbia)" label="Interior Minister of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11074974" start="23076" end="23092" title="Aleksandar Vulin" label="Aleksandar Vulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q275705" start="23478" end="23528" title="International Day Against Fascism and Antisemitism" label="International Day Against Fascism and Antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068733" start="24174" end="24184" title="heteroglossia" label="heteroglot"/>
<link wikidata="Q696819" start="24629" end="24635" title="herald" label="herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q482919" start="25174" end="25184" title="caricature" label="caricature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485806" start="25226" end="25233" title="pothole" label="pothole"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="25294" end="25304" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436741" start="25545" end="25557" title="Fashion Moda" label="Fashion Moda"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="25561" end="25570" title="the Bronx" label="the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374498" start="25572" end="25583" title="Now Gallery" label="Now Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090854" start="25588" end="25599" title="Fun Gallery" label="Fun Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043326" start="25613" end="25636" title="East Village, Manhattan" label="East Village, Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q632682" start="25664" end="25679" title="Brooklyn Museum" label="Brooklyn Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q408804" start="25728" end="25758" title="Boroughs of New York City" label="New York&amp;#x27;s outer boroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q485635" start="25839" end="25851" title="Keith Haring" label="Keith Haring"/>
<link wikidata="Q155407" start="25857" end="25877" title="Jean-Michel Basquiat" label="Jean-Michel Basquiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182013" start="25936" end="25941" title="Crash (graffiti artist)" label="Crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216025" start="25953" end="25962" title="Lady Pink" label="Lady Pink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016269" start="26186" end="26201" title="Burhan Doğançay" label="Burhan Doğançay"/>
<link wikidata="Q178065" start="26726" end="26749" title="Centre Pompidou" label="Centre Georges Pompidou"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="26753" end="26758" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="26888" end="26911" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q861716" start="27060" end="27074" title="visual culture" label="visual culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q457318" start="27215" end="27227" title="Grand Palais" label="Grand Palais"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055935" start="27269" end="27280" title="Spray paint" label="Spray paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q910267" start="27438" end="27463" title="Volatile organic compound" label="Volatile organic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="27721" end="27731" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="28123" end="28130" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107757" start="28268" end="28283" title="Tsang Tsou Choi" label="Tsang Tsou Choi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12681" start="28337" end="28348" title="calligraphy" label="calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="28468" end="28474" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q63227" start="29094" end="29103" title="Ximending" label="Ximending"/>
<link wikidata="Q208526" start="29218" end="29221" title="NT$" label="NT$"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="29555" end="29564" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522875" start="29624" end="29649" title="Singapore American School" label="Singapore American School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833299" start="29651" end="29665" title="Michael P. Fay" label="Michael P. Fay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914335" start="29819" end="29845" title="Vandalism Act (Singapore)" label="Vandalism Act of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192695" start="30004" end="30010" title="caning" label="caning"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="30018" end="30036" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q537151" start="30247" end="30255" title="pardon" label="clemency"/>
<link wikidata="Q39021" start="30399" end="30421" title="president of Singapore" label="president of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q543664" start="30423" end="30438" title="Ong Teng Cheong" label="Ong Teng Cheong"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="30497" end="30508" title="Republic of Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q202040" start="30546" end="30562" title="South Korean won" label="South Korean won"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="30570" end="30575" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q19771" start="30642" end="30646" title="G-20" label="G-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q14342" start="30921" end="30934" title="Lee Myung-bak" label="Lee Myung-bak"/>
<link wikidata="Q18099" start="31518" end="31523" title="bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117148" start="31531" end="31558" title="Cave of Mayrière supérieure" label="Cave of Mayrière supérieure"/>
<link wikidata="Q733480" start="31586" end="31595" title="Bruniquel" label="Bruniquel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12779" start="31599" end="31614" title="Tarn-et-Garonne" label="Tarn-et-Garonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q184253" start="31638" end="31652" title="Ig Nobel Prize" label="Ig Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="31656" end="31666" title="archeology" label="archeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="31978" end="31986" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774464" start="32182" end="32212" title="Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003" label="Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q45276" start="32289" end="32306" title="Keep Britain Tidy" label="Keep Britain Tidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156955" start="32351" end="32365" title="zero tolerance" label="zero tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243001" start="32443" end="32447" title="Fine (penalty)" label="fine"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="32622" end="32633" title="music video" label="music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="32803" end="32824" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="32862" end="32872" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774464" start="33166" end="33196" title="Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003" label="Anti-social Behaviour Act 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627314" start="33470" end="33480" title="Criminal conspiracy" label="conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q554774" start="33659" end="33674" title="Property damage" label="criminal damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918802" start="34570" end="34580" title="Camperdown, New South Wales" label="Camperdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q487556" start="34595" end="34615" title="University of Sydney" label="University of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838810" start="34908" end="34919" title="trespassing" label="trespassing"/>
<link wikidata="Q18000" start="35414" end="35429" title="age of majority" label="age of majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="35722" end="35731" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5908090" start="35832" end="35843" title="Hosier Lane, Melbourne" label="Hosier Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q17957" start="35972" end="35985" title="Lonely Planet" label="Lonely Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872553" start="36085" end="36092" title="sticker" label="sticker"/>
<link wikidata="Q429785" start="36098" end="36104" title="poster" label="poster"/>
<link wikidata="Q504073" start="36106" end="36113" title="stencil" label="stencil"/>
<link wikidata="Q37810383" start="36123" end="36135" title="wheatpasting" label="wheatpasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421389" start="36226" end="36233" title="Fitzroy, Victoria" label="Fitzroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109698" start="36235" end="36246" title="Collingwood, Victoria" label="Collingwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057754" start="36248" end="36257" title="Northcote, Victoria" label="Northcote"/>
<link wikidata="Q994135" start="36259" end="36268" title="Brunswick, Victoria" label="Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q823531" start="36270" end="36279" title="St Kilda, Victoria" label="St. Kilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q146123" start="36547" end="36554" title="perspex" label="perspex"/>
<link wikidata="Q180383" start="36823" end="36834" title="Helen Clark" label="Helen Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q37100" start="37338" end="37346" title="Auckland" label="Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882220" start="37483" end="37495" title="manslaughter" label="manslaughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644420" start="41756" end="41785" title="80 Blocks from Tiffany&amp;#x27;s" label="80 Blocks from Tiffany&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154575" start="42131" end="42155" title="Stations of the Elevated" label="Stations of the Elevated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492937" start="42272" end="42282" title="Style Wars" label="Style Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191353" start="42368" end="42382" title="Piece by Piece (2005 film)" label="Piece by Piece"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294762" start="42733" end="42737" title="RASH (film)" label="RASH"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="42916" end="42925" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119322" start="43172" end="43198" title="Exit Through The Gift Shop" label="Exit Through The Gift Shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q133600" start="43249" end="43255" title="Banksy" label="Banksy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849264" start="43279" end="43293" title="Thierry Guetta" label="Thierry Guetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332698" start="43365" end="43379" title="Shepard Fairey" label="Shepard Fairey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671666" start="43384" end="43391" title="Invader (artist)" label="Invader"/>
<link wikidata="Q819504" start="43621" end="43641" title="Von der Heydt-Museum" label="Von der Heydt-Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107" start="43645" end="43654" title="Wuppertal" label="Wuppertal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412010" start="43889" end="43899" title="King Robbo" label="King Robbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17516" start="43997" end="44007" title="street art" label="street art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2163904" start="44033" end="44043" title="Wild Style" label="Wild Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438444" start="44118" end="44126" title="Turk 182" label="Turk 182"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940435" start="44186" end="44201" title="Bomb the System" label="Bomb the System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268783" start="44280" end="44295" title="Quality of Life (film)" label="Quality of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q871180" start="44422" end="44432" title="Wholetrain" label="Wholetrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924259" start="44479" end="44500" title="Anti-graffiti coating" label="Anti-graffiti coating"/>
<link wikidata="Q15218879" start="44503" end="44519" title="Stencil graffiti" label="Stencil graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q17516" start="44522" end="44532" title="Street art" label="Street art"/>
<link wikidata="Q579816" start="44535" end="44547" title="Yarn bombing" label="Yarn bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q47072065" start="44589" end="44601" title="Jennifer Baird" label="Baird, J. A."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11986" wikidata="Q6567" url="?curid=11986" title="Godzilla">
<text>is a fictional monster, or &quot;kaiju&quot;, that debuted in the eponymous 1954 film, directed and co-written by Ishirō Honda. The character has since become an international pop culture icon, appearing in various media: 33 Japanese films produced by Toho Co., Ltd., five American films, and numerous video games, novels, comic books, and television shows. Godzilla has been dubbed the King of the Monsters, an epithet first used in &quot;Godzilla, King of the Monsters!&quot; (1956), the American localization of the 1954 film.

Originally and in most iterations of the creature, Godzilla is a colossal prehistoric reptilian or dinosaurian monster that is amphibious or resides partially in the ocean, awakened and empowered after many years by exposure to nuclear radiation and nuclear testing. With the nuclear bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and the &quot;Lucky Dragon 5&quot; incident still fresh in the Japanese consciousness, Godzilla was conceived as a metaphor for nuclear weapons. Others have suggested that Godzilla is a metaphor for the United States, a &quot;giant beast&quot; woken from its &quot;slumber&quot; that then takes terrible vengeance on Japan. As the film series expanded, some storylines took on less serious undertones, portraying Godzilla as an antihero or lesser threat who defends humanity. Later films address disparate themes and commentary, including Japan&#x27;s apathy, neglect, and ignorance of its imperial past, natural disasters, and the human condition.

Godzilla has been featured alongside many supporting characters and, over the decades, has faced off against various human opponents, such as the Japan Self-Defense Forces (JSDF), in addition to other gargantuan monsters, including Gigan, King Ghidorah, and Mechagodzilla. Godzilla has fought alongside allies such as Anguirus, Mothra, and Rodan and has had offspring, including Godzilla Junior and Minilla. Godzilla has also battled characters and creatures from other franchises in crossover media —such as King Kong— as well as various Marvel Comics characters, like S.H.I.E.L.D., the Fantastic Four, and the Avengers, as well as DC Comics characters such as the Justice League, the Legion of Doom and the Green Lantern Corps.
==Appearances==
First appearing in 1954, Godzilla has starred in a total of 38 films: 33 Japanese films produced and distributed by Toho Co., Ltd. and five American films, one produced by TriStar Pictures and four produced by Legendary Pictures. The monster has also appeared in countless other entertainment mediums, which include comic book lines, novelizations, and video games; each appearance expands upon the universe created by the films.

==Development==
===Naming===
Although the process of creating Godzilla&#x27;s first film is comprehensively recorded, exactly how its name came to be remains unclear. The most widely accepted report of its origin is that producer Tomoyuki Tanaka named the monster after sturdy Toho worker Shirō Amikura, the later chief of the theater club of Toho, who was jokingly dubbed then , a portmanteau of the Japanese words and due to his burly build to resemble a gorilla and his habit to favor whale meat. The account has been acknowledged by Toho themselves, director Ishirō Honda, producer Tanaka, special effects director Eiji Tsuburaya, producer , and production head , with Satō and Mori recalling that the employee was Amikura. However, Honda&#x27;s widow Kimi dismissed the employee-name story as a tall tale in a 1998 BBC documentary on Godzilla, believing that Honda, Tanaka, and Tsuburaya gave &quot;considerable thought&quot; to the name of the monster, stating, &quot;the backstage boys at Toho loved to joke around with tall stories, but I don&#x27;t believe that one&quot;. Honda&#x27;s longtime assistant director added: &quot;Those of us who were closest to them don&#x27;t even know how and why they came up with &quot;Gojira&quot;.&quot;

Toho later translated the monster&#x27;s Japanese name as &quot;Godzilla&quot; for overseas distribution. The first recorded foreign usage of &quot;Godzilla&quot; was printed in the &quot;Hawaii Tribune-Herald&quot; on November 20, 1955.

During the development of the American version of &quot;Godzilla Raids Again&quot; (1955), Godzilla&#x27;s name was changed to &quot;Gigantis&quot; by producer Paul Schreibman, who wanted to create a character distinct from Godzilla.

=== Characterization ===
Within the context of the Japanese films, Godzilla&#x27;s exact origins vary, but it is generally depicted as an enormous, violent, prehistoric sea monster awakened and empowered by nuclear radiation. Although the specific details of Godzilla&#x27;s appearance have varied slightly over the years, the overall impression has remained consistent. Inspired by the fictional &quot;Rhedosaurus&quot; created by animator Ray Harryhausen for the film &quot;The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms&quot;, Godzilla&#x27;s character design was conceived as that of an amphibious reptilian monster based around the loose concept of a dinosaur with an erect standing posture, scaly skin, an anthropomorphic torso with muscular arms, lobed bony plates along its back and tail, and a furrowed brow.

Art director Akira Watanabe combined attributes of a &quot;Tyrannosaurus&quot;, an &quot;Iguanodon&quot;, a &quot;Stegosaurus&quot; and an alligator to form a sort of blended chimera, inspired by illustrations from an issue of &quot;Life&quot; magazine. To emphasize the monster&#x27;s relationship with the atomic bomb, its skin texture was inspired by the keloid scars seen on the survivors of Hiroshima. The basic design has a reptilian visage, a robust build, an upright posture, a long tail and three rows of serrated plates along the back. In the original film, the plates were added for purely aesthetic purposes, in order to further differentiate Godzilla from any other living or extinct creature. Godzilla is sometimes depicted as green in comics, cartoons, and movie posters, but the costumes used in the movies were usually painted charcoal gray with bone-white dorsal plates up until the film &quot;Godzilla 2000: Millennium&quot;.

In the original Japanese films, Godzilla and all the other monsters are referred to with gender-neutral pronouns equivalent to &quot;it&quot;, while in the English dubbed versions, Godzilla is explicitly described as a male. In his book, Godzilla co-creator Tomoyuki Tanaka suggested that the monster was probably male; but also suggested that the original 1954 version could have been female. In the 1998 film &quot;Godzilla&quot;, the monster is referred to as a male and is depicted laying eggs through parthenogenesis. In the Legendary Pictures &quot;Godzilla&quot; films, Godzilla is specified as a male.&lt;ref name=&quot;/Film Gender&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

For the English translations for the &quot;Godzilla and Godzilla Raids Again&quot; novellas, writer Jeffrey Angles settled on male pronouns for Godzilla, stating that &quot;Kayama [writer of the original novellas] thought about Godzilla as a stand-in for the nuclear bomb, and it was men in America who were developing the hydrogen bombs that frightened Japan so much in 1954. So maybe it&#x27;s perhaps not inappropriate to call Godzilla &#x27;he&#x27;.&quot; Angles also noted that Toho prefers to keep Godzilla and their other &quot;kaiju&quot; characters as gender-neutral as they see them more as objects akin to natural disasters.

Godzilla&#x27;s allegiance and motivations, as well as its level of intelligence, have changed from film to film to suit the needs of the story. Although Godzilla does not like humans, it will fight alongside humanity against common threats. However, it makes no special effort to protect human life or property and will turn against its human allies on a whim. It is generally not motivated to attack by predatory instinct; it does not usually eat people and instead sustains itself on nuclear radiation and an omnivorous or piscivorian diet consisting especially of cetaceans and large fish. When inquired if Godzilla was &quot;good or bad&quot;, producer Shōgo Tomiyama likened it to a Shinto &quot;God of Destruction&quot; which lacks moral agency and cannot be held to human standards of good and evil. &quot;He totally destroys everything and then there is a rebirth. Something new and fresh can begin.&quot; Tomoyuki Tanaka noted in his book that Godzilla and humanity can become temporal allies against greater threats, however they are essentially enemies due to the difficulty to co-exist.

====Abilities====

Godzilla&#x27;s signature weapon is its &quot;atomic heat beam&quot; (also known as &quot;atomic breath&quot;), nuclear energy that it generates inside of its body, uses electromagnetic force to concentrate it into a laser-like high velocity projectile and unleashes it from its jaws in the form of a blue or red radioactive beam. Toho&#x27;s special effects department has used various techniques to render the beam, from physical gas-powered flames to hand-drawn or computer-generated fire. Godzilla is shown to possess immense physical strength and muscularity. Haruo Nakajima, the actor who played Godzilla in the original films, was a black belt in judo and used his expertise to choreograph the battle sequences.

Godzilla is amphibious: it has a preference for traversing Earth&#x27;s hydrosphere when in hibernation or migration, can breathe underwater due to pore-shaped gills and is described in the original film by the character Dr. Yamane as a transitional form between a marine and a terrestrial reptile. Godzilla is shown to have great vitality: it is immune to conventional weaponry thanks to its rugged hide and ability to regenerate, and as a result of surviving a nuclear explosion, it cannot be destroyed by anything less powerful. One incarnation possesses an electromagnetic pulse-producing organ in its body which generates an asymmetrical permeable shield, making it impervious to all damage except for a short period when the organ recycles.

Various films, non-canonical television shows, comics, and games have depicted Godzilla with additional powers, such as an atomic pulse, magnetism, precognition, fireballs, convert electromagnetic energy into intensive body heat, converting shed blood into temporary tentacle limbs, an electric bite, superhuman speed, laser beams emitted from its eyes and even flight.

====Roar====
Godzilla has a distinctive disyllabic roar (transcribed in several comics as &quot;Skreeeonk!&quot;), which was created by composer Akira Ifukube, who produced the sound by rubbing a pine tar-resin-coated glove along the string of a contrabass and then slowing down the playback. In the American version of &quot;Godzilla Raids Again&quot; (1955) titled &quot;Gigantis the Fire Monster&quot; (1959), Godzilla&#x27;s roar was mostly substituted with that of the monster Anguirus. From &quot;The Return of Godzilla&quot; (1984) to &quot;Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah&quot; (1991), Godzilla was given a deeper and more threatening-sounding roar than in previous films, though this change was reverted from &quot;Godzilla vs. Mothra&quot; (1992) onward. For the 2014 American film, sound editors Ethan Van der Ryn and Erik Aadahl refused to disclose the source of the sounds used for their Godzilla&#x27;s roar. Aadahl described the two syllables of the roar as representing two different emotional reactions, with the first expressing fury and the second conveying the character&#x27;s soul.

====Size====

Godzilla&#x27;s size is inconsistent, changing from film to film and even from scene to scene for the sake of artistic license. The miniature sets and costumes were typically built at a – scale and filmed at 240 frames per second to create the illusion of great size. In the original 1954 film, Godzilla was scaled to be tall. This was done so Godzilla could just peer over the largest buildings in Tokyo at the time. In the 1956 American version, Godzilla is estimated to be tall, because producer Joseph E. Levine felt that 50 m did not sound &quot;powerful enough&quot;.

As the series progressed, Toho would rescale the character, eventually making Godzilla as tall as . This was done so that it would not be dwarfed by the newer, bigger buildings in Tokyo&#x27;s skyline, such as the Tokyo Metropolitan Government Building which Godzilla destroyed in the film &quot;Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah&quot; (1991). Supplementary information, such as character profiles, would also depict Godzilla as weighing between .

In the American film &quot;Godzilla&quot; (2014) from Legendary Pictures, Godzilla was scaled to be and weighing , making it the largest film version at that time. Director Gareth Edwards wanted Godzilla &quot;to be so big as to be seen from anywhere in the city, but not too big that he couldn&#x27;t be obscured&quot;. For &quot;Shin Godzilla&quot; (2016), Godzilla was made even taller than the Legendary version, at . In &quot;&quot; (2017), Godzilla&#x27;s height was increased further still to . In &quot;&quot; (2019) and &quot;Godzilla vs. Kong&quot; (2021), Godzilla&#x27;s height was increased to from the 2014 incarnation.

==Special effects==

Godzilla&#x27;s appearance has traditionally been portrayed in the films by an actor wearing a latex costume, though the character has also been rendered in animatronic, stop-motion and computer-generated form. Taking inspiration from &quot;King Kong&quot;, special effects artist Eiji Tsuburaya had initially wanted Godzilla to be portrayed via stop-motion, but prohibitive deadlines and a lack of experienced animators in Japan at the time made suitmation more practical.

===Practical effects===
The first suit, weighing in excess of , consisted of a body cavity made of thin wires and bamboo wrapped in chicken wire for support and covered in fabric and cushions, which were then coated in latex. It was held together by small hooks on the back, though subsequent Godzilla suits incorporated a zipper. Prior to 1984, most Godzilla suits were made from scratch, thus resulting in slight design changes in each film appearance. The most notable changes from 1962 to 1975 were the reduction in Godzilla&#x27;s number of toes and the removal of the character&#x27;s external ears and prominent fangs, features which would all later be reincorporated in the Godzilla designs from &quot;The Return of Godzilla&quot; (1984) onward. The most consistent Godzilla design was maintained from &quot;Godzilla vs. Biollante&quot; (1989) to &quot;Godzilla vs. Destoroyah&quot; (1995), when the suit was given a cat-like face and double rows of teeth.

Several suit actors had difficulties in performing as Godzilla due to the suits&#x27; weight, lack of ventilation and diminished visibility. Haruo Nakajima, who portrayed Godzilla from 1954 to 1972, said the materials used to make the 1954 suit (rubber, plastic, cotton, and latex) were hard to find after World War II. The suit weighed 100 kilograms after its completion and required two men to help Nakajima put it on. When he first put it on, he sweated so heavily that his shirt was soaked within seconds. Kenpachiro Satsuma in particular, who portrayed Godzilla from 1984 to 1995, described how the Godzilla suits he wore were even heavier and hotter than their predecessors because of the incorporation of animatronics. Satsuma himself suffered numerous medical issues during his tenure, including oxygen deprivation, near-drowning, concussions, electric shocks and lacerations to the legs from the suits&#x27; steel wire reinforcements wearing through the rubber padding. The ventilation problem was partially solved in the suit used in 1994&#x27;s &quot;Godzilla vs. SpaceGodzilla&quot;, which was the first to include an air duct that allowed suit actors to last longer during performances. In &quot;Godzilla&quot; (1998), several scenes had the monster portrayed by stuntmen in suits similar to those used in the Toho films, with the actors&#x27; heads being located in the monster&#x27;s neck region and the facial movements controlled via animatronics. However, because of the creature&#x27;s horizontal posture, the stuntmen had to wear metal leg extenders, which allowed them to stand off the ground with their feet bent forward. Kurt Carley performed the suitmation sequences for the adult Godzilla.

In &quot;The Return of Godzilla&quot; (1984), some scenes made use of a 16-foot high robotic Godzilla (dubbed the &quot;Cybot Godzilla&quot;) for use in close-up shots of the creature&#x27;s head. The Cybot Godzilla consisted of a hydraulically powered mechanical endoskeleton covered in urethane skin containing 3,000 computer operated parts which permitted it to tilt its head and move its lips and arms. For &quot;Godzilla&quot; (1998), the film&#x27;s special effects crew built a scale animatronic Godzilla for close-up scenes, whose size outmatched that of Stan Winston&#x27;s &quot;Rexy&quot; in &quot;Jurassic Park&quot;.

===CGI===
In &quot;Godzilla&quot; (1998), special effects artist Patrick Tatopoulos was instructed to redesign Godzilla as an incredibly fast runner. At one point, it was planned to use motion capture from a human to create the movements of the computer-generated Godzilla, but it was said to have ended up looking too much like a man in a suit. Tatopoulos subsequently reimagined the creature as a lean, digitigrade bipedal, iguana-like creature that stood with its back and tail parallel to the ground, rendered via CGI.

In &quot;Godzilla&quot; (2014), the character was portrayed entirely via CGI. Godzilla&#x27;s design in the reboot was intended to stay true to that of the original series, though the film&#x27;s special effects team strove to make the monster &quot;more dynamic than a guy in a big rubber suit.&quot; To create a CG version of Godzilla, the Moving Picture Company (MPC) studied various animals such as bears, Komodo dragons, lizards, lions and wolves, which helped the visual effects artists visualize Godzilla&#x27;s body structure, like that of its underlying bone, fat and muscle structure, as well as the thickness and texture of its scales. Motion capture was also used for some of Godzilla&#x27;s movements. T. J. Storm provided the performance capture for Godzilla by wearing sensors in front of a green screen. Storm reprised the role of Godzilla in &quot;&quot;, portraying the character through performance capture.

In &quot;Shin Godzilla&quot;, a majority of the character was portrayed via CGI, with Mansai Nomura portraying Godzilla through motion capture. In 2024, &quot;Godzilla Minus One&quot; was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects, becoming the first &quot;Godzilla&quot; film nominated for an Oscar. At the 96th Academy Awards ceremony, it won the award.

==Cultural impact==
Godzilla is one of the most recognizable symbols of Japanese popular culture worldwide and remains an important facet of Japanese films, embodying the &quot;kaiju&quot; subset of the &quot;tokusatsu&quot; genre. Godzilla&#x27;s vaguely humanoid appearance and strained, lumbering movements endeared it to Japanese audiences, who could relate to Godzilla as a sympathetic character, despite its wrathful nature. Audiences respond positively to the character because it acts out of rage and self-preservation and shows where science and technology can go wrong.

In 1967, the Keukdong Entertainment Company of South Korea, with production assistance from Toei Company, produced &quot;Yongary, Monster from the Deep&quot;, a reptilian monster who invades South Korea to consume oil. The film and character has often been branded as an imitation of Godzilla.

Godzilla has been considered a filmographic metaphor for the United States, as well as an allegory of nuclear weapons in general. The earlier &quot;Godzilla&quot; films, especially the original, portrayed Godzilla as a frightening nuclear-spawned monster. Godzilla represented the fears that many Japanese held about the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and the possibility of recurrence.

As the series progressed, so did Godzilla, changing into a less destructive and more heroic character. &quot;Ghidorah&quot; (1964) was the turning point in Godzilla&#x27;s transformation from villain to hero, by pitting him against a greater threat to humanity, King Ghidorah. Godzilla has since been viewed as an anti-hero. Roger Ebert cited Godzilla as a notable example of a villain-turned-hero, along with King Kong, Jaws (&quot;James Bond&quot;), the Terminator and John Rambo.

Godzilla is considered &quot;the original radioactive superhero&quot; due to his accidental radioactive origin story predating Spider-Man (1962 debut), though Godzilla did not become a hero until &quot;Ghidorah&quot; in 1964. By the 1970s, Godzilla came to be viewed as a superhero, with the magazine &quot;King of the Monsters&quot; in 1977 describing Godzilla as &quot;Superhero of the &#x27;70s.&quot; Godzilla had surpassed Superman and Batman to become &quot;the most universally popular superhero of 1977&quot; according to Donald F. Glut. Godzilla was also voted the most popular movie monster in &quot;The Monster Times&quot; poll in 1973, beating Count Dracula, King Kong, the Wolf Man, the Mummy, the Creature from the Black Lagoon and the Frankenstein Monster.
In 1996, Godzilla received the MTV Lifetime Achievement Award, as well as being given a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2004 to celebrate the premiere of the character&#x27;s 50th anniversary film, &quot;&quot;. Godzilla&#x27;s pop-cultural impact has led to the creation of numerous parodies and tributes, as seen in media such as &quot;Bambi Meets Godzilla&quot;, which was ranked as one of the &quot;50 greatest cartoons&quot;, two episodes of &quot;Mystery Science Theater 3000&quot; and the song &quot;Godzilla&quot; by Blue Öyster Cult. Godzilla has also been used in advertisements, such as in a commercial for Nike, where Godzilla lost an oversized one-on-one game of basketball to a giant version of NBA player Charles Barkley. The commercial was subsequently adapted into a comic book illustrated by Jeff Butler. Godzilla has also appeared in a commercial for Snickers candy bars, which served as an indirect promo for the 2014 film. Godzilla&#x27;s success inspired the creation of numerous other monster characters, such as Gamera, Reptilicus of Denmark, Yonggary of South Korea, Pulgasari of North Korea, Gorgo of the United Kingdom and the &quot;Cloverfield&quot; monster of the United States.
&quot;Dakosaurus&quot; is an extinct sea crocodile of the Jurassic Period, which researchers informally nicknamed &quot;Godzilla&quot;. Paleontologists have written tongue-in-cheek speculative articles about Godzilla&#x27;s biology, with Kenneth Carpenter tentatively classifying it as a ceratosaur based on its skull shape, four-fingered hands, and dorsal scutes and paleontologist Darren Naish expressing skepticism, while commenting on Godzilla&#x27;s unusual morphology.

Godzilla&#x27;s ubiquity in pop culture has led to the mistaken assumption that the character is in the public domain, resulting in litigation by Toho to protect their corporate asset from becoming a generic trademark. In April 2008, Subway depicted a giant monster in a commercial for their Five Dollar Footlongs sandwich promotion. Toho filed a lawsuit against Subway for using the character without permission, demanding $150,000 in compensation. In February 2011, Toho sued Honda for depicting a fire-breathing monster in a commercial for the Honda Odyssey. The monster was never mentioned by name, being seen briefly on a video screen inside the minivan. The Sea Shepherd Conservation Society christened a vessel the &quot;MV Gojira&quot;. Its purpose is to target and harass Japanese whalers in defense of whales in the Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary. The &quot;MV Gojira&quot; was renamed the in May 2011, due to legal pressure from Toho. Gojira is the name of a French death metal band, formerly known as Godzilla; legal problems forced the band to change their name. In May 2015, Toho launched a lawsuit against Voltage Pictures over a planned picture starring Anne Hathaway. Promotional material released at the Cannes Film Festival used images of Godzilla.

Steven Spielberg cited &quot;Godzilla&quot; as an inspiration for &quot;Jurassic Park&quot; (1993), specifically &quot;Godzilla, King of the Monsters!&quot; (1956), which he grew up watching. Spielberg described &quot;Godzilla&quot; as &quot;the most masterful of all the dinosaur movies because it made you believe it was really happening.&quot; &quot;Godzilla&quot; also influenced the Spielberg film &quot;Jaws&quot; (1975). &quot;Godzilla&quot; has also been cited as an inspiration by filmmakers Martin Scorsese and Tim Burton.

A carnivorous dinosaur from the Triassic period was named &quot;Gojirasaurus&quot; in 1997&quot;.&quot; The main-belt asteroid 101781 Gojira, discovered by American astronomer Roy Tucker at the Goodricke-Pigott Observatory in 1999, was named in honor of the creature. The official naming citation was published by the Minor Planet Center on July 11, 2018 (). The largest megamullion, located 600 kilometers to the south-east of Okinotorishima, the southernmost Japanese island, is named the Godzilla Megamullion. The Japan Coast Guard played a role in name, reaching an agreement with Toho. Toho&#x27;s Chief Godzilla officer Keiji Ota stated that &quot;I am truly honored that (the megamullion) bears Godzilla&#x27;s name, the Earth&#x27;s most powerful monster.&quot;

In a 2007 interview, Japanese defense minister Shigeru Ishiba said that he would mobilize the Japan Self-Defense Forces in response to an appearance by Godzilla.

===Cultural ambassador===
In April 2015, the Shinjuku ward of Tokyo named Godzilla a special resident and official tourism ambassador to encourage tourism. During an unveiling of a giant Godzilla bust at Toho headquarters, Shinjuku mayor Kenichi Yoshizumi stated, &quot;Godzilla is a character that is the pride of Japan.&quot; The mayor extended a residency certificate to an actor in a rubber suit representing Godzilla, but as the suit&#x27;s hands were not designed for grasping, it was accepted on Godzilla&#x27;s behalf by a Toho executive. Reporters noted that Shinjuku&#x27;s ward has been flattened by Godzilla in three Toho movies.

== Notes ==
==References==

===Sources===
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* Official &quot;Godzilla&quot; website by Toho Co., Ltd
* Official website of Toho Co., Ltd (Japanese)
* Godzilla on IMDb</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1065444" start="33" end="38" title="kaiju" label="kaiju"/>
<link wikidata="Q860461" start="66" end="85" title="Godzilla (1954 film)" label="eponymous 1954 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q150840" start="114" end="126" title="Ishirō Honda" label="Ishirō Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q8964567" start="176" end="192" title="Godzilla in popular culture" label="pop culture icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q28859760" start="207" end="220" title="Godzilla (franchise)" label="various media"/>
<link wikidata="Q875920" start="252" end="266" title="Toho" label="Toho Co., Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="268" end="287" title="Godzilla (franchise)#American films" label="five American films"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096667" start="302" end="313" title="List of Godzilla games" label="video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577023" start="323" end="334" title="Godzilla (comics)" label="comic books"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="340" end="356" title="Godzilla (franchise)#Television" label="television shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567" start="387" end="407" title="Godzilla" label="King of the Monsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179062" start="440" end="471" title="Godzilla, King of the Monsters!" label="Godzilla, King of the Monsters!"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="605" end="616" title="Mesozoic" label="prehistoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="617" end="625" title="reptilia" label="reptilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="630" end="641" title="dinosaurian" label="dinosaurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q30715289" start="658" end="668" title="Semiaquatic" label="amphibious"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="759" end="776" title="Radioactive decay" label="nuclear radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q210112" start="781" end="796" title="nuclear testing" label="nuclear testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="807" end="849" title="Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="nuclear bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q510109" start="864" end="878" title="Daigo Fukuryū Maru" label="Lucky Dragon 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="978" end="992" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q110910" start="1278" end="1286" title="antihero" label="antihero"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="1440" end="1453" title="Empire of Japan" label="imperial past"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065" start="1455" end="1471" title="natural disaster" label="natural disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124515" start="1482" end="1497" title="human condition" label="human condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q275488" start="1646" end="1671" title="Japan Self-Defense Forces" label="Japan Self-Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q948488" start="1732" end="1737" title="Gigan" label="Gigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470558" start="1739" end="1752" title="King Ghidorah" label="King Ghidorah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311640" start="1758" end="1771" title="Mechagodzilla" label="Mechagodzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006970" start="1818" end="1826" title="Anguirus" label="Anguirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423458" start="1828" end="1834" title="Mothra" label="Mothra"/>
<link wikidata="Q780746" start="1840" end="1845" title="Rodan" label="Rodan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656265" start="1879" end="1894" title="Godzilla Junior" label="Godzilla Junior"/>
<link wikidata="Q516231" start="1899" end="1906" title="Minilla" label="Minilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q21192427" start="1984" end="1993" title="Crossover (fiction)" label="crossover"/>
<link wikidata="Q216810" start="2009" end="2018" title="King Kong" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="2039" end="2052" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q911971" start="2070" end="2082" title="S.H.I.E.L.D." label="S.H.I.E.L.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q152098" start="2088" end="2102" title="Fantastic Four" label="Fantastic Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q322646" start="2112" end="2120" title="Avengers (comics)" label="Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="2133" end="2142" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q735744" start="2166" end="2180" title="Justice League" label="Justice League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791993" start="2186" end="2200" title="Legion of Doom" label="Legion of Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422891" start="2209" end="2228" title="Green Lantern Corps" label="Green Lantern Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q651454" start="2418" end="2434" title="TriStar Pictures" label="TriStar Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q621364" start="2456" end="2474" title="Legendary Pictures" label="Legendary Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421000" start="2580" end="2592" title="novelization" label="novelization"/>
<link wikidata="Q860461" start="2755" end="2765" title="Godzilla (1954 film)" label="first film"/>
<link wikidata="Q652228" start="2907" end="2922" title="Tomoyuki Tanaka" label="Tomoyuki Tanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q875920" start="2954" end="2958" title="Toho" label="Toho"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="3059" end="3070" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5653150" start="3165" end="3175" title="whale meat" label="whale meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q150840" start="3240" end="3252" title="Ishirō Honda" label="Ishirō Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466933" start="3296" end="3310" title="Eiji Tsuburaya" label="Eiji Tsuburaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="3497" end="3500" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q13447569" start="4116" end="4137" title="Hawaii Tribune-Herald" label="Hawaii Tribune-Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273736" start="4223" end="4243" title="Godzilla Raids Again" label="Godzilla Raids Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q120850296" start="4805" end="4816" title="Rhedosaurus" label="Rhedosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q313341" start="4843" end="4858" title="Ray Harryhausen" label="Ray Harryhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888170" start="4878" end="4907" title="The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms" label="The Beast from 20,000 Fathoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q30715289" start="4976" end="4986" title="Semiaquatic" label="amphibious"/>
<link wikidata="Q11562305" start="5217" end="5231" title="Akira Watanabe (art director)" label="Akira Watanabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q14332" start="5263" end="5276" title="Tyrannosaurus" label="Tyrannosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130980" start="5293" end="5302" title="Iguanodon" label="Iguanodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14388" start="5318" end="5329" title="Stegosaurus" label="Stegosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q182790" start="5379" end="5386" title="Chimera (mythology)" label="chimera"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="5431" end="5447" title="Life (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Life&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131260" start="5562" end="5568" title="keloid" label="keloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q598936" start="5587" end="5609" title="Hibakusha" label="survivors of Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768462" start="6116" end="6141" title="Godzilla 2000" label="Godzilla 2000: Millennium"/>
<link wikidata="Q127385223" start="6239" end="6261" title="gender-neutral pronoun" label="gender-neutral pronoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q652228" start="6408" end="6423" title="Tomoyuki Tanaka" label="Tomoyuki Tanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q24075" start="6567" end="6575" title="Godzilla (1998 film)" label="Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q183236" start="6656" end="6671" title="parthenogenesis" label="parthenogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q21527684" start="6680" end="6719" title="Monsterverse" label="Legendary Pictures &amp;quot;Godzilla&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q122891127" start="6857" end="6890" title="Godzilla and Godzilla Raids Again" label="Godzilla and Godzilla Raids Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175834" start="6914" end="6928" title="Jeffrey Angles" label="Jeffrey Angles"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="8020" end="8029" title="cetaceans" label="cetaceans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697380" start="8110" end="8124" title="Shōgo Tomiyama" label="Shōgo Tomiyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q812767" start="8141" end="8147" title="Shinto" label="Shinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q652228" start="8367" end="8382" title="Tomoyuki Tanaka" label="Tomoyuki Tanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q684402" start="9212" end="9222" title="Black belt (martial arts)" label="black belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q30715289" start="9304" end="9314" title="Semiaquatic" label="amphibious"/>
<link wikidata="Q83169" start="9364" end="9375" title="hydrosphere" label="hydrosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q132390" start="9452" end="9456" title="gill" label="gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q447188" start="9529" end="9546" title="transitional form" label="transitional form"/>
<link wikidata="Q193119" start="9712" end="9722" title="Regeneration (biology)" label="regenerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q135570" start="10556" end="10569" title="Akira Ifukube" label="Akira Ifukube"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="10657" end="10667" title="Double bass" label="contrabass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006970" start="10893" end="10901" title="Anguirus" label="Anguirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518701" start="10914" end="10936" title="The Return of Godzilla" label="The Return of Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464998" start="10959" end="10985" title="Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah" label="Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284313" start="11130" end="11149" title="Godzilla vs. Mothra" label="Godzilla vs. Mothra"/>
<link wikidata="Q860461" start="11796" end="11818" title="Godzilla (1954 film)" label="the original 1954 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179062" start="11950" end="11971" title="Godzilla, King of the Monsters!" label="1956 American version"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975783" start="12024" end="12040" title="Joseph E. Levine" label="Joseph E. Levine"/>
<link wikidata="Q111973" start="12314" end="12352" title="Tokyo Metropolitan Government Building" label="Tokyo Metropolitan Government Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731172" start="12569" end="12577" title="Godzilla (2014 film)" label="Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q621364" start="12596" end="12614" title="Legendary Pictures" label="Legendary Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451678" start="12715" end="12729" title="Gareth Edwards (filmmaker)" label="Gareth Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899737" start="12873" end="12886" title="Shin Godzilla" label="Shin Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q56307503" start="13077" end="13094" title="Godzilla vs. Kong" label="Godzilla vs. Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123744" start="13274" end="13306" title="Suitmation" label="an actor wearing a latex costume"/>
<link wikidata="Q494002" start="13355" end="13366" title="Animatronics" label="animatronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="13368" end="13379" title="stop-motion" label="stop-motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002306" start="13384" end="13402" title="Computer-generated imagery" label="computer-generated"/>
<link wikidata="Q309048" start="13439" end="13448" title="King Kong (1933 film)" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466933" start="13479" end="13493" title="Eiji Tsuburaya" label="Eiji Tsuburaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514098" start="14489" end="14511" title="Godzilla vs. Biollante" label="Godzilla vs. Biollante"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514075" start="14534" end="14557" title="Godzilla vs. Destoroyah" label="Godzilla vs. Destoroyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315977" start="14780" end="14794" title="Haruo Nakajima" label="Haruo Nakajima"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="14945" end="14957" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778287" start="15149" end="15167" title="Kenpachiro Satsuma" label="Kenpachiro Satsuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q193840" start="15443" end="15461" title="oxygen deprivation" label="oxygen deprivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533970" start="15701" end="15727" title="Godzilla vs. SpaceGodzilla" label="Godzilla vs. SpaceGodzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q24075" start="15848" end="15856" title="Godzilla (1998 film)" label="Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q177784" start="16586" end="16607" title="Hydraulics" label="hydraulically powered"/>
<link wikidata="Q146322" start="16643" end="16651" title="Polyurethane" label="urethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q24075" start="16772" end="16780" title="Godzilla (1998 film)" label="Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q320211" start="16918" end="16930" title="Stan Winston" label="Stan Winston"/>
<link wikidata="Q114656241" start="16944" end="16948" title="Rexy" label="Rexy"/>
<link wikidata="Q167726" start="16964" end="16977" title="Jurassic Park (film)" label="Jurassic Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q24075" start="17005" end="17013" title="Godzilla (1998 film)" label="Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610341" start="17051" end="17069" title="Patrick Tatopoulos" label="Patrick Tatopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q536204" start="17097" end="17105" title="Zilla (TriStar Godzilla)" label="Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q676252" start="17172" end="17186" title="motion capture" label="motion capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q184503" start="17391" end="17402" title="digitigrade" label="digitigrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002306" start="17504" end="17507" title="Computer-generated imagery" label="CGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731172" start="17519" end="17527" title="Godzilla (2014 film)" label="Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4504" start="17920" end="17933" title="Komodo dragon" label="Komodo dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="17955" end="17961" title="Wolf" label="wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353649" start="18225" end="18236" title="T. J. Storm" label="T. J. Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q18391269" start="18416" end="18435" title="Motion-capture acting" label="performance capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899737" start="18447" end="18460" title="Shin Godzilla" label="Shin Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q910611" start="18524" end="18537" title="Mansai Nomura" label="Mansai Nomura"/>
<link wikidata="Q115053037" start="18597" end="18615" title="Godzilla Minus One" label="Godzilla Minus One"/>
<link wikidata="Q393686" start="18644" end="18681" title="Academy Award for Best Visual Effects" label="Academy Award for Best Visual Effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="18745" end="18750" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q85314819" start="18759" end="18778" title="96th Academy Awards" label="96th Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158957" start="18880" end="18904" title="Japanese popular culture" label="Japanese popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065444" start="18985" end="18990" title="kaiju" label="kaiju"/>
<link wikidata="Q275934" start="19017" end="19026" title="tokusatsu" label="tokusatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066018" start="19481" end="19493" title="Toei Company" label="Toei Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q489379" start="19510" end="19540" title="Yongary, Monster from the Deep" label="Yongary, Monster from the Deep"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534" start="19728" end="19736" title="metaphor" label="metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="19786" end="19793" title="Nuclear power" label="nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="20005" end="20046" title="atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q588011" start="20192" end="20200" title="Ghidorah, the Three-Headed Monster" label="Ghidorah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470558" start="20345" end="20358" title="King Ghidorah" label="King Ghidorah"/>
<link wikidata="Q110910" start="20397" end="20406" title="anti-hero" label="anti-hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="20408" end="20419" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361723" start="20504" end="20533" title="Jaws (James Bond)" label="Jaws (&amp;quot;James Bond&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976616" start="20539" end="20549" title="Terminator (character)" label="Terminator"/>
<link wikidata="Q951317" start="20554" end="20564" title="John Rambo" label="John Rambo"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="20621" end="20630" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102502" start="20671" end="20683" title="origin story" label="origin story"/>
<link wikidata="Q79037" start="20694" end="20704" title="Spider-Man" label="Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="20995" end="21003" title="Superman" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="21008" end="21014" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342372" start="21154" end="21167" title="movie monster" label="movie monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752083" start="21177" end="21194" title="The Monster Times" label="The Monster Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266236" start="21223" end="21236" title="Count Dracula" label="Count Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q216810" start="21238" end="21247" title="King Kong" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q21683804" start="21253" end="21261" title="Werewolf fiction" label="Wolf Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q3823300" start="21267" end="21272" title="The Mummy (Universal film franchise)" label="Mummy"/>
<link wikidata="Q124612" start="21278" end="21308" title="Creature from the Black Lagoon" label="Creature from the Black Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021531" start="21317" end="21337" title="Frankenstein&amp;#x27;s monster" label="Frankenstein Monster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21370" end="21400" title="MTV Movie Awards#MTV Lifetime Achievement Award" label="MTV Lifetime Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="21439" end="21461" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379886" start="21683" end="21703" title="Bambi Meets Godzilla" label="Bambi Meets Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894972" start="21798" end="21826" title="Mystery Science Theater 3000" label="Mystery Science Theater 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577027" start="21852" end="21860" title="Godzilla (Blue Öyster Cult song)" label="Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q331016" start="21870" end="21886" title="Blue Öyster Cult" label="Blue Öyster Cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="21963" end="21967" title="Nike, Inc." label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q192707" start="22065" end="22080" title="Charles Barkley" label="Charles Barkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039544" start="22129" end="22139" title="Godzilla vs. Charles Barkley" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q6173474" start="22155" end="22166" title="Jeff Butler" label="Jeff Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q714179" start="22215" end="22234" title="Snickers" label="Snickers candy bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q687240" start="22381" end="22387" title="Gamera" label="Gamera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078014" start="22389" end="22399" title="Reptilicus" label="Reptilicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48988299" start="22412" end="22420" title="Yonggary (character)" label="Yonggary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137583" start="22437" end="22446" title="Pulgasari" label="Pulgasari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538253" start="22463" end="22468" title="Gorgo (film)" label="Gorgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268286" start="22499" end="22530" title="Clover (creature)" label="&amp;quot;Cloverfield&amp;quot; monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q18819" start="22559" end="22569" title="Dakosaurus" label="Dakosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300406" start="22590" end="22603" title="Thalattosuchia" label="sea crocodile"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="22611" end="22626" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041772" start="22791" end="22808" title="Kenneth Carpenter" label="Kenneth Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131383" start="22841" end="22851" title="Ceratosauria" label="ceratosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774302" start="22936" end="22948" title="Darren Naish" label="Darren Naish"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="23133" end="23146" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q765270" start="23229" end="23246" title="generic trademark" label="generic trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q244457" start="23263" end="23269" title="Subway (restaurant)" label="Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q9584" start="23507" end="23512" title="Honda" label="Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5892599" start="23576" end="23589" title="Honda Odyssey" label="Honda Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q731200" start="23693" end="23726" title="Sea Shepherd Conservation Society" label="Sea Shepherd Conservation Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q875920" start="23969" end="23973" title="Toho" label="Toho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011412" start="23975" end="23981" title="Gojira (band)" label="Gojira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076092" start="24006" end="24017" title="Technical Death Metal" label="death metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881683" start="24150" end="24166" title="Voltage Pictures" label="Voltage Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q21527562" start="24172" end="24189" title="Colossal (film)" label="a planned picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q36301" start="24199" end="24212" title="Anne Hathaway" label="Anne Hathaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="24298" end="24314" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q167726" start="24370" end="24383" title="Jurassic Park (film)" label="Jurassic Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179062" start="24417" end="24448" title="Godzilla, King of the Monsters!" label="Godzilla, King of the Monsters!"/>
<link wikidata="Q189505" start="24707" end="24711" title="Jaws (film)" label="Jaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="24799" end="24814" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="24819" end="24829" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="24864" end="24872" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134199" start="24896" end="24908" title="Gojirasaurus" label="Gojirasaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366535" start="24959" end="24972" title="101781 Gojira" label="101781 Gojira"/>
<link wikidata="Q474720" start="25008" end="25018" title="Roy Tucker" label="Roy Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821639" start="25026" end="25054" title="Goodricke-Pigott Observatory" label="Goodricke-Pigott Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q522039" start="25150" end="25169" title="Minor Planet Center" label="Minor Planet Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304334" start="25203" end="25214" title="megamullion" label="megamullion"/>
<link wikidata="Q908529" start="25260" end="25274" title="Okinotorishima" label="Okinotorishima"/>
<link wikidata="Q17991314" start="25323" end="25343" title="Godzilla Megamullion" label="Godzilla Megamullion"/>
<link wikidata="Q565418" start="25349" end="25366" title="Japan Coast Guard" label="Japan Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q275488" start="25697" end="25722" title="Japan Self-Defense Forces" label="Japan Self-Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q179645" start="25811" end="25819" title="Shinjuku" label="Shinjuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q24864718" start="26004" end="26021" title="Kenichi Yoshizumi" label="Kenichi Yoshizumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q875920" start="26540" end="26553" title="Toho" label="Toho Co., Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q37312" start="26615" end="26619" title="IMDb" label="IMDb"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11988" wikidata="Q1215918" url="?curid=11988" title="King Kong vs. Godzilla">
<text>is a 1962 Japanese &quot;kaiju&quot; film directed by Ishirō Honda, with special effects by Eiji Tsuburaya. Produced and distributed by Toho Co., Ltd, it is the third film in both the &quot;Godzilla&quot; and &quot;King Kong&quot; franchises, as well as the first Toho-produced film featuring King Kong. It is also the first time that each character appeared on film in color and widescreen. The film stars Shoichi Hirose as King Kong and Haruo Nakajima as Godzilla with Shoichi Hirose, Tadao Takashima, Kenji Sahara, Yū Fujiki, Ichirō Arishima, and Mie Hama playing other prominent roles. In the film, Godzilla is reawakened by an American submarine and a pharmaceutical company captures King Kong for promotional uses, culminating in a battle on Mount Fuji.

The project began with a story outline devised by &quot;King Kong&quot; stop motion animator Willis O&#x27;Brien around 1960, in which Kong battles a giant Frankenstein&#x27;s monster; O&#x27;Brien gave the outline to producer John Beck for development. Behind O&#x27;Brien&#x27;s back and without his knowledge, Beck gave the project to Toho to produce the film, replacing the giant Frankenstein&#x27;s monster with Godzilla and scrapping O&#x27;Brien&#x27;s original story.

&quot;King Kong vs. Godzilla&quot; was released theatrically in Japan on August 11, 1962, and grossed , making it the second-highest-grossing Japanese film in history upon its release. The film remains the most attended &quot;Godzilla&quot; film in Japan to date, and is credited with encouraging Toho to prioritize the continuation of the &quot;Godzilla&quot; series after seven years of dormancy. A heavily re-edited &quot;Americanized&quot; version of the film was released theatrically in the United States by Universal International Inc. on June 26, 1963.

The film was followed by &quot;Mothra vs. Godzilla&quot;, released on April 29, 1964.

==Plot==
Mr. Tako, head of Pacific Pharmaceuticals, is frustrated with the television shows his company is sponsoring and wants something to boost his ratings. When a doctor tells Tako about a giant monster he discovered on the small Faro Island, Tako believes that it would be a brilliant idea to use the monster to gain publicity. Tako sends two men, Osamu Sakurai and Kinsaburo Furue, to find and bring back the monster. Meanwhile, the American nuclear submarine &quot;Seahawk&quot; gets caught in an iceberg. The iceberg collapses, unleashing Godzilla, who had been trapped within it since 1955. Godzilla destroys the submarine and makes his way towards Japan, attacking a military base as he journeys southward.
On Faro Island, a gigantic octopus crawls ashore and attacks the native village in search of Farolacton juice, taken from a species of red berry native to the island. The mysterious Faro monster, revealed to be King Kong, arrives and defeats the octopus. Kong drinks several vases full of the juice while the islanders perform a ceremony, which causes him to fall asleep. Sakurai and Furue place Kong on a large raft and begin to transport him back to Japan. Mr. Tako arrives on the ship transporting Kong, but a JSDF ship stops them and orders that Kong must be kept out of Japan. Meanwhile, Godzilla arrives in Japan and terrorizes the countryside. Kong wakes up and breaks free from the raft. Reaching the mainland, Kong confronts Godzilla and proceeds to throw giant rocks at him. Godzilla is not fazed by King Kong&#x27;s rock attack and uses his heat ray to burn him. Kong retreats after realizing that he is not yet ready to take on Godzilla.
The JSDF digs a large pit laden with explosives and poison gas and lures Godzilla into it, but Godzilla is unharmed. They next string up a barrier of power lines around the city filled with 1,000,000 volts of electricity, which proves effective against Godzilla. Kong approaches Tokyo and tears through the power lines, feeding off the electricity, which seems to make him stronger. Kong then enters Tokyo and captures Fumiko, Sakurai&#x27;s sister, taking her to the National Diet Building which he then scales. The JSDF launches capsules full of vaporised Farolacton juice, which puts Kong to sleep, and rescue Fumiko. The JSDF decides to transport Kong via balloons to Godzilla, in hopes that they will kill each other.
The next morning, Kong is deployed by helicopter next to Godzilla at the summit of Mount Fuji and the two engage in battle. Godzilla initially has the advantage, dazing Kong with a devastating dropkick and repeated tail blows to his head. Godzilla attempts to burn Kong to death by using his atomic breath to set fire to the foliage around Kong&#x27;s body. A bolt of lightning from thunder clouds strikes Kong, reviving him and charging him up, and the battle resumes. Godzilla and King Kong fight their way down the mountain and into Atami, where the two monsters destroy Atami Castle while trading blows, before falling off a cliff together into Sagami Bay. After a brief underwater battle, only Kong resurfaces from the water, and he swims back toward his home island. There is no sign of Godzilla, but the JSDF speculates that he may have survived.

==Cast==
===Japanese version===
===American version===

Cast taken from &quot;Japan&#x27;s Favorite Mon-Star&quot;, except where cited otherwise.

==Production==
===Crew===

* Ishirō Honda – director
* Eiji Tsuburaya – special effects director
* Kōji Kajita – assistant director
* Toshio Takashima – lighting
* Takeo Kita – art director
* Teruaki Abe – art director
* Akira Watanabe – special effects art director
* Kuichirō Kishida – special effects lighting
* Masao Fujiyoshi – sound recording
====American version====
* Thomas Montgomery – director
* John Beck – producer
* Paul Mason – writer
* Bruce Howard – writer
* Peter Zinner – editorial and music supervision

Personnel taken from &quot;Japan&#x27;s Favorite Mon-Star&quot;.

===Conception===

&quot;King Kong vs. Godzilla&quot; had its roots in an earlier concept for a new &quot;King Kong&quot; feature developed by Willis O&#x27;Brien, animator of the original stop-motion Kong. Around 1960, O&#x27;Brien came up with a proposed treatment, &quot;King Kong Meets Frankenstein&quot;, where Kong would fight against a giant Frankenstein&#x27;s monster in San Francisco. O&#x27;Brien took the project (which consisted of some concept art and a screenplay treatment) to RKO to secure permission to use the King Kong character. During this time, the story was renamed &quot;King Kong vs. the Ginko&quot; when it was believed that Universal had the rights to the Frankenstein name. O&#x27;Brien was introduced to producer John Beck, who promised to find a studio to make the film (at this point, RKO was no longer a production company). Beck took the story treatment and hired George Worthing Yates to write the screenplay for the film. The story was slightly altered and the title changed to &quot;King Kong vs. Prometheus&quot;, returning the name to the original Frankenstein concept (&quot;The Modern Prometheus&quot; was the alternate title of the original novel). The November 2, 1960 issue of &quot;Variety&quot; reported that Beck had even asked a filmmaker named Jerry Guran (a possible misspelling of filmmaker Nathan Juran&#x27;s pseudonym Jerry Juran) to direct the film. However, the cost of stop-motion animation discouraged potential studios from putting the film into production. After shopping the script around overseas, Beck eventually attracted the interest of the Japanese studio Toho, which had long wanted to make a &quot;King Kong&quot; film. After purchasing the script, they decided to replace the giant Frankenstein&#x27;s monster with Godzilla to be King Kong&#x27;s opponent and would have Shinichi Sekizawa rewrite Yates&#x27; script. The studio thought that it would be the perfect way to celebrate its 30th year in production. It was one of five big banner releases for the company to celebrate the anniversary alongside &quot;Sanjuro&quot;, &quot;Chūshingura&quot;, &quot;Lonely Lane&quot;, and &quot;Born in Sin&quot;. John Beck&#x27;s dealings with Willis O&#x27;Brien&#x27;s project were done behind his back, and O&#x27;Brien was never credited for his idea. O&#x27;Brien attempted to sue Beck, but lacked the money to do so, and on November 8, 1962, he died in his home in Los Angeles at the age of 76. O&#x27;Brien&#x27;s wife Darlyne later cited &quot;the frustration of the &quot;King Kong vs. Frankenstein&quot; deal&quot; as the cause of his death. Merian C. Cooper, the producer and Co-Director of the 1933 &quot;King Kong&quot; film, was bitterly opposed to the project, stating in a letter addressed to his friend Douglas Burden, &quot;I was indignant when some Japanese company made a belittling thing, to a creative mind, called &quot;King Kong vs. Godzilla&quot;. I believe they even stooped so low as to use a man in a gorilla suit, which I have spoken out against so often in the early days of &quot;King Kong&quot;&quot;. In 1963, he filed a lawsuit to enjoin distribution of the movie against John Beck, as well as Toho and Universal (the film&#x27;s U.S. copyright holder) claiming that he outright owned the King Kong character, but the lawsuit never went through, as it turned out he was not Kong&#x27;s sole legal owner as he had previously believed.

===Themes===
Director Ishirō Honda wanted the theme of the movie to be a satire of the television industry in Japan. In April 1962, TV networks and their various sponsors started producing outrageous programming and publicity stunts to grab audiences&#x27; attention after two elderly viewers reportedly died at home while watching a violent wrestling match on TV. The various rating wars between the networks and banal programming that followed this event caused widespread debate over how TV would affect Japanese culture with Sōichi Ōya stating TV was creating &quot;a nation of 100 million idiots&quot;. Honda stated &quot;People were making a big deal out of ratings, but my own view of TV shows was that they did not take the viewer seriously, that they took the audience for granted...so I decided to show that through my movie&quot; and &quot;the reason I showed the monster battle through the prism of a ratings war was to depict the reality of the times&quot;. Honda addressed this by having a pharmaceutical company sponsor a TV show and going to extremes for a publicity stunt for ratings by capturing a giant monster stating &quot;All a medicine company would have to do is just produce good medicines you know? But the company doesn&#x27;t think that way. They think they will get ahead of their competitors if they use a monster to promote their product.&quot; Honda would work with screenwriter Shinichi Sekizawa on developing the story stating that &quot;Back then Sekizawa was working on pop songs and TV shows so he really had a clear insight into television&quot;.

===Filming===
Special effects director Eiji Tsuburaya was planning on working on other projects at this point in time such as a new version of a fairy tale film script called &quot;Princess Kaguya&quot;, but he postponed those to work on this project with Toho instead since he was such a huge fan of King Kong. He stated in an early 1960s interview with the Mainichi Newspaper, &quot;But my movie company has produced a very interesting script that combined King Kong and Godzilla, so I couldn&#x27;t help working on this instead of my other fantasy films. The script is special to me; it makes me emotional because it was &quot;King Kong&quot; that got me interested in the world of special photographic techniques when I saw it in 1933.&quot;

Early drafts of the script were sent back with notes from the studio asking that the monster antics be made as &quot;funny as possible&quot;. This comical approach was embraced by Tsuburaya, who wanted to appeal to children&#x27;s sensibilities and broaden the genre&#x27;s audience. Much of the monster battle was filmed to contain a great deal of humor but the approach was not favoured by most of the effects crew, who &quot;couldn&#x27;t believe&quot; some of the things Tsuburaya asked them to do, such as Kong and Godzilla volleying a giant boulder back and forth. With the exception of the next film, &quot;Mothra vs. Godzilla&quot;, this film began the trend to portray Godzilla and the monsters with more and more anthropomorphism as the series progressed, to appeal more to younger children. Ishirō Honda was not a fan of the dumbing down of the monsters. Years later, Honda stated in an interview. &quot;I don&#x27;t think a monster should ever be a comical character,&quot; and &quot;The public is more entertained when the great King Kong strikes fear into the hearts of the little characters.&quot; The decision was also taken to shoot the film in a (2.35:1) scope ratio (TohoScope) and to film in color (Eastman Color), marking both monsters&#x27; first widescreen and color portrayals.

Toho originally planned to shoot the film on location in Sri Lanka, but abandoned the idea after being forced to pay RKO roughly ($220,000) for the rights to the King Kong character, which forced the company to scale down their original production costs. The bulk of the film was shot on the Japanese island of Izu Ōshima instead. The movie&#x27;s production budget came out to ().

Suit actors Shoichi Hirose (as King Kong) and Haruo Nakajima (as Godzilla) were given mostly free rein by Tsuburaya to choreograph their own moves. The men would rehearse for hours and would base their moves on those of professional wrestling (a sport that was growing in popularity in Japan), in particular the moves of Toyonobori.

During pre-production, Tsuburaya toyed with the idea of using Willis O&#x27;Brien&#x27;s stop-motion technique instead of the suitmation process used in the first two &quot;Godzilla&quot; films, but budgetary concerns prevented him from using the process, and the more cost-efficient suitmation was used instead. However, some brief stop-motion was used in a couple of quick sequences. Two of these sequences were animated by Minoru Nakano.

A brand new Godzilla suit was designed for this film and some slight alterations were done to its overall appearance. These alterations included the removal of its tiny ears, three toes on each foot rather than four, enlarged central dorsal fins, and a bulkier body. These new features gave Godzilla a more reptilian/dinosaurian appearance. Outside of the suit, a meter-high model and a small puppet were also built. Another puppet (from the waist up) was also designed that had a nozzle in the mouth to spray out liquid mist simulating Godzilla&#x27;s atomic breath. However the shots in the film where this prop was employed (far away shots of Godzilla breathing its atomic breath during its attack on the Arctic Military base) were ultimately cut from the film. These cut scenes can be seen in the Japanese theatrical trailer. Finally, a separate prop of Godzilla&#x27;s tail was also built for close-up practical shots when its tail would be used (such as the scene where Godzilla trips Kong with its tail). The tail prop would be swung offscreen by a stagehand.

Sadamasa Arikawa (who worked with Tsuburaya) said that the sculptors had a hard time coming up with a King Kong suit that appeased Tsuburaya. The first suit was rejected for being too fat with long legs giving Kong what the crew considered an almost cute look. A few other designs were done before Tsuburaya would approve the final look that was ultimately used in the film. The suit&#x27;s body design was a team effort by brothers Koei Yagi and Kanji Yagi and was covered with expensive yak hair, which Eizō Kaimai hand-dyed brown. Because RKO instructed that the face must be different from the original&#x27;s design, sculptor Teizō Toshimitsu based Kong&#x27;s face on the Japanese macaque rather than a gorilla, and designed two separate masks. As well, two separate pairs of arms were also created. One pair were extended arms operated by poles inside the suit to give Kong a gorilla-like illusion, while the other pair were at normal arms-length and featured gloves that were used for scenes that required Kong to grab items and wrestle with Godzilla. Suit actor Hirose was sewn into the suit in order to hide the zipper. This would force him to be trapped inside the suit for large amounts of time and would cause him much physical discomfort. In the scene where Kong drinks the berry juice and falls asleep, he was trapped in the suit for three hours. Besides the suit with the two separate arm attachments, a meter-high model and a puppet of Kong (used for closeups) were also built. As well, a huge prop of Kong&#x27;s hand was built for the scene where he grabs Mie Hama (Fumiko) and carries her off.

For the attack of the giant octopus, four live octopuses were used. They were forced to move among the miniature huts by having hot air blown onto them. After the filming of that scene was finished, three of the four octopuses were released. The fourth became special effects director Tsuburaya&#x27;s dinner. These sequences were filmed on a miniature set outdoors on the Miura Coast, According to assistant special effects cinematographer Kōichi Kawakita, the crew had difficulty getting the live octopuses to move. Along with the live animals, two rubber octopus puppets were built, with the larger one being covered with plastic wrap to simulate mucous. Some stop-motion tentacles were also created for the scene where the octopus grabs a native and tosses him. These sequences were shot indoors at Toho&#x27;s studios.

The special effects crew filmed a sequence in which Godzilla rampages through Takasaki, Gunma Prefecture, and destroys the Takasaki Kannon Statue, but this scene was cut from the final film. Despite this scene being cut, Godzilla is still said to have passed through Takasaki in the film.

Since King Kong was seen as the bigger draw and Godzilla was still considered a &#x27;villain&#x27; at this point in the series, the decision was made to not only give King Kong top billing but also to present him as the winner of the climactic fight. While the ending of the film does look somewhat ambiguous, Toho confirmed that King Kong was indeed the winner in their 1962–63 English-language film program &quot;Toho Films Vol. 8&quot;, which states in the film&#x27;s plot synopsis, &quot;A spectacular duel is arranged on the summit of Mt. Fuji and King Kong is victorious. But after he has won...&quot; While producer Tomoyuki Tanaka stated in his 1983 and 1984 books, &quot;The Complete History of Toho Special Effects Movies&quot;, and &quot;Definitive Edition Godzilla Introduction&quot; that he believed the battle ended in a draw, Toho still maintains that Kong was the victor on their global website in 2023.

==Release==
===Theatrical===

&quot;King Kong vs. Godzilla&quot; was released in Japan by Toho on August 11, 1962, where it played alongside &quot;Myself and I&quot; for two weeks, afterward, it was extended by one more week and screened alongside the anime film &quot;Touring the World&quot;. The film was re-released twice as part of the Toho Champion Festival, a children&#x27;s festival centered on marathon screenings of &quot;kaiju&quot; films and cartoons. The film was first heavily re-cut and screened at the festival on March 21, 1970, and again on March 19, 1977, to coincide with the Japanese release of the 1976 version of &quot;King Kong&quot;. The 1970 Champion Festival version was edited by the film’s director Ishirō Honda, who shortened the runtime to just 74 minutes. In 1983, the film was screened across Japan alongside 9 other &quot;kaiju&quot; films as part of the &quot;Godzilla 1983 Revival Festival&quot;. The festival&#x27;s success became the catalyst for relaunching the &quot;Godzilla&quot; series with &quot;The Return of Godzilla&quot;.

In North America, &quot;King Kong vs. Godzilla&quot; premiered in New York City on June 26, 1963. The film was also released in many international markets. In Germany, it was known as &quot;Die Rückkehr des King Kong&quot; (&quot;The Return of King Kong&quot;) and in Italy as &quot;Il trionfo di King Kong&quot; (&quot;The Triumph of King Kong&quot;).

To celebrate the film&#x27;s 50th anniversary, Bay Area Film Events (BAFE) planned to screen the film at the Historic BAL Theatre in San Leandro, California, on June 16, 2012, as a double feature with &quot;Godzilla, Mothra and King Ghidorah: Giant Monsters All-Out Attack&quot;.

===American version===
When John Beck sold the &quot;King Kong vs Prometheus&quot; script to Toho (which became &quot;King Kong vs. Godzilla&quot;), he was given exclusive rights to produce a version of the film for release in non-Asian territories. He was able to line up a couple of potential distributors in Warner Bros. and Universal-International even before the film began production. Beck, accompanied by two Warner Bros. representatives, attended at least two private screenings of the film on the Toho Studios lot before it was released in Japan.

John Beck enlisted the help of two Hollywood writers, Paul Mason and Bruce Howard, to write a new screenplay. After discussions with Beck, the two wrote the American version and worked with editor Peter Zinner to remove scenes, recut others, and change the sequence of several events. To give the film more of an American feel, Mason and Howard decided to insert new footage that would convey the impression that the film was actually a newscast. The television actor Michael Keith played newscaster Eric Carter, a United Nations reporter who spends much of the time commenting on the action from the U.N. Headquarters via an International Communications Satellite (ICS) broadcast. Harry Holcombe was cast as Dr. Arnold Johnson, the head of the Museum of Natural History in New York City, who tries to explain Godzilla&#x27;s origin and his and Kong&#x27;s motivations.

Beck and his crew were able to obtain library music from a host of older films, including &quot;Creature from the Black Lagoon&quot; (1954). Cues from these scores were used to almost completely replace the original Japanese score by Akira Ifukube and give the film a more Western sound. They also obtained stock footage from the film &quot;The Mysterians&quot; from RKO (the film&#x27;s U.S. copyright holder at the time) which was used not only to represent the ICS, but which was also utilized during the film&#x27;s climax. Stock footage of a massive earthquake from &quot;The Mysterians&quot; was employed to make the earthquake caused by Kong and Godzilla&#x27;s plummet into the ocean much more violent than the comparatively tame tremor seen in the Japanese version. This added footage features massive tidal waves, flooded valleys, and the ground splitting open swallowing up various huts.

Beck spent roughly $12,000 making his English version and sold the film to Universal-International for roughly $200,000 on April 29, 1963. The film was released theatrically in the United States on June 26 of that year, as a double feature with &quot;The Traitors&quot;.

Starting in 1963, Toho&#x27;s international sales booklets began advertising an English dub of &quot;King Kong vs. Godzilla&quot; alongside Toho-commissioned, unedited international dubs of movies such as &quot;Giant Monster Varan&quot; and &quot;The Last War&quot;. By association, it is thought that this &quot;King Kong vs. Godzilla&quot; dub is an unedited English-language international version not known to have been released on home video.

===Home media===
In July 2014, the Japanese version was released for the first time on Blu-ray in Japan as part of Toho&#x27;s plan to release the entire series on the Blu-ray format for Godzilla&#x27;s 60th anniversary. Universal Pictures released the English-language version of the film on Blu-ray on April 1, 2014, along with &quot;King Kong Escapes&quot;. The Blu-ray sold $738,063 in domestic video sales. In 2019, the Japanese and American versions were included in a Blu-ray box set released by The Criterion Collection, which included all 15 films from the franchise&#x27;s Shōwa era. The 4K remaster of the Japanese version was released on Blu-ray and 4K Blu-ray in May 2021. The special features for the 2021 Blu-ray include one of the Toho Champion Festival reissues of the film, the film&#x27;s theatrical trailer, and a still gallery.

==Reception==
===Box office===
In Japan, this film has the highest box office attendance figures of all of the &quot;Godzilla&quot; films to date. It sold 11.2 million tickets during its initial theatrical run, accumulating ($972,000) in distribution rental earnings. The film became the second-highest-grossing Japanese-produced film in history upon its release and was the fourth-highest-grossing film released in Japan that year as well as Toho&#x27;s second-biggest release. At an average 1962 Japanese ticket price, ticket sales were equivalent to estimated gross receipts of approximately ().

Including re-releases, the film accumulated a lifetime figure of 12.55 million tickets sold in Japan, with distribution rental earnings of . The 1970 re-release sold 870,000 tickets, equivalent to estimated gross receipts of approximately (). The 1977 re-release sold 480,000 tickets, equivalent to estimated gross receipts of approximately (). This adds up to total estimated Japanese gross receipts of approximately (). In the United States, the film grossed $2.7 million, accumulating a profit (via rentals) of $1.25 million. Overall, the film is estimated to have earned worldwide.

===Critical response===

The reviews tended to evaluate the film as an exploitation or kiddie film. Some of the more positive reviews were from James Powers of &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; who wrote &quot;A funny monster picture? That&#x27;s what Universal has in &quot;&quot;King Kong Versus Godzilla&quot; &quot;. Audiences which patronize this kind of picture will eat it up. It should be a big success via the multiple booking, exploitation route.&quot; While the review from &quot;Box Office&quot; stated &quot;Exploitation-minded exhibitors should have a field day with this Japanese import. While the story is preposterous and loaded with stilted dialogue...the special effects are unusual and merit considerable praise&quot;. John Cutts of &quot;Films and Filming&quot; wrote &quot;Sublime stuff. Richly comic, briskly paced, oddly touching, and thoroughly irresistible. Outrageous of course, and deplorably acted and atrociously dubbed to boot. But what matters most is the sheer invention of its exemplary trick work.&quot;

The review from &quot;Variety&quot; stated &quot;To the list of this century&#x27;s great preliminary bouts—Dempsey-Firpo, Sullivan-Paar, Nixon-Kennedy, Paterson-Liston, Steve Reeves-Gordon Scott—add the main event &quot;&quot;King Kong Versus Godzilla&quot; &quot;. From the mysterious East comes the monstrosity to end all monstrosities, the epic clash between the 30-year-old, breast-beating, Hollywood-born-and-bred gorilla with the overactive pituitary and the seven-year-old, pea-brained, flame-throated, tail-wagging cross between a Stegosaurus and a Tyrannosaurus rex who fights out of Tokyo, Japan. Onward and upward with the arts&quot;. While Eugene Archer of &quot;The New York Times&quot; said
&quot;&quot;King Kong Versus Godzilla&quot; should be explicit enough title for anyone. Viewers who attend the ridiculous melodrama unveiled at neighborhood theaters should know exactly what to expect and get what they deserve. The one real surprise of this cheap reprise of earlier Hollywood and Japanese horror films is the ineptitude of its fakery. When the pair of prehistoric monsters finally get together for their battle royal, the effect is nothing more than a couple of dressed-up stuntmen throwing cardboard rocks at each other.&quot;

&quot;Den of Geek&quot; ranked the film at number eight in their 2019 ranking of the Shōwa &quot;Godzilla&quot; films, writing that the film has a &quot;sturdy, surprisingly crafty story&quot; but calling Kong&#x27;s design and appearance a &quot;major drawback.&quot; &quot;Variety&quot; listed it number sixteen on their 2021 ranking of every &quot;Godzilla&quot; film. &quot;Collider&quot; ranked the film number two on their Shōwa Godzilla list in 2022, describing the fight choreography as &quot;beautiful.&quot;

==Preservation==
The original Japanese version of &quot;King Kong vs. Godzilla&quot; is infamous for being one of the most poorly-preserved &quot;tokusatsu&quot; films. In 1970, director Ishirō Honda prepared an edited version of the film for the Toho Champion Festival, a children&#x27;s matinee program that showcased edited re-releases of older &quot;kaiju&quot; films along with cartoons and then-new &quot;kaiju&quot; films. Honda cut 24 minutes from the film&#x27;s original negative and, as a result, the highest quality source for the cut footage was lost. For years, all that was thought to remain of the uncut 1962 version was a faded, heavily damaged 16mm element from which rental prints were made. 1980s restorations for home video integrated the 16mm deleted scenes into the 35mm Champion cut, resulting in wildly inconsistent picture quality.

On July 14, 2016, a 4K restoration of a completely 35mm sourced version of the film aired on &quot;The Godzilla First Impact&quot;, a series of 4K broadcasts of Godzilla films on the Nihon Eiga Senmon Channel.

==Legacy==
Due to the great box office success of this film, Toho wanted to produce a sequel immediately. Shinichi Sekizawa was brought back to write the screenplay tentatively titled . Sekizawa revealed that Kong killed Godzilla during their underwater battle in Sagami Bay with a line of dialogue stating &quot;Godzilla, who sank and died in the waters off Atami&quot;. As the story progressed, Godzilla&#x27;s body is salvaged from the Ocean by a group of entrepreneurs who hope to display the remains at a planned resort. Meanwhile, King Kong is found in Africa where he had been protecting a baby (the sole survivor of a plane crash). After the baby is rescued by investigators, and is taken back to Japan, Kong follows the group and rampages through the country looking for the infant. Godzilla is then revived with hopes of driving off Kong. The story ends with both monsters plummeting into a volcano. The project was ultimately cancelled. A couple of years later, United Productions of America (UPA) and Toho conceived the idea to pit Godzilla against a giant Frankenstein&#x27;s monster and commissioned Takeshi Kimura to write a screenplay titled &quot;Frankenstein vs. Godzilla&quot;, with Jerry Sohl and Reuben Bercovitch writing the story and synopsis for the film. However, Toho would cancel this project as well and instead decided to match Mothra against Godzilla in &quot;Mothra vs. Godzilla&quot;. This began a formula where &quot;kaiju&quot; from past Toho films would be added into the &quot;Godzilla&quot; franchise.

Toho was interested in producing a series around their version of King Kong but were refused by RKO. However, Toho would handle the character once more in 1967 to help Rankin/Bass co-produce their film &quot;King Kong Escapes&quot;, which was loosely based on a cartoon series Rankin/Bass produced.

Henry G. Saperstein was impressed with the giant octopus scene and requested a giant octopus to appear in &quot;Frankenstein Conquers the World&quot; and &quot;The War of the Gargantuas&quot;. The giant octopus appeared in an alternate ending for &quot;Frankenstein Conquers the World&quot; that was intended for overseas markets, but went unused. As a result, the octopus instead appeared in the opening of &quot;The War of the Gargantuas&quot;. The film&#x27;s King Kong suit was recycled and altered to depict Goro in the second episode of &quot;Ultra Q&quot;, and the suit&#x27;s torso was later reused to portray King Kong in the water scenes of &quot;King Kong Escapes&quot;.

Filmmaker Shizuo Nakajima recreated several scenes from this film in his 1983 fan film &quot;Legendary Giant Beast Wolfman vs. Godzilla&quot;, including the scenes where Godzilla emerges from an iceberg and attacks a train during his rampage on the Japanese mainland.

In 1990, Toho expressed interest in remaking the film as &quot;Godzilla vs. King Kong&quot;. However, producer Tomoyuki Tanaka stated that obtaining the rights to King Kong proved difficult. Toho then considered producing &quot;Godzilla vs. Mechani-Kong&quot; but effects director Koichi Kawakita confirmed that obtaining the likeness of King Kong also proved difficult. Mechani-Kong was replaced by Mechagodzilla, and the project was developed into &quot;Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II&quot; in 1993.

In October 2015, Legendary Pictures announced plans for a King Kong vs Godzilla film of their own (unrelated to Toho&#x27;s version), which was released in the United States on March 31, 2021, simultaneously in theaters and on HBO Max.

===Dual ending myth===
For many years, a popular myth has persisted that in the Japanese version of the film, Godzilla emerges as the winner. The myth originated in the pages of &quot;Spacemen&quot; magazine, a 1960s sister magazine to the influential publication &quot;Famous Monsters of Filmland&quot;. In an article about the film, it is incorrectly stated that there were two endings and &quot;If you see &quot;King Kong vs Godzilla&quot; in Japan, Hong Kong or some Oriental sector of the world, Godzilla wins!&quot; The article was reprinted in various issues of &quot;Famous Monsters of Filmland&quot; in the years following, such as in issues #51 and #114. This misinformation would be accepted as fact and persist for decades. For example, a question in the &quot;Genus III&quot; edition of the popular board game &quot;Trivial Pursuit&quot; asked, &quot;Who wins in the Japanese version of &quot;King Kong vs. Godzilla&quot;?&quot; and stated that the correct answer was &quot;Godzilla&quot;. Various media have repeated this falsehood, including the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;.
There are technically minor differences in the ending between both versions. For example, in the Japanese version, both Godzilla and King Kong&#x27;s roars are heard during the film&#x27;s fade to black while in the American version only Kong&#x27;s roar is heard. However in both versions, the final shot of Kong swimming away alone is unchanged.

==See also==

* List of American films of 1963
* &quot;Godzilla vs. Kong&quot;

==Notes==
==References==
=== Bibliography ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

* &quot;King Kong vs. Godzilla&quot; at the official &quot;Godzilla&quot; website by Toho Co., Ltd. 
** &quot;King Kong vs. Godzilla&quot; at the official Toho website 
** &quot;King Kong vs. Godzilla&quot; at the official English-language Toho website
* 
* 
* &quot;King Kong vs. Godzilla&quot; at Movie-Censorship - detailed comparison between the Japanese and American versions of the film </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1065444" start="25" end="30" title="kaiju" label="kaiju"/>
<link wikidata="Q150840" start="54" end="66" title="Ishirō Honda" label="Ishirō Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466933" start="92" end="106" title="Eiji Tsuburaya" label="Eiji Tsuburaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q875920" start="136" end="149" title="Toho" label="Toho Co., Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q28859760" start="190" end="198" title="Godzilla (franchise)" label="Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3876200" start="215" end="224" title="King Kong (franchise)" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q216810" start="293" end="302" title="King Kong" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7500141" start="407" end="421" title="Shoichi Hirose" label="Shoichi Hirose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315977" start="439" end="453" title="Haruo Nakajima" label="Haruo Nakajima"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567" start="457" end="465" title="Godzilla" label="Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7500141" start="471" end="485" title="Shoichi Hirose" label="Shoichi Hirose"/>
<link wikidata="Q279321" start="487" end="502" title="Tadao Takashima" label="Tadao Takashima"/>
<link wikidata="Q977656" start="504" end="516" title="Kenji Sahara" label="Kenji Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531471" start="518" end="527" title="Yū Fujiki" label="Yū Fujiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551313" start="529" end="544" title="Ichirō Arishima" label="Ichirō Arishima"/>
<link wikidata="Q449493" start="550" end="558" title="Mie Hama" label="Mie Hama"/>
<link wikidata="Q39231" start="748" end="758" title="Mount Fuji" label="Mount Fuji"/>
<link wikidata="Q309048" start="817" end="826" title="King Kong (1933 film)" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="833" end="853" title="Stop motion" label="stop motion animator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386416" start="854" end="873" title="Willis H. O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Willis O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021531" start="917" end="944" title="Frankenstein&amp;#x27;s monster" label="Frankenstein&amp;#x27;s monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q106514691" start="988" end="997" title="John Beck (producer)" label="John Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q11546839" start="1356" end="1404" title="List of highest-grossing Japanese films" label="second-highest-grossing Japanese film in history"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="1752" end="1780" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal International Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q633073" start="1831" end="1850" title="Mothra vs. Godzilla" label="Mothra vs. Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q757554" start="2335" end="2352" title="nuclear submarine" label="nuclear submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q47568" start="2391" end="2398" title="iceberg" label="iceberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567" start="2434" end="2442" title="Godzilla" label="Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q216810" start="2815" end="2824" title="King Kong" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q275488" start="3117" end="3121" title="Japan Self Defense Force" label="JSDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338856" start="4022" end="4044" title="National Diet Building" label="National Diet Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q39231" start="4360" end="4370" title="Mount Fuji" label="Mount Fuji"/>
<link wikidata="Q653364" start="4813" end="4818" title="Atami, Shizuoka" label="Atami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061221" start="4926" end="4936" title="Sagami Bay" label="Sagami Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q150840" start="5308" end="5320" title="Ishirō Honda" label="Ishirō Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466933" start="5334" end="5348" title="Eiji Tsuburaya" label="Eiji Tsuburaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q11562305" start="5500" end="5514" title="Akira Watanabe (art director)" label="Akira Watanabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q106514691" start="5686" end="5695" title="John Beck (producer)" label="John Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q214066" start="5755" end="5767" title="Peter Zinner" label="Peter Zinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3876200" start="5974" end="5983" title="King Kong (franchise)" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386416" start="6011" end="6030" title="Willis H. O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Willis O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q216810" start="6048" end="6073" title="King Kong" label="original stop-motion Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021531" start="6217" end="6244" title="Frankenstein&amp;#x27;s monster" label="Frankenstein&amp;#x27;s monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="6248" end="6261" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q267282" start="6361" end="6364" title="RKO" label="RKO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546527" start="6766" end="6787" title="George Worthing Yates" label="George Worthing Yates"/>
<link wikidata="Q150827" start="7042" end="7056" title="Frankenstein" label="original novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="7095" end="7102" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q588246" start="7210" end="7222" title="Nathan Juran" label="Nathan Juran"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="7294" end="7315" title="stop-motion animation" label="stop-motion animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q875920" start="7490" end="7494" title="Toho" label="Toho"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567" start="7652" end="7660" title="Godzilla" label="Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074930" start="7708" end="7725" title="Shinichi Sekizawa" label="Shinichi Sekizawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q575014" start="7948" end="7955" title="Sanjuro" label="Sanjuro"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7969" end="7980" title="Chūshingura: Hana no Maki, Yuki no Maki" label="Chūshingura"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660548" start="7994" end="8005" title="A Wanderer&amp;#x27;s Notebook" label="Lonely Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="8300" end="8311" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q446427" start="8481" end="8497" title="Merian C. Cooper" label="Merian C. Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q309048" start="8940" end="8949" title="King Kong (1933 film)" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7667584" start="9827" end="9837" title="Sōichi Ōya" label="Sōichi Ōya"/>
<link wikidata="Q923593" start="11065" end="11080" title="The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter" label="Princess Kaguya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136866" start="11243" end="11261" title="Mainichi Shimbun" label="Mainichi Newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q633073" start="12245" end="12264" title="Mothra vs. Godzilla" label="Mothra vs. Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q11526594" start="12817" end="12826" title="TohoScope" label="TohoScope"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="12991" end="13000" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070580" start="13245" end="13255" title="Izu Ōshima" label="Izu Ōshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q7500141" start="13329" end="13343" title="Shoichi Hirose" label="Shoichi Hirose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315977" start="13363" end="13377" title="Haruo Nakajima" label="Haruo Nakajima"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634184" start="13638" end="13648" title="Toyonobori" label="Toyonobori"/>
<link wikidata="Q308876" start="13740" end="13751" title="stop-motion" label="stop-motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123744" start="13777" end="13787" title="suitmation" label="suitmation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328828" start="15149" end="15158" title="stagehand" label="stagehand"/>
<link wikidata="Q191781" start="15839" end="15855" title="Japanese macaque" label="Japanese macaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q449493" start="16736" end="16744" title="Mie Hama" label="Mie Hama"/>
<link wikidata="Q536757" start="17149" end="17160" title="Miura Peninsula" label="Miura Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q9038803" start="17217" end="17232" title="Kōichi Kawakita" label="Kōichi Kawakita"/>
<link wikidata="Q336438" start="17679" end="17687" title="Takasaki" label="Takasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q129499" start="17689" end="17705" title="Gunma Prefecture" label="Gunma Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11669782" start="17724" end="17746" title="Takasaki Byakue Dai-Kannon" label="Takasaki Kannon Statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q652228" start="18516" end="18531" title="Tomoyuki Tanaka" label="Tomoyuki Tanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q875920" start="18904" end="18908" title="Toho" label="Toho"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18961" end="18973" title=":ja:私と私" label="Myself and I"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19083" end="19100" title=":ja:おとぎの世界旅行" label="Touring the World"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19154" end="19176" title=":ja:東宝チャンピオンまつり" label="Toho Champion Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065444" start="19246" end="19251" title="kaiju" label="kaiju"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142862" start="19456" end="19465" title="King Kong (1976 film)" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q150840" start="19542" end="19554" title="Ishirō Honda" label="Ishirō Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518701" start="19854" end="19876" title="The Return of Godzilla" label="The Return of Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="19951" end="19964" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q851034" start="20372" end="20395" title="San Leandro, California" label="San Leandro, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251417" start="20420" end="20434" title="double feature" label="double feature"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20446" end="20511" title="Godzilla, Mothra and King Ghidorah: Giant Monsters All-Out Attack" label="Godzilla, Mothra and King Ghidorah: Giant Monsters All-Out Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q106514691" start="20548" end="20557" title="John Beck (producer)" label="John Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="20831" end="20843" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="20848" end="20871" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal-International"/>
<link wikidata="Q214066" start="21274" end="21286" title="Peter Zinner" label="Peter Zinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="21592" end="21606" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11297" start="21678" end="21695" title="Headquarters of the United Nations" label="U.N. Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="21703" end="21741" title="Communications satellite" label="International Communications Satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127833" start="21759" end="21773" title="Harry Holcombe" label="Harry Holcombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111784" start="21986" end="21999" title="library music" label="library music"/>
<link wikidata="Q124612" start="22044" end="22074" title="Creature from the Black Lagoon" label="Creature from the Black Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q135570" start="22182" end="22195" title="Akira Ifukube" label="Akira Ifukube"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621366" start="22289" end="22303" title="The Mysterians" label="The Mysterians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251417" start="23073" end="23087" title="double feature" label="double feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769921" start="23099" end="23111" title="The Traitors (1962 film)" label="The Traitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665751" start="23331" end="23350" title="Varan the Unbelievable" label="Giant Monster Varan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421586" start="23367" end="23379" title="The Last War (1961 film)" label="The Last War"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="23655" end="23662" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005797" start="23789" end="23807" title="Universal Pictures Home Entertainment" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="24071" end="24095" title="The Criterion Collection" label="The Criterion Collection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24151" end="24160" title="Godzilla (franchise)#Shōwa era (1954–1975)" label="Shōwa era"/>
<link wikidata="Q19953724" start="24230" end="24240" title="Ultra HD Blu-ray" label="4K Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q877435" start="24485" end="24495" title="box office" label="box office"/>
<link wikidata="Q877435" start="24656" end="24675" title="Theatrical rental" label="distribution rental"/>
<link wikidata="Q11546839" start="24706" end="24763" title="List of highest-grossing Japanese films" label="second-highest-grossing Japanese-produced film in history"/>
<link wikidata="Q850210" start="24981" end="24986" title="Gross revenue" label="gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="25771" end="25793" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923577" start="26097" end="26107" title="Boxoffice Pro" label="Box Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q107103912" start="26365" end="26382" title="Films and Filming" label="Films and Filming"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="26668" end="26675" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112082" start="26754" end="26767" title="Jack Dempsey vs. Luis Ángel Firpo" label="Dempsey-Firpo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26769" end="26782" title="Tonight Starring Jack Paar#Controversy" label="Sullivan-Paar"/>
<link wikidata="Q699590" start="26784" end="26797" title="1960 United States presidential election" label="Nixon-Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26799" end="26814" title="Floyd Patterson#Patterson vs. Liston I &amp;amp; II" label="Paterson-Liston"/>
<link wikidata="Q518379" start="26816" end="26841" title="Duel of the Titans" label="Steve Reeves-Gordon Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="27322" end="27340" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q65073063" start="27904" end="27915" title="Den of Geek" label="Den of Geek"/>
<link wikidata="Q126730672" start="28276" end="28284" title="Collider (website)" label="Collider"/>
<link wikidata="Q275934" start="28563" end="28572" title="tokusatsu" label="tokusatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q150840" start="28604" end="28616" title="Ishirō Honda" label="Ishirō Honda"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28664" end="28686" title=":ja:東宝チャンピオンまつり" label="Toho Champion Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4220904" start="28889" end="28906" title="Original camera negative" label="original negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q238162" start="29296" end="29298" title="4K resolution" label="4K"/>
<link wikidata="Q875920" start="29548" end="29552" title="Toho" label="Toho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074930" start="29593" end="29610" title="Shinichi Sekizawa" label="Shinichi Sekizawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567" start="29708" end="29716" title="Godzilla" label="Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061221" start="29751" end="29761" title="Sagami Bay" label="Sagami Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q653364" start="29846" end="29851" title="Atami" label="Atami"/>
<link wikidata="Q216810" start="30024" end="30033" title="King Kong" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q642996" start="30460" end="30489" title="United Productions of America" label="United Productions of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021531" start="30556" end="30583" title="Frankenstein&amp;#x27;s monster" label="Frankenstein&amp;#x27;s monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678126" start="30601" end="30615" title="Takeshi Kimura" label="Takeshi Kimura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687871" start="30689" end="30699" title="Jerry Sohl" label="Jerry Sohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423458" start="30844" end="30850" title="Mothra" label="Mothra"/>
<link wikidata="Q633073" start="30877" end="30896" title="Mothra vs. Godzilla" label="Mothra vs. Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065444" start="30937" end="30942" title="kaiju" label="kaiju"/>
<link wikidata="Q28859760" start="30994" end="31024" title="Godzilla (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Godzilla&amp;quot; franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q267282" start="31123" end="31126" title="RKO Pictures" label="RKO"/>
<link wikidata="Q724622" start="31195" end="31206" title="Rankin/Bass Animated Entertainment" label="Rankin/Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q127430" start="31235" end="31252" title="King Kong Escapes" label="King Kong Escapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628294" start="31289" end="31303" title="The King Kong Show" label="cartoon series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606765" start="31327" end="31346" title="Henry G. Saperstein" label="Henry G. Saperstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444725" start="31439" end="31470" title="Frankenstein vs. Baragon" label="Frankenstein Conquers the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444735" start="31487" end="31512" title="The War of the Gargantuas" label="The War of the Gargantuas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699578" start="31876" end="31883" title="Ultra Q" label="Ultra Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q652228" start="32390" end="32405" title="Tomoyuki Tanaka" label="Tomoyuki Tanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3876200" start="32520" end="32532" title="Mechani-Kong" label="Mechani-Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q9038803" start="32560" end="32575" title="Koichi Kawakita" label="Koichi Kawakita"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311640" start="32679" end="32692" title="Mechagodzilla" label="Mechagodzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533972" start="32735" end="32764" title="Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II" label="Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II"/>
<link wikidata="Q621364" start="32798" end="32816" title="Legendary Entertainment" label="Legendary Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q56307503" start="32839" end="32878" title="Godzilla vs. Kong" label="King Kong vs Godzilla film of their own"/>
<link wikidata="Q117078710" start="33008" end="33015" title="Max (streaming service)" label="HBO Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433473" start="33288" end="33315" title="Famous Monsters of Filmland" label="Famous Monsters of Filmland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17250" start="33847" end="33862" title="Trivial Pursuit" label="Trivial Pursuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="34085" end="34102" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q6561521" start="34475" end="34505" title="List of American films of 1963" label="List of American films of 1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q56307503" start="34514" end="34531" title="Godzilla vs. Kong" label="Godzilla vs. Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q875920" start="34779" end="34793" title="Toho" label="Toho Co., Ltd."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11992" wikidata="Q775709" url="?curid=11992" title="Ebirah, Horror of the Deep">
<text>is a 1966 Japanese &quot; kaiju&quot; film directed by Jun Fukuda and produced and distributed by Toho Co., Ltd. The film stars Akira Takarada, Kumi Mizuno, Akihiko Hirata and Eisei Amamoto, and features the fictional monster characters Godzilla, Mothra, and Ebirah. It is the seventh film in the &quot; Godzilla&quot; franchise, and features special effects by Sadamasa Arikawa, under the supervision of Eiji Tsuburaya. In the film, Godzilla and Ebirah are portrayed by Haruo Nakajima and Hiroshi Sekita, respectively.

During its development, &quot;Ebirah, Horror of the Deep&quot; was intended to feature King Kong, but the character was replaced by Godzilla. The film was released to theaters in Japan on December 17, 1966, and was released directly to television in the United States under the title Godzilla vs. the Sea Monster in 1968 by Continental Distributing.

The film was followed by the eighth film in the &quot;Godzilla&quot; franchise, &quot;Son of Godzilla&quot;, released on December 
16, 1967.

==Plot ==
After Yata is lost at sea, his brother Ryota steals a yacht with his two friends and a bank robber. However, the crew runs afoul of Ebirah, a giant lobster-like creature, and washes ashore on Letchi Island. There, the Red Bamboo, a terrorist organization, manufactures heavy water for selling weapons of mass destruction and a yellow liquid that keeps Ebirah at bay, presumably controlling him. The Red Bamboo has enslaved natives from nearby Infant Island to create the yellow liquid, while the natives hope that Mothra will awaken in her winged, adult form and rescue them.

In their efforts to avoid capture, Ryota and his friends, aided by Daiyo, a native girl, come across Godzilla, who previously fought Ghidorah and is now sleeping within a cliffside cavern. The group devises a plan to defeat the Red Bamboo and escape the island. In the process, they awaken Godzilla using a makeshift lightning rod. Godzilla fights Ebirah, but the huge crustacean escapes. Godzilla is then attacked by a giant condor and a squadron of Red Bamboo fighter jets. Using its atomic breath, Godzilla destroys the jets and kills the giant bird.

Ryota and his friends retrieve the missing Yata and free the enslaved natives as Godzilla begins to destroy the Red Bamboo&#x27;s base of operations, smashing a tower that causes a countdown that will destroy the island in a nuclear explosion. Godzilla fights Ebirah and defeats it, ripping its claws off, and forcing it to retreat into the sea. The natives await for Mothra to carry them off in a large net. However, when she gets to the island, Mothra is challenged by Godzilla due to a previous confrontation. Mothra manages to repel Godzilla and save her people and the human heroes. Godzilla also escapes just before the bomb detonates and destroys the island.

==Cast==
==Production==
===Writing===
By 1966, Toho had their sights set on bringing back King Kong back to the silver screen. Their deal with RKO allowed them the use of King Kong for five years, an agreement that would be over in 1967. Why Toho waited so long to produce another Kong film is unknown. The planned movie, &quot;Operation Robinson Crusoe: King Kong vs. Ebirah&quot; (ロビンソン·クルーソー作戦 キングコング対エビラ &quot;Robinson Kurūsō Sakusen: Kingu Kongu tai Ebira&quot;), was to be a co-production with Rankin/Bass, who was about to debut their animated program, &quot;The King Kong Show&quot;, in September of that same year. According to Toho Special Effects Movies Complete Works, Jun Fukuda was approached about an untitled US–Japanese &quot;King Kong&quot; co-production on April 21, 1966. Even before that, in February 1966, Toho&#x27;s senior staff member Makoto Fujimoto met with a movie theater owner in Kansai and revealed that the New Year&#x27;s season would see the release of a new &quot;King Kong&quot; movie.

The concept was first pitched by Shinichi Sekizawa on July 13, 1966. However, Rankin-Bass was displeased that Toho was dead-set on Jun Fukuda directing the live-action and Eiji Tsuburaya&#x27;s protege, Sadamasa Arikawa, directing special effects. Rankin-Bass was equally dead set on the creative team being Ishiro Honda and Eiji Tsuburaya. When Toho refused to budge and was unable to compromise, Rankin-Bass dropped out of the project. Toho liked the script so much that they decided to simply substitute Godzilla in place of Kong and release it as &quot;Godzilla, Ebirah, Mothra: Big Duel in the South Seas&quot; for their New Year&#x27;s blockbuster. Rankin-Bass and Toho would settle their differences the next year and would begin work on &quot;King Kong Escapes&quot; (1967), which was based on the recent King Kong cartoon and would feature Honda at the director&#x27;s helm.

Even with the loss of one of the title characters, though, Toho continued with production on Sekizawa&#x27;s screenplay. Little was done to tweak the script and Godzilla displays a Kong-inspired interest in Daiyo. It&#x27;s even possible the electric shock to revive Kong was a nod to the ape&#x27;s love of electricity in &quot;King Kong vs. Godzilla&quot;.

According to Teruyoshi Nakano, Godzilla was supposed to fight a giant octopus in this film. However, Nakano likely confused this film with an early version of &quot;All Monsters Attack&quot; (1969). Both Nakano and Fukuda acted as though they were unaware the film ever started out starring King Kong. Fukuda said, &quot;Godzilla was in the first draft of the script that I saw. I don&#x27;t know what the earlier drafts were like.&quot; Fukuda further elaborated that making the film &quot;was like pouring two cups of water into one. I had to cut one sequence after another.&quot; What these cut scenes contained are unknown, but Godzilla&#x27;s infamous helicopter spin of Ebirah, which exists only in publicity photos, was apparently planned for the film, as storyboards exist of the scene.

===Filming===
This is the first of two &quot;Godzilla&quot; films in which a Pacific island is the primary setting, rather than a location inside Japan. The second and final one is &quot;Son of Godzilla&quot; (1967).

Director Jun Fukuda notes that producer Tomoyuki Tanaka was not particularly active on this production, with the exception of being involved with the budget. The producer would, however, visit the set &quot;often&quot; to watch progress but only as an observer.

Daiyo was originally to be played by Noriko Takahashi, from &quot;Frankenstein vs. Baragon&quot; (1965), but fell ill with appendicitis during production was replaced with Kumi Mizuno at the last second.

Although Eiji Tsuburaya is credited as the special effects director, actual directorial duties were handed over to Teisho Arikawa, who at this stage had been promoted to Tsuburaya&#x27;s first assistant director. Tsuburaya still had the final say on effects sequences but served more of a supervisor role on the production.

With a new special effects director in the seat, Toho tried to limit the effects budget. Sadamasa Arikawa lamented that Toho likely did this due to his inexperience and TV history, noting that &quot;Toho couldn&#x27;t have made too many demands about the budget if Mr. Tsuburaya had been in charge&quot; and that he &quot;was also doing TV work then, so they must have figured I could produce the movie cheaply.&quot; To keep the budget down, Toho instructed Arikawa to avoid expensive composite shots as much as possible. Although the movie has minimal composite shots, it is not devoid of them as scenes such as Godzilla&#x27;s foot composited near actress Kumi Mizuno or a sequence of Mothra composited as her followers rush toward her are some examples of these sequences that made it into the final film.

Jun Fukuda was not fond of the film. In an interview, he was quoted saying, &quot;Toho sent me a copy of the VHS tape edition of Godzilla vs The Sea Monsters when it was released. It was like opening up an old wound, I didn&#x27;t watch the tape.&quot;

===Music===
Director Jun Fukuda selected Masaru Sato to score his films to give it a &quot;different touch from Ishiro Honda&#x27;s&quot;, noting Sato&#x27;s music was lighter than Akira Ifukube&#x27;s. Producer Tomoyuki Tanaka didn&#x27;t agree with this decision but Fukuda won out in the end.

===Special effects===
The underwater sequences were filmed on an indoor soundstage where the Godzilla and Ebirah suits were filmed through the glass of a water-filled aquarium, with some scenes of the Godzilla suit shot separately underwater as well. Haruo Nakajima wore a wet suit under the Godzilla suit for every scene that required him to be in the water, which took a week to complete the water scenes, Nakajima stated, &quot;I worked overtime until about eight o&#x27;clock every day. I lived in the water! Generally, in the summer, everybody wants to go in the pool and play, but, when it comes to kaiju movies, it is totally different. Most of the scenes that they shoot in the water are not in the summer, but in the winter. In the middle of winter, shooting started at nine in the morning, going until noon, and then we&#x27;d take an hour off. But we&#x27;d go from 1:00 P.M. until around 5:00 at night. I needed to stay in the water all day in the suit, and shooting took a week.&quot;

The Side Monsters that featured in this film were largely dictated by suits and props that were still available from previous films. For example, the Mothra was the same prop seen in Ghidorah, the Three-Headed Monster and the giant condor was a repurposed Rodan prop used in flying scenes. Other places where the low budget of the movie can be seen is in the island setting which was picked, as islands are much cheaper to make miniatures of compared to cities. This island trend carries on in other movies such as Son of Godzilla.

==Release==
===Theatrical===
&quot;Ebirah, Horror of the Deep&quot; was released theatrically in Japan on December 17, 1966, where it was distributed by Toho.

The American version of the film was released directly to television by Continental Distributing in 1968 under the title &quot;Godzilla versus the Sea Monster&quot;. The film may have received theatrical distribution in the United States as a Walter Reade Jr. Presentation, but this has not been confirmed. It was also featured on &quot;Mystery Science Theater 3000&quot; as the last episode for the second season.

===Home media===
The film was released on DVD on February 8, 2005, by Sony Pictures Home Entertainment. The film was released on Blu-ray on May 6, 2014, by Kraken Releasing. In 2019, the Japanese version was included in a Blu-ray box set released by the Criterion Collection, which included all 15 films from the franchise&#x27;s Shōwa era.

There are two English versions. The first one was dubbed in the 1960s by a company called Titra and featured Hal Linden. He was the voice dub for the character, Yoshimura or “Yoshi,” who was played onscreen by Akira Takarada. The first English version was featured on VHS releases. The second one was dubbed with extra scenes and dialogue for DVD and Blu-ray releases. The Titra version did not use the entire movie for dubbing.

== Ebirah ==
 is a kaiju film monster taking the form of an enormous monstrous lobster. The name &quot;Ebirah&quot; is a portmanteau of the Japanese word for &quot;shrimp&quot; or &quot;lobster&quot; (蝦, &quot;ebi&quot;) and the -ra ending often appended to the names of kaiju monsters, such as Mothra, Hedorah, Ghidorah, and Godzilla.

Ebirah first appeared in Toho&#x27;s 1966 film &quot;Ebirah, Horror of the Deep&quot;. It is one of the two main antagonists of the film. Ebirah has also appeared in &quot;All Monsters Attack&quot; and &quot;&quot;.

Ebirah has also appeared in a number of video games, including &quot;King of the Monsters, Godzilla, , Godzilla Unleashed: Double Smash, and Godzilla Trading Battle.&quot;

=== Overview ===

==== Showa series ====
In &quot;Ebirah, Horror of the Deep&quot;, a terrorist organization called the Red Bamboo had set up a base of operations on Letchi Island. The giant lobster Ebirah was successfully used to destroy any ship that came too close to the island. The Red Bamboo ships used a special extract from the island’s fruit to protect themselves from Ebirah. When a small group of people stranded on the island saw the monster Godzilla sleeping in a cave, they woke it so it could fight Ebirah. Godzilla easily won and injured the crustacean with its atomic ray. The day after, a Red Bamboo ship appeared, but they unknowingly used a placebo and not the real fruit extract. Ebirah attacked and tore the ship apart. Godzilla reappeared, but this time, Godzilla pulled off Ebirah’s claws. The wounded Ebirah then fled.

Ebirah was not seen again until it appeared on Monster Island in Ichiro’s dreams in &quot;All Monsters Attack&quot;. Its appearance in this film is simply stock footage utilized from &quot;Ebirah, Horror of the Deep&quot;. Ebirah was originally going to appear in &quot;Destroy All Monsters,&quot; but did not make it to the final draft.

Showa Ebirah is 50 meters (164 feet) tall and weighs 23,000 metric tons (25,353 short tons).

==== Millennium series ====
In the Millennium era, Ebirah makes an appearance in &quot;&quot; as one of the many controlled monsters of the Xiliens, a race of extraterrestrial beings. It destroys a factory near Tokyo, and the military forces are sent to destroy it, but are outmatched by the immense crustacean. Instead, the mutant soldiers are called to stop the monster. The mutants successfully defeat Ebirah and are about to kill it, when it disappears in a flash of light. The Xiliens arrive and say that they destroyed the monsters to save Earth. However, it is soon found out that the monsters were in fact controlled by the Xiliens all along.

The Gotengo then frees Godzilla from the Antarctic so it can fight the controlled monsters. The plan is a success and Godzilla successfully defeats all of the monsters. When it arrives in Tokyo Bay, it faces Ebirah and the Smog Monster Hedorah. However, they are no match for Godzilla, who blasts them out of the water with its atomic ray and the duo crash into a building, where Ebirah&#x27;s claw stabs Hedorah&#x27;s eye. With another blast, Godzilla destroys them both.

Final Wars Ebirah is 30 meters (98 feet) tall, 100 meters (328 feet) long, and weighs 50,000 metric tons (55,115 short tons).

==== Reiwa series ====
In Godzilla: Monster Apocalypse, a prequel novel to , two Ebirah appeared in the Atlantic Ocean in early 2010&#x27;s. USS Saratoga defeated a third Ebirah in the Pacific Ocean.

=== Appearances ===

==== Films ====

* &quot;Ebirah, Horror of the Deep&quot; (1966)
* &quot;All Monsters Attack&quot; (1969) stock footage cameo
* &quot;&quot; (2004)

==== Video games ====

* &quot;Flappy&quot; (first appeared on FM-7 in 1983)
* &quot;Kaijū-ō Godzilla&quot; / &quot;King of the Monsters, Godzilla&quot; (Game Boy - 1993)
* &quot;Godzilla Trading Battle&quot; (PlayStation - 1998)
* &quot;&quot; (Xbox, PS2 - 2004)
* &quot;Godzilla Unleashed: Double Smash&quot; (NDS - 2007)
* &quot;Godzilla Defense Force&quot; (2019)

==== Literature ====

* &quot;Godzilla: The Half-Century War&quot; (comic - 2012-2013)
* &quot;Godzilla: Rulers of Earth&quot; (comic - 2013-2015)
* &quot;Godzilla: Cataclysm&quot; (comic - 2014)
* &quot;&quot; (novel - 2017)

== References ==
===Sources===
* 
* 

==External links==

*Godzilla on the web (Japan)
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1065444" start="19" end="42" title="Kaiju" label="&amp;quot; kaiju&amp;quot; film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332764" start="55" end="65" title="Jun Fukuda" label="Jun Fukuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q875920" start="98" end="111" title="Toho" label="Toho Co., Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q636593" start="128" end="142" title="Akira Takarada" label="Akira Takarada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074322" start="144" end="155" title="Kumi Mizuno" label="Kumi Mizuno"/>
<link wikidata="Q418046" start="157" end="171" title="Akihiko Hirata" label="Akihiko Hirata"/>
<link wikidata="Q938317" start="176" end="189" title="Eisei Amamoto" label="Eisei Amamoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567" start="237" end="245" title="Godzilla" label="Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423458" start="247" end="253" title="Mothra" label="Mothra"/>
<link wikidata="Q28859760" start="297" end="328" title="Godzilla (franchise)" label="&amp;quot; Godzilla&amp;quot; franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466933" start="405" end="419" title="Eiji Tsuburaya" label="Eiji Tsuburaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315977" start="471" end="485" title="Haruo Nakajima" label="Haruo Nakajima"/>
<link wikidata="Q216810" start="608" end="617" title="King Kong" label="King Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965932" start="845" end="869" title="Continental Distributing" label="Continental Distributing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444768" start="958" end="973" title="Son of Godzilla" label="Son of Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q170173" start="1078" end="1083" title="yacht" label="yacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038113" start="1172" end="1179" title="lobster" label="lobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="1256" end="1265" title="Terrorism" label="terrorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q155890" start="1293" end="1304" title="heavy water" label="heavy water"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="1438" end="1446" title="Slavery" label="enslaved"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423458" start="1538" end="1544" title="Mothra" label="Mothra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470558" start="1734" end="1742" title="Ghidorah" label="Ghidorah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973" start="1918" end="1931" title="lightning rod" label="lightning rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211606" start="2027" end="2033" title="condor" label="condor"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="2063" end="2075" title="Fighter aircraft" label="fighter jets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656967" start="2381" end="2398" title="nuclear explosion" label="nuclear explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q633073" start="2645" end="2667" title="Mothra vs. Godzilla" label="previous confrontation"/>
<link wikidata="Q267282" start="2966" end="2969" title="RKO" label="RKO"/>
<link wikidata="Q724622" start="3323" end="3334" title="Rankin/Bass" label="Rankin/Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705349" start="5104" end="5120" title="Teruyoshi Nakano" label="Teruyoshi Nakano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444768" start="6074" end="6089" title="Son of Godzilla" label="Son of Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332764" start="6114" end="6124" title="Jun Fukuda" label="Jun Fukuda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6405" end="6421" title="Noriko Takahashi" label="Noriko Takahashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444725" start="6434" end="6458" title="Frankenstein vs. Baragon" label="Frankenstein vs. Baragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074322" start="6540" end="6551" title="Kumi Mizuno" label="Kumi Mizuno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466933" start="6582" end="6596" title="Eiji Tsuburaya" label="Eiji Tsuburaya"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6688" end="6702" title="Teisho Arikawa" label="Teisho Arikawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423458" start="9409" end="9415" title="Mothra" label="Mothra"/>
<link wikidata="Q588011" start="9442" end="9476" title="Ghidorah, the Three-Headed Monster" label="Ghidorah, the Three-Headed Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444768" start="9774" end="9789" title="Son of Godzilla" label="Son of Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q875920" start="9945" end="9949" title="Toho" label="Toho"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965932" start="10024" end="10048" title="Continental Distributing" label="Continental Distributing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894972" start="10289" end="10317" title="Mystery Science Theater 3000" label="Mystery Science Theater 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="10410" end="10413" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q734401" start="10438" end="10470" title="Sony Pictures Home Entertainment" label="Sony Pictures Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="10497" end="10504" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10524" end="10540" title="Section23 Films#Kraken Releasing" label="Kraken Releasing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10698" end="10707" title="Godzilla (franchise)#Shōwa era (1954–1975)" label="Shōwa era"/>
<link wikidata="Q553436" start="10819" end="10829" title="Hal Linden" label="Hal Linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q636593" start="10920" end="10934" title="Akira Takarada" label="Akira Takarada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065444" start="11159" end="11164" title="kaiju" label="kaiju"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038113" start="11219" end="11226" title="lobster" label="lobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="11261" end="11272" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423458" start="11435" end="11441" title="Mothra" label="Mothra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706041" start="11443" end="11450" title="Hedorah" label="Hedorah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470558" start="11452" end="11460" title="Ghidorah" label="Ghidorah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567" start="11466" end="11474" title="Godzilla" label="Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q875920" start="11502" end="11506" title="Toho" label="Toho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534456" start="11649" end="11668" title="All Monsters Attack" label="All Monsters Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812484" start="11763" end="11793" title="Kaijū-ō Godzilla" label="King of the Monsters, Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11797" end="11829" title="Godzilla Unleashed: Double Smash" label="Godzilla Unleashed: Double Smash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096667" start="11835" end="11858" title="Godzilla Trading Battle" label="Godzilla Trading Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567" start="12321" end="12329" title="Godzilla" label="Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534456" start="12802" end="12821" title="All Monsters Attack" label="All Monsters Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444720" start="12982" end="13002" title="Destroy All Monsters" label="Destroy All Monsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759684" start="13801" end="13808" title="Gotengo" label="Gotengo"/>
<link wikidata="Q141017" start="13985" end="13994" title="Tokyo Bay" label="Tokyo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706041" start="14033" end="14040" title="Hedorah" label="Hedorah"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="14503" end="14517" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473114" start="14540" end="14552" title="USS Saratoga (CV-60)" label="USS Saratoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="14584" end="14597" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534456" start="14694" end="14713" title="All Monsters Attack" label="All Monsters Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073362" start="14801" end="14807" title="Flappy" label="Flappy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812484" start="14855" end="14871" title="Kaijū-ō Godzilla" label="Kaijū-ō Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q186437" start="14924" end="14932" title="Game Boy" label="Game Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096667" start="14949" end="14972" title="Godzilla Trading Battle" label="Godzilla Trading Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="14980" end="14991" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q132020" start="15016" end="15020" title="Xbox (console)" label="Xbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q10680" start="15022" end="15025" title="PlayStation 2" label="PS2"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15042" end="15074" title="Godzilla Unleashed: Double Smash" label="Godzilla Unleashed: Double Smash"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="15082" end="15085" title="Nintendo DS" label="NDS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15169" end="15199" title="Godzilla (comics)#IDW Publishing" label="Godzilla: The Half-Century War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15234" end="15259" title="Godzilla (comics)#IDW Publishing" label="Godzilla: Rulers of Earth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15294" end="15313" title="Godzilla (comics)#IDW Publishing" label="Godzilla: Cataclysm"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11993" wikidata="Q1444768" url="?curid=11993" title="Son of Godzilla">
<text>is a 1967 Japanese &quot;kaiju&quot; film directed by Jun Fukuda, with special effects by Sadamasa Arikawa, under the supervision of Eiji Tsuburaya. Produced and distributed by Toho Co., Ltd, it is the eighth film in the &quot;Godzilla&quot; franchise. It stars Tadao Takashima, Akira Kubo, Akihiko Hirata, and Beverly Maeda, with Hiroshi Sekita, Seiji Onaka, and Haruo Nakajima as Godzilla, and Marchan the Dwarf as Minilla.

&quot;Son of Godzilla&quot; received a theatrical release in Japan on December 16, 1967, it received mixed reactions from critics and audience. It was released directly to television in the United States in 1969 through the Walter Reade Organization.

The film was followed by the ninth film in the &quot;Godzilla&quot; franchise, &quot;Destroy All Monsters&quot;, released on August 1, 1968.

==Plot==
A team of scientists are trying to perfect a weather-controlling system. Their efforts are hampered by the arrival of a nosy reporter and by the sudden presence of giant mantises. A reporter, Maki Goro, arrives on the island to find the scientists somewhat stir-crazy from the events, and is allowed to stay as a maintenance worker. Whilst there he also glimpses a mysterious woman the scientists were unaware of, apparently living in the jungle. The first test of the weather control system goes awry when the remote control for a radioactive balloon is jammed by an unexplained signal coming from the center of the island. Eventually finding the woman, Saeko Matsumiya, she is revealed to be the daughter of a previous researcher on the island who warned about a gigantic species of spider. The balloon detonates prematurely, creating a radioactive storm that causes the giant mantises to grow to enormous sizes. Investigating the mantises, which are named Kamacuras (Gimantis in the English-dubbed version), the scientists find the monstrous insects digging an egg out from under a pile of earth. 

The egg hatches, revealing a baby Godzilla. The scientists realize that the baby&#x27;s telepathic cries for help were the cause of the interference that ruined their experiment. Shortly afterwards, Godzilla arrives on the island in response to the infant&#x27;s cries, demolishing the scientists&#x27; base while rushing to defend the baby. Godzilla kills two of the Kamacuras during the battle while one manages to fly away to safety. Saeko introduces herself to and bonds with the baby kaiju, feeding him a mango. Godzilla then returns and adopts the baby as his son.

The baby Godzilla, named Minilla, quickly grows to about half the size of the adult Godzilla, and Godzilla begins instructing his new charge on the important monster skills of roaring and using his atomic ray, as Maki and Saeko observe them. At first, Minilla has difficulty producing anything more than atomic smoke rings, but Godzilla discovers that stressful conditions (i.e. stomping on his tail) or motivation produces a true radioactive blast. Minilla comes to the aid of Saeko when she is attacked by a Kamacuras, but inadvertently awakens Kumonga (Spiga in the English-dubbed version), a giant spider that was sleeping in a valley which killed Saeko&#x27;s father. Kumonga attacks Saeko&#x27;s cave where the scientists are hiding and Minilla stumbles into the fray.

Kumonga traps Minilla and the final Kamacuras with its webbing, but as Kumonga begins to feed on the deceased Kamacuras, Godzilla arrives. Godzilla saves Minilla and they work together to defeat Kumonga by using their atomic rays on the giant spider. Hoping to keep the monsters from interfering in their attempt to escape the island, the scientists finally use their perfected weather altering device on the island and the once tropical island becomes buried in snow and ice. As the scientists are saved by an American submarine, Godzilla and Minilla embrace and begin to hibernate as they wait for the island to become tropical again.

==Cast==
==Production==
===Writing===
For the second &quot;Godzilla&quot; film in a row, Toho produced an island themed adventure with a smaller budget than most of their monster films from this time period. While the a-list crew of talent was hired to work on that year&#x27;s &quot;King Kong Escapes&quot;, (Ishirō Honda, Eiji Tsuburaya, and Akira Ifukube), the second string crew of cheaper talent was once again tapped to work on this project as they had done with &quot;Ebirah, Horror of the Deep&quot;. This included Jun Fukuda (director), Sadamasa Arikawa (special effects), and Masaru Sato (composer). This was the first film where Arikawa was officially listed as the director of Special Effects, although he did receive some supervision from Tsuburaya when he was available.

The early draft of the film, done by Kazue Shiba, titled Two Godzilla&#x27;s: Japan S.O.S. (2つのゴジラ：日本S.O.S.!, Gojira: Tsu no Nihon S.O.S.!). The overall plot is the same but Kumonga and the Kamacuras are not in the story.

===Filming===
Filming took place in Guam and areas in Japan including Gotemba, Lake Yamana, the Fuji Five Lakes region, and Oshima.

Toho wanted to create a baby Godzilla to appeal to the &quot;date crowd&quot; (a genre of films that were very popular among young couples during this time period), with the idea that girls would like a &quot;cute&quot; baby monster. For the idea behind Minilla, Fukuda stated, &quot;We wanted to take a new approach, so we gave Godzilla a child. We thought it would be a little strange if we gave Godzilla a daughter, so instead we gave him a son&quot;. Fukuda also wanted to portray the monsters almost as people in regards to the father-son relationship between Godzilla and Minilla, as Fukuda stated &quot;We focused on the relationship between Godzilla and his son throughout the course of &quot;Son of Godzilla&quot;.

At the time, Sekizawa was already tired of writing the series and likely complained that he had run out of ideas for further monster movies, and director Jun Fukuda heartily agreed. Producer Tomoyuki Tanaka then proposed the idea of introducing a son to Godzilla.

The budget for the film was 260,000,000 yen. When Son of Godzilla was released on December 16, 1967 in Japan, it sold 2,480,000 tickets. When the film was re-issued on August 1, 1973, it received 610,000 attendees, adding up to a rough attendance total of 3,090,000.

===Special effects===
The Godzilla suit built for this film was the biggest in terms of size and girth. This was done in order to give Godzilla a &quot;paternal&quot; appearance and to give a parent-like stature in contrast next to Minilla. Because of the size of the suit, seasoned Godzilla suit actor Haruo Nakajima was only hired to play Godzilla in two scenes because the suit was much too big for him to wear. The smaller suit he had worn for the films &quot;Ebirah, Horror of the Deep&quot; and &quot;Invasion of Astro-Monster&quot; was used for these sequences. The much larger Seji Onaka instead played Godzilla in the film, although he was replaced midway through filming by Hiroshi Sekita after he broke his fingers.

Minilla was designed to incorporate features of not only a baby Godzilla but a human baby was well. Minilla&#x27;s face was patterned after the character Chibita from the popular manga &quot;Osomatsu-kun&quot; published by Shogakukan in Weekly Shonen Saturday at the time. &quot;Marchan the Dwarf&quot; was hired to play the character due to his ability to play-act and to give the character a childlike ambiance. He was also hired because of his ability to perform athletic rolls and flips inside the thick rubber suit.

Outside of the two monster suits, various marionettes and puppets were used to portray the Island&#x27;s gigantic inhabitants. The various giant preying mantises known as Kamacuras and the huge spider Kumonga. Arikawa would usually have 20 puppeteers at a time working on the various marionettes. The massive Kumonga puppet needed 2 to 3 people at a time to operate each leg.

Styrofoam and paraffin were used for the snow falling on Solgell Island.

===Deleted scenes===
Many scenes were shot but deleted showing Godzilla being mean or harsh to Minilla. One sequence shows Godzilla leaving Minilla behind on the freezing Sollgel Island and making it to shore before turning back was cut from the final film&#x27;s ending. A portion of this sequence has been preserved in both the trailer and an outtake reel included with the Godzilla Final Box DVD collection as supplemental material. More deleted footage included Godzilla expecting the newborn Minilla to get up and walk after the Kamacuras have been defeated. Another featured Godzilla head-butting Minilla to make him stop following Saeko. One scene included Minilla being able to fire his own type of atomic breath during his fight with Kamacuras. However, in the final film, the smoke rings and his Godzilla breath were utilized instead. It is unknown who was responsible for these bits being deleted, but it was possibly Tsuburaya since he would not have allowed time and resources to be wasted shooting each such scenes if he was not okay with them in the first place.

==Release==

=== Theatrical ===
&quot;Son of Godzilla&quot; was distributed theatrically in Japan by Toho on December 16, 1967. The film was released theatrically in the United Kingdom in August 1969, as a double feature with &quot;Ebirah, Horror of the Deep&quot;. &quot;Son of Godzilla&quot; was never released theatrically in the United States, instead being released directly to television by Walter Reade Sterling as well as American International Pictures (AIP-TV) in some markets in 1969. The American television version was cut to 84 minutes.

===Home media===
In 2005, the film was released on DVD by Sony Pictures in its original uncut length with the original Japanese audio and Toho&#x27;s international English dub. In 2019, the Japanese version and export English version was included in a Blu-ray box set released by the Criterion Collection, which included all 15 films from the franchise&#x27;s Shōwa era.

==Reception==
In a contemporary review, the &quot;Monthly Film Bulletin&quot; declared the film to be &quot;out of the top drawer of the Toho Company&#x27;s monster file, with the special effects department achieving their best results in monster locomotion&quot; and that the film &quot;has the advantage of a more soundly constructed story than most of its predecessors and a delightful vein of humor that allows for a gentle parody of the genre.&quot;

According to the Polish writer Aleksandra Ziółkowska-Boehm, the film appealed to Polish journalist Melchior Wańkowicz: &quot;On August 9, Tomuś&#x27;s birthday, we all went to see &quot;Son of Godzilla&quot;. I was afraid [Melchior] would be irritated by this film&#x27;s type. I was again surprised, I watched with what interest he looked at the picture. Later he said that he had never seen this genre, but he was delighted with the technique of realization.&quot;

==See also==
* List of Japanese films of 1967
* List of science fiction films of the 1960s

== References ==
;Footnotes

;Bibliography
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

* Godzilla on the web(Japan)
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1065444" start="19" end="41" title="Kaiju" label="&amp;quot;kaiju&amp;quot; film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332764" start="54" end="64" title="Jun Fukuda" label="Jun Fukuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466933" start="133" end="147" title="Eiji Tsuburaya" label="Eiji Tsuburaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q875920" start="177" end="190" title="Toho" label="Toho Co., Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q28859760" start="221" end="251" title="Godzilla (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Godzilla&amp;quot; franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q279321" start="262" end="277" title="Tadao Takashima" label="Tadao Takashima"/>
<link wikidata="Q418778" start="279" end="289" title="Akira Kubo" label="Akira Kubo"/>
<link wikidata="Q418046" start="291" end="305" title="Akihiko Hirata" label="Akihiko Hirata"/>
<link wikidata="Q11397709" start="311" end="324" title="Bibari Maeda" label="Beverly Maeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315977" start="364" end="378" title="Haruo Nakajima" label="Haruo Nakajima"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567" start="382" end="390" title="Godzilla" label="Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q516231" start="417" end="424" title="Minilla" label="Minilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444720" start="764" end="784" title="Destroy All Monsters" label="Destroy All Monsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q131250" start="1000" end="1006" title="mantis" label="mantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="1669" end="1680" title="radioactive" label="radioactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567" start="2131" end="2139" title="Godzilla" label="Godzilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q516231" start="2529" end="2536" title="Minilla" label="Minilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q127430" start="4202" end="4219" title="King Kong Escapes" label="King Kong Escapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150840" start="4228" end="4240" title="Ishirō Honda" label="Ishirō Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466933" start="4242" end="4256" title="Eiji Tsuburaya" label="Eiji Tsuburaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q135570" start="4262" end="4275" title="Akira Ifukube" label="Akira Ifukube"/>
<link wikidata="Q775709" start="4393" end="4419" title="Ebirah, Horror of the Deep" label="Ebirah, Horror of the Deep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332764" start="4441" end="4451" title="Jun Fukuda" label="Jun Fukuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="4963" end="4967" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q516231" start="5314" end="5321" title="Minilla" label="Minilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315977" start="6621" end="6635" title="Haruo Nakajima" label="Haruo Nakajima"/>
<link wikidata="Q814166" start="6825" end="6850" title="Invasion of Astro-Monster" label="Invasion of Astro-Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546336" start="7237" end="7249" title="Osomatsu-kun" label="Osomatsu-kun"/>
<link wikidata="Q28859760" start="7739" end="7748" title="Kamacuras" label="Kamacuras"/>
<link wikidata="Q875920" start="9199" end="9203" title="Toho" label="Toho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251417" start="9304" end="9318" title="double feature" label="double feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q775709" start="9330" end="9356" title="Ebirah, Horror of the Deep" label="Ebirah, Horror of the Deep"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965932" start="9495" end="9516" title="Walter Reade Sterling" label="Walter Reade Sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q465224" start="9528" end="9559" title="American International Pictures" label="American International Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q822314" start="9708" end="9721" title="Sony Pictures" label="Sony Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10010" end="10019" title="Godzilla (franchise)#Shōwa era (1954–1975)" label="Shōwa era"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107374" start="10072" end="10093" title="Monthly Film Bulletin" label="Monthly Film Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4715596" start="10509" end="10536" title="Aleksandra Ziółkowska-Boehm" label="Aleksandra Ziółkowska-Boehm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646655" start="10577" end="10595" title="Melchior Wańkowicz" label="Melchior Wańkowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575104" start="10961" end="10991" title="List of Japanese films of 1967" label="List of Japanese films of 1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768568" start="10994" end="11036" title="List of science fiction films of the 1960s" label="List of science fiction films of the 1960s"/>
</links>
</doc>
