<doc id="12240" wikidata="Q897" url="?curid=12240" title="Gold">
<text>Gold is a chemical element with the chemical symbol Au (from Latin ) and atomic number 79. In its pure form, it is a bright, slightly orange-yellow, dense, soft, malleable, and ductile metal. Chemically, gold is a transition metal, a group 11 element, and one of the noble metals. It is one of the least reactive chemical elements, being the second-lowest in the reactivity series. It is solid under standard conditions.

Gold often occurs in free elemental (native state), as nuggets or grains, in rocks, veins, and alluvial deposits. It occurs in a solid solution series with the native element silver (as in electrum), naturally alloyed with other metals like copper and palladium, and mineral inclusions such as within pyrite. Less commonly, it occurs in minerals as gold compounds, often with tellurium (gold tellurides).

Gold is resistant to most acids, though it does dissolve in aqua regia (a mixture of nitric acid and hydrochloric acid), forming a soluble tetrachloroaurate anion. Gold is insoluble in nitric acid alone, which dissolves silver and base metals, a property long used to refine gold and confirm the presence of gold in metallic substances, giving rise to the term &#x27;acid test&#x27;. Gold dissolves in alkaline solutions of cyanide, which are used in mining and electroplating. Gold also dissolves in mercury, forming amalgam alloys, and as the gold acts simply as a solute, this is not a chemical reaction.

A relatively rare element, gold is a precious metal that has been used for coinage, jewelry, and other works of art throughout recorded history. In the past, a gold standard was often implemented as a monetary policy. Gold coins ceased to be minted as a circulating currency in the 1930s, and the world gold standard was abandoned for a fiat currency system after the Nixon shock measures of 1971.

In 2023, the world&#x27;s largest gold producer was China, followed by Russia and Australia. , a total of around 201,296 tonnes of gold exist above ground. This is equal to a cube, with each side measuring roughly . The world&#x27;s consumption of new gold produced is about 50% in jewelry, 40% in investments, and 10% in industry. Gold&#x27;s high malleability, ductility, resistance to corrosion and most other chemical reactions, as well as conductivity of electricity have led to its continued use in corrosion-resistant electrical connectors in all types of computerized devices (its chief industrial use). Gold is also used in infrared shielding, the production of colored glass, gold leafing, and tooth restoration. Certain gold salts are still used as anti-inflammatory agents in medicine.

== Characteristics ==
Gold is the most malleable of all metals. It can be drawn into a wire of single-atom width, and then stretched considerably before it breaks. Such nanowires distort via the formation, reorientation, and migration of dislocations and crystal twins without noticeable hardening. A single gram of gold can be beaten into a sheet of , and an avoirdupois ounce into . Gold leaf can be beaten thin enough to become semi-transparent. The transmitted light appears greenish-blue because gold strongly reflects yellow and red. Such semi-transparent sheets also strongly reflect infrared light, making them useful as infrared (radiant heat) shields in the visors of heat-resistant suits and in sun visors for spacesuits. Gold is a good conductor of heat and electricity.

Gold has a density of 19.3 g/cm3, almost identical to that of tungsten at 19.25 g/cm3; as such, tungsten has been used in the counterfeiting of gold bars, such as by plating a tungsten bar with gold. By comparison, the density of lead is 11.34 g/cm3, and that of the densest element, osmium, is .

=== Color ===

Whereas most metals are gray or silvery white, gold is slightly reddish-yellow. This color is determined by the frequency of plasma oscillations among the metal&#x27;s valence electrons, in the ultraviolet range for most metals but in the visible range for gold due to relativistic effects affecting the orbitals around gold atoms. Similar effects impart a golden hue to metallic caesium.

Common colored gold alloys include the distinctive eighteen-karat rose gold created by the addition of copper. Alloys containing palladium or nickel are also important in commercial jewelry as these produce white gold alloys. Fourteen-karat gold-copper alloy is nearly identical in color to certain bronze alloys, and both may be used to produce police and other badges. Fourteen- and eighteen-karat gold alloys with silver alone appear greenish-yellow and are referred to as green gold. Blue gold can be made by alloying with iron, and purple gold can be made by alloying with aluminium. Less commonly, addition of manganese, indium, and other elements can produce more unusual colors of gold for various applications.

Colloidal gold, used by electron-microscopists, is red if the particles are small; larger particles of colloidal gold are blue.

=== Isotopes ===

Gold has only one stable isotope, , which is also its only naturally occurring isotope, so gold is both a mononuclidic and monoisotopic element. Thirty-six radioisotopes have been synthesized, ranging in atomic mass from 169 to 205. The most stable of these is with a half-life of 186.1 days. The least stable is , which decays by proton emission with a half-life of 30 μs. Most of gold&#x27;s radioisotopes with atomic masses below 197 decay by some combination of proton emission, α decay, and β+ decay. The exceptions are , which decays by electron capture, and , which decays most often by electron capture (93%) with a minor β− decay path (7%). All of gold&#x27;s radioisotopes with atomic masses above 197 decay by β− decay.

At least 32 nuclear isomers have also been characterized, ranging in atomic mass from 170 to 200. Within that range, only , , , , and do not have isomers. Gold&#x27;s most stable isomer is with a half-life of 2.27 days. Gold&#x27;s least stable isomer is with a half-life of only 7 ns. has three decay paths: β+ decay, isomeric transition, and alpha decay. No other isomer or isotope of gold has three decay paths.

==== Synthesis ====

The possible production of gold from a more common element, such as lead, has long been a subject of human inquiry, and the ancient and medieval discipline of alchemy often focused on it; however, the transmutation of the chemical elements did not become possible until the understanding of nuclear physics in the 20th century. The first synthesis of gold was conducted by Japanese physicist Hantaro Nagaoka, who synthesized gold from mercury in 1924 by neutron bombardment. An American team, working without knowledge of Nagaoka&#x27;s prior study, conducted the same experiment in 1941, achieving the same result and showing that the isotopes of gold produced by it were all radioactive. In 1980, Glenn Seaborg transmuted several thousand atoms of bismuth into gold at the Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory. Gold can be manufactured in a nuclear reactor, but doing so is highly impractical and would cost far more than the value of the gold that is produced.

== Chemistry ==
Although gold is the most noble of the noble metals, it still forms many diverse compounds. The oxidation state of gold in its compounds ranges from −1 to +5, but Au(I) and Au(III) dominate its chemistry. Au(I), referred to as the aurous ion, is the most common oxidation state with soft ligands such as thioethers, thiolates, and organophosphines. Au(I) compounds are typically linear. A good example is , which is the soluble form of gold encountered in mining. The binary gold halides, such as AuCl, form zigzag polymeric chains, again featuring linear coordination at Au. Most drugs based on gold are Au(I) derivatives.

Au(III) (referred to as auric) is a common oxidation state, and is illustrated by gold(III) chloride, . The gold atom centers in Au(III) complexes, like other d8 compounds, are typically square planar, with chemical bonds that have both covalent and ionic character. Gold(I,III) chloride is also known, an example of a mixed-valence complex.

Gold does not react with oxygen at any temperature and, up to 100 °C, is resistant to attack from ozone:
formula_1
formula_2

Some free halogens react to form the corresponding gold halides. Gold is strongly attacked by fluorine at dull-red heat to form gold(III) fluoride . Powdered gold reacts with chlorine at 180 °C to form gold(III) chloride . Gold reacts with bromine at 140 °C to form a combination of gold(III) bromide and gold(I) bromide AuBr, but reacts very slowly with iodine to form gold(I) iodide AuI:
&lt;chem display=block&gt;2 Au{} + 3 F2 -&gt;[{}\atop\Delta] 2 AuF3&lt;/chem&gt;
&lt;chem display=block&gt;2 Au{} + 3 Cl2 -&gt;[{}\atop\Delta] 2 AuCl3&lt;/chem&gt;
&lt;chem display=block&gt;2 Au{} + 2 Br2 -&gt;[{}\atop\Delta] AuBr3{} + AuBr&lt;/chem&gt;
&lt;chem display=block&gt;2 Au{} + I2 -&gt;[{}\atop\Delta] 2 AuI&lt;/chem&gt;

Gold does not react with sulfur directly, but gold(III) sulfide can be made by passing hydrogen sulfide through a dilute solution of gold(III) chloride or chlorauric acid.

Unlike sulfur, phosphorus reacts directly with gold at elevated temperatures to produce gold phosphide (Au2P3).

Gold readily dissolves in mercury at room temperature to form an amalgam, and forms alloys with many other metals at higher temperatures. These alloys can be produced to modify the hardness and other metallurgical properties, to control melting point or to create exotic colors.

Gold is unaffected by most acids. It does not react with hydrofluoric, hydrochloric, hydrobromic, hydriodic, sulfuric, or nitric acid. It does react with selenic acid, and is dissolved by aqua regia, a 1:3 mixture of nitric acid and hydrochloric acid. Nitric acid oxidizes the metal to +3 ions, but only in minute amounts, typically undetectable in the pure acid because of the chemical equilibrium of the reaction. However, the ions are removed from the equilibrium by hydrochloric acid, forming ions, or chloroauric acid, thereby enabling further oxidation:
&lt;chem display=block&gt;2 Au{} + 6 H2SeO4 -&gt;[{}\atop{200^\circ\text{C}}] Au2(SeO4)3{} + 3 H2SeO3{} + 3 H2O&lt;/chem&gt;
&lt;chem display=block&gt;Au{} + 4HCl{} + HNO3 -&gt; HAuCl4{} + NO\uparrow + 2H2O &lt;/chem&gt;

Gold is similarly unaffected by most bases. It does not react with aqueous, solid, or molten sodium or potassium hydroxide. It does however, react with sodium or potassium cyanide under alkaline conditions when oxygen is present to form soluble complexes.

Common oxidation states of gold include +1 (gold(I) or aurous compounds) and +3 (gold(III) or auric compounds). Gold ions in solution are readily reduced and precipitated as metal by adding any other metal as the reducing agent. The added metal is oxidized and dissolves, allowing the gold to be displaced from solution and be recovered as a solid precipitate.

=== Rare oxidation states ===
Less common oxidation states of gold include −1, +2, and +5.

The −1 oxidation state occurs in aurides, compounds containing the anion. Caesium auride (CsAu), for example, crystallizes in the caesium chloride motif; rubidium, potassium, and tetramethylammonium aurides are also known. Gold has the highest electron affinity of any metal, at 222.8 kJ/mol, making a stable species, analogous to the halides.

Gold also has a –1 oxidation state in covalent complexes with the group 4 transition metals, such as in titanium tetraauride and the analogous zirconium and hafnium compounds. These chemicals are expected to form gold-bridged dimers in a manner similar to titanium(IV) hydride.

Gold(II) compounds are usually diamagnetic with Au–Au bonds such as [. The evaporation of a solution of in concentrated produces red crystals of gold(II) sulfate, . Originally thought to be a mixed-valence compound, it has been shown to contain cations, analogous to the better-known mercury(I) ion, . A gold(II) complex, the tetraxenonogold(II) cation, which contains xenon as a ligand, occurs in . In September 2023, a novel type of metal-halide perovskite material consisting of Au3+ and Au2+ cations in its crystal structure has been found. It has been shown to be unexpectedly stable at normal conditions.

Gold pentafluoride, along with its derivative anion, , and its difluorine complex, gold heptafluoride, is the sole example of gold(V), the highest verified oxidation state.

Some gold compounds exhibit &quot;aurophilic bonding&quot;, which describes the tendency of gold ions to interact at distances that are too long to be a conventional Au–Au bond but shorter than van der Waals bonding. The interaction is estimated to be comparable in strength to that of a hydrogen bond.

Well-defined cluster compounds are numerous. In some cases, gold has a fractional oxidation state. A representative example is the octahedral species .

== Origin ==
=== Gold production in the universe ===

Gold is thought to have been produced in supernova nucleosynthesis, and from the collision of neutron stars, and to have been present in the dust from which the Solar System formed.

Traditionally, gold in the universe is thought to have formed by the r-process (rapid neutron capture) in supernova nucleosynthesis, but more recently it has been suggested that gold and other elements heavier than iron may also be produced in quantity by the r-process in the collision of neutron stars. In both cases, satellite spectrometers at first only indirectly detected the resulting gold. However, in August 2017, the spectroscopic signatures of heavy elements, including gold, were observed by electromagnetic observatories in the GW170817 neutron star merger event, after gravitational wave detectors confirmed the event as a neutron star merger. Current astrophysical models suggest that this single neutron star merger event generated between 3 and 13 Earth masses of gold. This amount, along with estimations of the rate of occurrence of these neutron star merger events, suggests that such mergers may produce enough gold to account for most of the abundance of this element in the universe.

=== Asteroid origin theories ===
Because the Earth was molten when it was formed, almost all of the gold present in the early Earth probably sank into the planetary core. Therefore, as hypothesized in one model, most of the gold in the Earth&#x27;s crust and mantle is thought to have been delivered to Earth by asteroid impacts during the Late Heavy Bombardment, about 4 billion years ago.

Gold which is reachable by humans has, in one case, been associated with a particular asteroid impact. The asteroid that formed Vredefort impact structure 2.020 billion years ago is often credited with seeding the Witwatersrand basin in South Africa with the richest gold deposits on earth. However, this scenario is now questioned. The gold-bearing Witwatersrand rocks were laid down between 700 and 950 million years before the Vredefort impact. These gold-bearing rocks had furthermore been covered by a thick layer of Ventersdorp lavas and the Transvaal Supergroup of rocks before the meteor struck, and thus the gold did not actually arrive in the asteroid/meteorite. What the Vredefort impact achieved, however, was to distort the Witwatersrand basin in such a way that the gold-bearing rocks were brought to the present erosion surface in Johannesburg, on the Witwatersrand, just inside the rim of the original diameter crater caused by the meteor strike. The discovery of the deposit in 1886 launched the Witwatersrand Gold Rush. Some 22% of all the gold that is ascertained to exist today on Earth has been extracted from these Witwatersrand rocks.

=== Mantle return theories ===
Much of the rest of the gold on Earth is thought to have been incorporated into the planet since its very beginning, as planetesimals formed the mantle. In 2017, an international group of scientists established that gold &quot;came to the Earth&#x27;s surface from the deepest regions of our planet&quot;, the mantle, as evidenced by their findings at Deseado Massif in the Argentinian Patagonia.

== Occurrence ==
On Earth, gold is found in ores in rock formed from the Precambrian time onward. It most often occurs as a native metal, typically in a metal solid solution with silver (i.e. as a gold/silver alloy). Such alloys usually have a silver content of 8–10%. Electrum is elemental gold with more than 20% silver, and is commonly known as white gold. Electrum&#x27;s color runs from golden-silvery to silvery, dependent upon the silver content. The more silver, the lower the specific gravity.

Native gold occurs as very small to microscopic particles embedded in rock, often together with quartz or sulfide minerals such as &quot;fool&#x27;s gold&quot;, which is a pyrite. These are called lode deposits. The metal in a native state is also found in the form of free flakes, grains or larger nuggets that have been eroded from rocks and end up in alluvial deposits called placer deposits. Such free gold is always richer at the exposed surface of gold-bearing veins, owing to the oxidation of accompanying minerals followed by weathering; and by washing of the dust into streams and rivers, where it collects and can be welded by water action to form nuggets.

Gold sometimes occurs combined with tellurium as the minerals calaverite, krennerite, nagyagite, petzite and sylvanite (see telluride minerals), and as the rare bismuthide maldonite () and antimonide aurostibite (). Gold also occurs in rare alloys with copper, lead, and mercury: the minerals auricupride (), novodneprite () and weishanite ().

A 2004 research paper suggests that microbes can sometimes play an important role in forming gold deposits, transporting and precipitating gold to form grains and nuggets that collect in alluvial deposits.

A 2013 study has claimed water in faults vaporizes during an earthquake, depositing gold. When an earthquake strikes, it moves along a fault. Water often lubricates faults, filling in fractures and jogs. About below the surface, under very high temperatures and pressures, the water carries high concentrations of carbon dioxide, silica, and gold. During an earthquake, the fault jog suddenly opens wider. The water inside the void instantly vaporizes, flashing to steam and forcing silica, which forms the mineral quartz, and gold out of the fluids and onto nearby surfaces.

=== Seawater ===
The world&#x27;s oceans contain gold. Measured concentrations of gold in the Atlantic and Northeast Pacific are 50–150 femtomol/L or 10–30 parts per quadrillion (about 10–30 g/km3). In general, gold concentrations for south Atlantic and central Pacific samples are the same (~50 femtomol/L) but less certain. Mediterranean deep waters contain slightly higher concentrations of gold (100–150 femtomol/L), which is attributed to wind-blown dust or rivers. At 10 parts per quadrillion, the Earth&#x27;s oceans would hold 15,000 tonnes of gold. These figures are three orders of magnitude less than reported in the literature prior to 1988, indicating contamination problems with the earlier data.

A number of people have claimed to be able to economically recover gold from sea water, but they were either mistaken or acted in an intentional deception. Prescott Jernegan ran a gold-from-seawater swindle in the United States in the 1890s, as did an English fraudster in the early 1900s. Fritz Haber did research on the extraction of gold from sea water in an effort to help pay Germany&#x27;s reparations following World War I. Based on the published values of 2 to 64 ppb of gold in seawater, a commercially successful extraction seemed possible. After analysis of 4,000 water samples yielding an average of 0.004 ppb, it became clear that extraction would not be possible, and he ended the project.

== History ==

The earliest recorded metal employed by humans appears to be gold, which can be found free or &quot;native&quot;. Small amounts of natural gold have been found in Spanish caves used during the late Paleolithic period, .

The oldest gold artifacts in the world are from Bulgaria and are dating back to the 5th millennium BC (4,600 BC to 4,200 BC), such as those found in the Varna Necropolis near Lake Varna and the Black Sea coast, thought to be the earliest &quot;well-dated&quot; finding of gold artifacts in history.

Gold artifacts probably made their first appearance in Ancient Egypt at the very beginning of the pre-dynastic period, at the end of the fifth millennium BC and the start of the fourth, and smelting was developed during the course of the 4th millennium; gold artifacts appear in the archeology of Lower Mesopotamia during the early 4th millennium. As of 1990, gold artifacts found at the Wadi Qana cave cemetery of the 4th millennium BC in West Bank were the earliest from the Levant. Gold artifacts such as the golden hats and the Nebra disk appeared in Central Europe from the 2nd millennium BC Bronze Age.

The oldest known map of a gold mine was drawn in the 19th Dynasty of Ancient Egypt (1320–1200 BC), whereas the first written reference to gold was recorded in the 12th Dynasty around 1900 BC. Egyptian hieroglyphs from as early as 2600 BC describe gold, which King Tushratta of the Mitanni claimed was &quot;more plentiful than dirt&quot; in Egypt. Egypt and especially Nubia had the resources to make them major gold-producing areas for much of history. One of the earliest known maps, known as the Turin Papyrus Map, shows the plan of a gold mine in Nubia together with indications of the local geology. The primitive working methods are described by both Strabo and Diodorus Siculus, and included fire-setting. Large mines were also present across the Red Sea in what is now Saudi Arabia.
Gold is mentioned in the Amarna letters numbered 19 and 26 from around the 14th century BC.

Gold is mentioned frequently in the Old Testament, starting with Genesis 2:11 (at Havilah), the story of the golden calf, and many parts of the temple including the Menorah and the golden altar. In the New Testament, it is included with the gifts of the magi in the first chapters of Matthew. The Book of Revelation 21:21 describes the city of New Jerusalem as having streets &quot;made of pure gold, clear as crystal&quot;. Exploitation of gold in the south-east corner of the Black Sea is said to date from the time of Midas, and this gold was important in the establishment of what is probably the world&#x27;s earliest coinage in Lydia around 610 BC. The legend of the golden fleece dating from eighth century BCE may refer to the use of fleeces to trap gold dust from placer deposits in the ancient world. From the 6th or 5th century BC, the Chu (state) circulated the Ying Yuan, one kind of square gold coin.

In Roman metallurgy, new methods for extracting gold on a large scale were developed by introducing hydraulic mining methods, especially in Hispania from 25 BC onwards and in Dacia from 106 AD onwards. One of their largest mines was at Las Medulas in León, where seven long aqueducts enabled them to sluice most of a large alluvial deposit. The mines at Roşia Montană in Transylvania were also very large, and until very recently, still mined by opencast methods. They also exploited smaller deposits in Britain, such as placer and hard-rock deposits at Dolaucothi. The various methods they used are well described by Pliny the Elder in his encyclopedia &quot;Naturalis Historia&quot; written towards the end of the first century AD.

During Mansa Musa&#x27;s (ruler of the Mali Empire from 1312 to 1337) hajj to Mecca in 1324, he passed through Cairo in July 1324, and was reportedly accompanied by a camel train that included thousands of people and nearly a hundred camels where he gave away so much gold that it depressed the price in Egypt for over a decade, causing high inflation. A contemporary Arab historian remarked:


The European exploration of the Americas was fueled in no small part by reports of the gold ornaments displayed in great profusion by Native American peoples, especially in Mesoamerica, Peru, Ecuador and Colombia. The Aztecs regarded gold as the product of the gods, calling it literally &quot;god excrement&quot; (&quot;teocuitlatl&quot; in Nahuatl), and after Moctezuma II was killed, most of this gold was shipped to Spain. However, for the indigenous peoples of North America gold was considered useless and they saw much greater value in other minerals which were directly related to their utility, such as obsidian, flint, and slate.

El Dorado is applied to a legendary story in which precious stones were found in fabulous abundance along with gold coins. The concept of El Dorado underwent several transformations, and eventually accounts of the previous myth were also combined with those of a legendary lost city. El Dorado, was the term used by the Spanish Empire to describe a mythical tribal chief (zipa) of the Muisca native people in Colombia, who, as an initiation rite, covered himself with gold dust and submerged in Lake Guatavita. The legends surrounding El Dorado changed over time, as it went from being a man, to a city, to a kingdom, and then finally to an empire.

Beginning in the early modern period, European exploration and colonization of West Africa was driven in large part by reports of gold deposits in the region, which was eventually referred to by Europeans as the &quot;Gold Coast&quot;. From the late 15th to early 19th centuries, European trade in the region was primarily focused in gold, along with ivory and slaves. The gold trade in West Africa was dominated by the Ashanti Empire, who initially traded with the Portuguese before branching out and trading with British, French, Spanish and Danish merchants. British desires to secure control of West African gold deposits played a role in the Anglo-Ashanti wars of the late 19th century, which saw the Ashanti Empire annexed by Britain.

Gold played a role in western culture, as a cause for desire and of corruption, as told in children&#x27;s fables such as Rumpelstiltskin—where Rumpelstiltskin turns hay into gold for the peasant&#x27;s daughter in return for her child when she becomes a princess—and the stealing of the hen that lays golden eggs in Jack and the Beanstalk.

The top prize at the Olympic Games and many other sports competitions is the gold medal.

75% of the presently accounted for gold has been extracted since 1910, two-thirds since 1950.

One main goal of the alchemists was to produce gold from other substances, such as lead — presumably by the interaction with a mythical substance called the philosopher&#x27;s stone. Trying to produce gold led the alchemists to systematically find out what can be done with substances, and this laid the foundation for today&#x27;s chemistry, which can produce gold (albeit uneconomically) by using nuclear transmutation. Their symbol for gold was the circle with a point at its center (☉), which was also the astrological symbol and the ancient Chinese character for the Sun.

The Dome of the Rock is covered with an ultra-thin golden glassier. The Sikh Golden temple, the Harmandir Sahib, is a building covered with gold. Similarly the Wat Phra Kaew emerald Buddhist temple (wat) in Thailand has ornamental gold-leafed statues and roofs. Some European king and queen&#x27;s crowns were made of gold, and gold was used for the bridal crown since antiquity. An ancient Talmudic text circa 100 AD describes Rachel, wife of Rabbi Akiva, receiving a &quot;Jerusalem of Gold&quot; (diadem). A Greek burial crown made of gold was found in a grave circa 370 BC.

=== Etymology ===

&quot;Gold&quot; is cognate with similar words in many Germanic languages, deriving via Proto-Germanic from Proto-Indo-European .

The symbol &quot;Au&quot; is from the Latin . The Proto-Indo-European ancestor of &quot;aurum&quot; was &quot;*h₂é-h₂us-o-&quot;, meaning . This word is derived from the same root (Proto-Indo-European &quot;*h₂u̯es-&quot; ) as , the ancestor of the Latin word . This etymological relationship is presumably behind the frequent claim in scientific publications that meant .

=== Culture ===
In popular culture gold is a high standard of excellence, often used in awards. Great achievements are frequently rewarded with gold, in the form of gold medals, gold trophies and other decorations. Winners of athletic events and other graded competitions are usually awarded a gold medal. Many awards such as the Nobel Prize are made from gold as well. Other award statues and prizes are depicted in gold or are gold plated (such as the Academy Awards, the Golden Globe Awards, the Emmy Awards, the Palme d&#x27;Or, and the British Academy Film Awards).

Aristotle in his ethics used gold symbolism when referring to what is now known as the golden mean. Similarly, gold is associated with perfect or divine principles, such as in the case of the golden ratio and the Golden Rule. Gold is further associated with the wisdom of aging and fruition. The fiftieth wedding anniversary is golden. A person&#x27;s most valued or most successful latter years are sometimes considered &quot;golden years&quot; or &quot;golden jubilee&quot;. The height of a civilization is referred to as a golden age.

==== Religion ====

The first known prehistoric human usages of gold were religious in nature.

In some forms of Christianity and Judaism, gold has been associated both with the sacred and evil. In the Book of Exodus, the Golden Calf is a symbol of idolatry, while in the Book of Genesis, Abraham was said to be rich in gold and silver, and Moses was instructed to cover the Mercy Seat of the Ark of the Covenant with pure gold. In Byzantine iconography the halos of Christ, Virgin Mary and the saints are often golden.

In Islam, gold (along with silk) is often cited as being forbidden for men to wear. Abu Bakr al-Jazaeri, quoting a hadith, said that &quot;[t]he wearing of silk and gold are forbidden on the males of my nation, and they are lawful to their women&quot;. This, however, has not been enforced consistently throughout history, e.g. in the Ottoman Empire. Further, small gold accents on clothing, such as in embroidery, may be permitted.

In ancient Greek religion and mythology, Theia was seen as the goddess of gold, silver and other gemstones.

According to Christopher Columbus, those who had something of gold were in possession of something of great value on Earth and a substance to even help souls to paradise.

Wedding rings are typically made of gold. It is long lasting and unaffected by the passage of time and may aid in the ring symbolism of eternal vows before God and the perfection the marriage signifies. In Orthodox Christian wedding ceremonies, the wedded couple is adorned with a golden crown (though some opt for wreaths, instead) during the ceremony, an amalgamation of symbolic rites.

On 24 August 2020, Israeli archaeologists discovered a trove of early Islamic gold coins near the central city of Yavne. Analysis of the extremely rare collection of 425 gold coins indicated that they were from the late 9th century. Dating to around 1,100 years back, the gold coins were from the Abbasid Caliphate.

== Production ==
According to the United States Geological Survey in 2016, about of gold has been accounted for, of which 85% remains in active use.

=== Mining and prospecting ===

Since the 1880s, South Africa has been the source of a large proportion of the world&#x27;s gold supply, and about 22% of the gold presently accounted is from South Africa. Production in 1970 accounted for 79% of the world supply, about 1,480 tonnes. In 2007 China (with 276 tonnes) overtook South Africa as the world&#x27;s largest gold producer, the first time since 1905 that South Africa had not been the largest.

In 2023, China was the world&#x27;s leading gold-mining country, followed in order by Russia, Australia, Canada, the United States and Ghana.
In South America, the controversial project Pascua Lama aims at exploitation of rich fields in the high mountains of Atacama Desert, at the border between Chile and Argentina.

It has been estimated that up to one-quarter of the yearly global gold production originates from artisanal or small scale mining.

The city of Johannesburg located in South Africa was founded as a result of the Witwatersrand Gold Rush which resulted in the discovery of some of the largest natural gold deposits in recorded history. The gold fields are confined to the northern and north-western edges of the Witwatersrand basin, which is a thick layer of archean rocks located, in most places, deep under the Free State, Gauteng and surrounding provinces. These Witwatersrand rocks are exposed at the surface on the Witwatersrand, in and around Johannesburg, but also in isolated patches to the south-east and south-west of Johannesburg, as well as in an arc around the Vredefort Dome which lies close to the center of the Witwatersrand basin. From these surface exposures the basin dips extensively, requiring some of the mining to occur at depths of nearly , making them, especially the Savuka and TauTona mines to the south-west of Johannesburg, the deepest mines on Earth. The gold is found only in six areas where archean rivers from the north and north-west formed extensive pebbly Braided river deltas before draining into the &quot;Witwatersrand sea&quot; where the rest of the Witwatersrand sediments were deposited.

The Second Boer War of 1899–1901 between the British Empire and the Afrikaner Boers was at least partly over the rights of miners and possession of the gold wealth in South Africa.
During the 19th century, gold rushes occurred whenever large gold deposits were discovered. The first documented discovery of gold in the United States was at the Reed Gold Mine near Georgeville, North Carolina in 1803. The first major gold strike in the United States occurred in a small north Georgia town called Dahlonega. Further gold rushes occurred in California, Colorado, the Black Hills, Otago in New Zealand, a number of locations across Australia, Witwatersrand in South Africa, and the Klondike in Canada.

Grasberg mine located in Papua, Indonesia is the largest gold mine in the world.

=== Extraction and refining ===
Gold extraction is most economical in large, easily mined deposits. Ore grades as little as 0.5 parts per million (ppm) can be economical. Typical ore grades in open-pit mines are 1–5 ppm; ore grades in underground or hard rock mines are usually at least 3 ppm. Because ore grades of 30 ppm are usually needed before gold is visible to the naked eye, in most gold mines the gold is invisible.

The average gold mining and extraction costs were about $317 per troy ounce in 2007, but these can vary widely depending on mining type and ore quality; global mine production amounted to 2,471.1 tonnes.

After initial production, gold is often subsequently refined industrially by the Wohlwill process which is based on electrolysis or by the Miller process, that is chlorination in the melt. The Wohlwill process results in higher purity, but is more complex and is only applied in small-scale installations. Other methods of assaying and purifying smaller amounts of gold include parting and inquartation as well as cupellation, or refining methods based on the dissolution of gold in aqua regia.

=== Recycling ===
In 1997, recycled gold accounted for approximately 20% of the 2700 tons of gold supplied to the market. Jewelry companies such as Generation Collection and computer companies including Dell conduct recycling.

As of 2020, the amount of carbon dioxide produced in mining a kilogram of gold is 16 tonnes, while recycling a kilogram of gold produces 53 kilograms of equivalent. Approximately 30 percent of the global gold supply is recycled and not mined as of 2020.

=== Consumption ===
The consumption of gold produced in the world is about 50% in jewelry, 40% in investments, and 10% in industry.

According to the World Gold Council, China was the world&#x27;s largest single consumer of gold in 2013, overtaking India.

=== Pollution ===

Gold production is associated with contribution to hazardous pollution.

Low-grade gold ore may contain less than one ppm gold metal; such ore is ground and mixed with sodium cyanide to dissolve the gold. Cyanide is a highly poisonous chemical, which can kill living creatures when exposed in minute quantities. Many cyanide spills from gold mines have occurred in both developed and developing countries which killed aquatic life in long stretches of affected rivers. Environmentalists consider these events major environmental disasters. Up to thirty tons of used ore can be dumped as waste for producing one troy ounce of gold. Gold ore dumps are the source of many heavy elements such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, arsenic, selenium and mercury. When sulfide-bearing minerals in these ore dumps are exposed to air and water, the sulfide transforms into sulfuric acid which in turn dissolves these heavy metals facilitating their passage into surface water and ground water. This process is called acid mine drainage. These gold ore dumps contain long-term, highly hazardous waste.

It was once common to use mercury to recover gold from ore, but today the use of mercury is largely limited to small-scale individual miners. Minute quantities of mercury compounds can reach water bodies, causing heavy metal contamination. Mercury can then enter into the human food chain in the form of methylmercury. Mercury poisoning in humans can cause severe brain damage.

Gold extraction is also a highly energy-intensive industry, extracting ore from deep mines and grinding the large quantity of ore for further chemical extraction requires nearly 25 kWh of electricity per gram of gold produced.

== Monetary use ==
Gold has been widely used throughout the world as money, for efficient indirect exchange (versus barter), and to store wealth in hoards. For exchange purposes, mints produce standardized gold bullion coins, bars and other units of fixed weight and purity.

The first known coins containing gold were struck in Lydia, Asia Minor, around 600 BC. The &quot;talent&quot; coin of gold in use during the periods of Grecian history both before and during the time of the life of Homer weighed between 8.42 and 8.75 grams. From an earlier preference in using silver, European economies re-established the minting of gold as coinage during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.

Bills (that mature into gold coin) and gold certificates (convertible into gold coin at the issuing bank) added to the circulating stock of gold standard money in most 19th century industrial economies. In preparation for World War I the warring nations moved to fractional gold standards, inflating their currencies to finance the war effort. Post-war, the victorious countries, most notably Britain, gradually restored gold-convertibility, but international flows of gold via bills of exchange remained embargoed; international shipments were made exclusively for bilateral trades or to pay war reparations.

After World War II gold was replaced by a system of nominally convertible currencies related by fixed exchange rates following the Bretton Woods system. Gold standards and the direct convertibility of currencies to gold have been abandoned by world governments, led in 1971 by the United States&#x27; refusal to redeem its dollars in gold. Fiat currency now fills most monetary roles. Switzerland was the last country to tie its currency to gold; this was ended by a referendum in 1999.
Central banks continue to keep a portion of their liquid reserves as gold in some form, and metals exchanges such as the London Bullion Market Association still clear transactions denominated in gold, including future delivery contracts. Today, gold mining output is declining. With the sharp growth of economies in the 20th century, and increasing foreign exchange, the world&#x27;s gold reserves and their trading market have become a small fraction of all markets and fixed exchange rates of currencies to gold have been replaced by floating prices for gold and gold future contract. Though the gold stock grows by only 1% or 2% per year, very little metal is irretrievably consumed. Inventory above ground would satisfy many decades of industrial and even artisan uses at current prices.

The gold proportion (fineness) of alloys is measured by karat (k). Pure gold (commercially termed &quot;fine&quot; gold) is designated as 24 karat, abbreviated 24k. English gold coins intended for circulation from 1526 into the 1930s were typically a standard 22k alloy called crown gold, for hardness (American gold coins for circulation after 1837 contain an alloy of 0.900 fine gold, or 21.6 kt).

Although the prices of some platinum group metals can be much higher, gold has long been considered the most desirable of precious metals, and its value has been used as the standard for many currencies. Gold has been used as a symbol for purity, value, royalty, and particularly roles that combine these properties. Gold as a sign of wealth and prestige was ridiculed by Thomas More in his treatise &quot;Utopia&quot;. On that imaginary island, gold is so abundant that it is used to make chains for slaves, tableware, and lavatory seats. When ambassadors from other countries arrive, dressed in ostentatious gold jewels and badges, the Utopians mistake them for menial servants, paying homage instead to the most modestly dressed of their party.

The ISO 4217 currency code of gold is XAU. Many holders of gold store it in form of bullion coins or bars as a hedge against inflation or other economic disruptions, though its efficacy as such has been questioned; historically, it has not proven itself reliable as a hedging instrument. Modern bullion coins for investment or collector purposes do not require good mechanical wear properties; they are typically fine gold at 24k, although the American Gold Eagle and the British gold sovereign continue to be minted in 22k (0.92) metal in historical tradition, and the South African Krugerrand, first released in 1967, is also 22k (0.92).

The &quot;special issue&quot; Canadian Gold Maple Leaf coin contains the highest purity gold of any bullion coin, at 99.999% or 0.99999, while the &quot;popular issue&quot; Canadian Gold Maple Leaf coin has a purity of 99.99%. In 2006, the United States Mint began producing the American Buffalo gold bullion coin with a purity of 99.99%. The Australian Gold Kangaroos were first coined in 1986 as the Australian Gold Nugget but changed the reverse design in 1989. Other modern coins include the Austrian Vienna Philharmonic bullion coin and the Chinese Gold Panda.

=== Price ===

Like other precious metals, gold is measured by troy weight and by grams. The proportion of gold in the alloy is measured by &quot;karat&quot; (k), with 24 karat (24k) being pure gold (100%), and lower karat numbers proportionally less (18k = 75%). The purity of a gold bar or coin can also be expressed as a decimal figure ranging from 0 to 1, known as the millesimal fineness, such as 0.995 being nearly pure.

The price of gold is determined through trading in the gold and derivatives markets, but a procedure known as the Gold Fixing in London, originating in September 1919, provides a daily benchmark price to the industry. The afternoon fixing was introduced in 1968 to provide a price when US markets are open. , gold was valued at around $92 per gram ($2,850 per troy ounce).

==== History ====
Historically gold coinage was widely used as currency; when paper money was introduced, it typically was a receipt redeemable for gold coin or bullion. In a monetary system known as the gold standard, a certain weight of gold was given the name of a unit of currency. For a long period, the United States government set the value of the US dollar so that one troy ounce was equal to $20.67 ($0.665 per gram), but in 1934 the dollar was devalued to $35.00 per troy ounce ($0.889/g). By 1961, it was becoming hard to maintain this price, and a pool of US and European banks agreed to manipulate the market to prevent further currency devaluation against increased gold demand.

The largest gold depository in the world is that of the U.S. Federal Reserve Bank in New York, which holds about 3% of the gold known to exist and accounted for today, as does the similarly laden U.S. Bullion Depository at Fort Knox. In 2005 the World Gold Council estimated total global gold supply to be 3,859 tonnes and demand to be 3,754 tonnes, giving a surplus of 105 tonnes.

After 15 August 1971 Nixon shock, the price began to greatly increase, and between 1968 and 2000 the price of gold ranged widely, from a high of $850 per troy ounce ($27.33/g) on 21 January 1980, to a low of $252.90 per troy ounce ($8.13/g) on 21 June 1999 (London Gold Fixing). Prices increased rapidly from 2001, but the 1980 high was not exceeded until 3 January 2008, when a new maximum of $865.35 per troy ounce was set. Another record price was set on 17 March 2008, at $1023.50 per troy ounce ($32.91/g).

On 2 December 2009, gold reached a new high closing at $1,217.23. Gold further rallied hitting new highs in May 2010 after the European Union debt crisis prompted further purchase of gold as a safe asset. On 1 March 2011, gold hit a new all-time high of $1432.57, based on investor concerns regarding ongoing unrest in North Africa as well as in the Middle East.

From April 2001 to August 2011, spot gold prices more than quintupled in value against the US dollar, hitting a new all-time high of $1,913.50 on 23 August 2011, prompting speculation that the long secular bear market had ended and a bull market had returned. However, the price then began a slow decline towards $1200 per troy ounce in late 2014 and 2015.

In August 2020, the gold price picked up to US$2060 per ounce after a total growth of 59% from August 2018 to October 2020, a period during which it outplaced the Nasdaq total return of 54%.

Gold futures are traded on the COMEX exchange. These contacts are priced in USD per troy ounce (1 troy ounce = 31.1034768 grams). Below are the CQG contract specifications outlining the futures contracts:
== Other applications ==
=== Jewelry ===
Because of the softness of pure (24k) gold, it is usually alloyed with other metals for use in jewelry, altering its hardness and ductility, melting point, color and other properties. Alloys with lower karat rating, typically 22k, 18k, 14k or 10k, contain higher percentages of copper, silver, palladium or other base metals in the alloy. Nickel is toxic, and its release from nickel white gold is controlled by legislation in Europe. Palladium-gold alloys are more expensive than those using nickel. High-karat white gold alloys are more resistant to corrosion than are either pure silver or sterling silver. The Japanese craft of Mokume-gane exploits the color contrasts between laminated colored gold alloys to produce decorative wood-grain effects.

By 2014, the gold jewelry industry was escalating despite a dip in gold prices. Demand in the first quarter of 2014 pushed turnover to $23.7 billion according to a World Gold Council report.

Gold solder is used for joining the components of gold jewelry by high-temperature hard soldering or brazing. If the work is to be of hallmarking quality, the gold solder alloy must match the fineness of the work, and alloy formulas are manufactured to color-match yellow and white gold. Gold solder is usually made in at least three melting-point ranges referred to as Easy, Medium and Hard. By using the hard, high-melting point solder first, followed by solders with progressively lower melting points, goldsmiths can assemble complex items with several separate soldered joints. Gold can also be made into thread and used in embroidery.

=== Electronics ===
Only 10% of the world consumption of new gold produced goes to industry, but by far the most important industrial use for new gold is in fabrication of corrosion-free electrical connectors in computers and other electrical devices. For example, according to the World Gold Council, a typical cell phone may contain 50 mg of gold, worth about three dollars. But since nearly one billion cell phones are produced each year, a gold value of US$2.82 in each phone adds to US$2.82 billion in gold from just this application. (Prices updated to November 2022)

Though gold is attacked by free chlorine, its good conductivity and general resistance to oxidation and corrosion in other environments (including resistance to non-chlorinated acids) has led to its widespread industrial use in the electronic era as a thin-layer coating on electrical connectors, thereby ensuring good connection. For example, gold is used in the connectors of the more expensive electronics cables, such as audio, video and USB cables. The benefit of using gold over other connector metals such as tin in these applications has been debated; gold connectors are often criticized by audio-visual experts as unnecessary for most consumers and seen as simply a marketing ploy. However, the use of gold in other applications in electronic sliding contacts in highly humid or corrosive atmospheres, and in use for contacts with a very high failure cost (certain computers, communications equipment, spacecraft, jet aircraft engines) remains very common.

Besides sliding electrical contacts, gold is also used in electrical contacts because of its resistance to corrosion, electrical conductivity, ductility and lack of toxicity. Switch contacts are generally subjected to more intense corrosion stress than are sliding contacts. Fine gold wires are used to connect semiconductor devices to their packages through a process known as wire bonding.

The concentration of free electrons in gold metal is 5.91×1022 cm−3. Gold is highly conductive to electricity and has been used for electrical wiring in some high-energy applications (only silver and copper are more conductive per volume, but gold has the advantage of corrosion resistance). For example, gold electrical wires were used during some of the Manhattan Project&#x27;s atomic experiments, but large high-current silver wires were used in the calutron isotope separator magnets in the project.

It is estimated that 16% of the world&#x27;s presently-accounted-for gold and 22% of the world&#x27;s silver is contained in electronic technology in Japan.

=== Medicine ===
There are only two gold compounds currently employed as pharmaceuticals in modern medicine (sodium aurothiomalate and auranofin), used in the treatment of arthritis and other similar conditions in the US due to their anti-inflammatory properties. These drugs have been explored as a means to help to reduce the pain and swelling of rheumatoid arthritis, and also (historically) against tuberculosis and some parasites.

Some esotericists and forms of alternative medicine assign metallic gold a healing power, against the scientific consensus.

Historically, metallic and gold compounds have long been used for medicinal purposes. Gold, usually as the metal, is perhaps the most anciently administered medicine (apparently by shamanic practitioners) and known to Dioscorides. In medieval times, gold was often seen as beneficial for the health, in the belief that something so rare and beautiful could not be anything but healthy.

In the 19th century gold had a reputation as an anxiolytic, a therapy for nervous disorders. Depression, epilepsy, migraine, and glandular problems such as amenorrhea and impotence were treated, and most notably alcoholism (Keeley, 1897).

The apparent paradox of the actual toxicology of the substance suggests the possibility of serious gaps in the understanding of the action of gold in physiology. Only salts and radioisotopes of gold are of pharmacological value, since elemental (metallic) gold is inert to all chemicals it encounters inside the body (e.g., ingested gold cannot be attacked by stomach acid).
Gold alloys are used in restorative dentistry, especially in tooth restorations, such as crowns and permanent bridges. The gold alloys&#x27; slight malleability facilitates the creation of a superior molar mating surface with other teeth and produces results that are generally more satisfactory than those produced by the creation of porcelain crowns. The use of gold crowns in more prominent teeth such as incisors is favored in some cultures and discouraged in others.

Colloidal gold preparations (suspensions of gold nanoparticles) in water are intensely red-colored, and can be made with tightly controlled particle sizes up to a few tens of nanometers across by reduction of gold chloride with citrate or ascorbate ions. Colloidal gold is used in research applications in medicine, biology and materials science. The technique of immunogold labeling exploits the ability of the gold particles to adsorb protein molecules onto their surfaces. Colloidal gold particles coated with specific antibodies can be used as probes for the presence and position of antigens on the surfaces of cells. In ultrathin sections of tissues viewed by electron microscopy, the immunogold labels appear as extremely dense round spots at the position of the antigen.

Gold, or alloys of gold and palladium, are applied as conductive coating to biological specimens and other non-conducting materials such as plastics and glass to be viewed in a scanning electron microscope. The coating, which is usually applied by sputtering with an argon plasma, has a triple role in this application. Gold&#x27;s very high electrical conductivity drains electrical charge to earth, and its very high density provides stopping power for electrons in the electron beam, helping to limit the depth to which the electron beam penetrates the specimen. This improves definition of the position and topography of the specimen surface and increases the spatial resolution of the image. Gold also produces a high output of secondary electrons when irradiated by an electron beam, and these low-energy electrons are the most commonly used signal source used in the scanning electron microscope.

The isotope gold-198 (half-life 2.7 days) is used in nuclear medicine, in some cancer treatments and for treating other diseases.

=== Cuisine ===

* Gold can be used in food and has the E number 175. In 2016, the European Food Safety Authority published an opinion on the re-evaluation of gold as a food additive. Concerns included the possible presence of minute amounts of gold nanoparticles in the food additive, and that gold nanoparticles have been shown to be genotoxic in mammalian cells in vitro.
* Gold leaf, flake or dust is used on and in some gourmet foods, notably sweets and drinks as decorative ingredient. Gold flake was used by the nobility in medieval Europe as a decoration in food and drinks,
* Danziger Goldwasser (German: Gold water of Danzig) or Goldwasser () is a traditional German herbal liqueur produced in what is today Gdańsk, Poland, and Schwabach, Germany, and contains flakes of gold leaf. There are also some expensive (c. $1000) cocktails which contain flakes of gold leaf. However, since metallic gold is inert to all body chemistry, it has no taste, it provides no nutrition, and it leaves the body unaltered.
* Vark is a foil composed of a pure metal that is sometimes gold, and is used for garnishing sweets in South Asian cuisine.

=== Miscellanea ===
* Gold produces a deep, intense red color when used as a coloring agent in cranberry glass.
* In photography, gold toners are used to shift the color of silver bromide black-and-white prints towards brown or blue tones, or to increase their stability. Used on sepia-toned prints, gold toners produce red tones. Kodak published formulas for several types of gold toners, which use gold as the chloride.
* Gold is a good reflector of electromagnetic radiation such as infrared and visible light, as well as radio waves. It is used for the protective coatings on many artificial satellites, in infrared protective faceplates in thermal-protection suits and astronauts&#x27; helmets, and in electronic warfare planes such as the EA-6B Prowler.
* Gold is used as the reflective layer on some high-end CDs.
* Automobiles may use gold for heat shielding. McLaren uses gold foil in the engine compartment of its F1 model.
* Gold can be manufactured so thin that it appears semi-transparent. It is used in some aircraft cockpit windows for de-icing or anti-icing by passing electricity through it. The heat produced by the resistance of the gold is enough to prevent ice from forming.
* Gold is attacked by and dissolves in alkaline solutions of potassium or sodium cyanide, to form the salt gold cyanide—a technique that has been used in extracting metallic gold from ores in the cyanide process. Gold cyanide is the electrolyte used in commercial electroplating of gold onto base metals and electroforming.
* Gold chloride (chloroauric acid) solutions are used to make colloidal gold by reduction with citrate or ascorbate ions. Gold chloride and gold oxide are used to make cranberry or red-colored glass, which, like colloidal gold suspensions, contains evenly sized spherical gold nanoparticles.
* Gold, when dispersed in nanoparticles, can act as a heterogeneous catalyst of chemical reactions.
* In recent years, gold has been used as a symbol of pride by the autism rights movement, as its symbol Au could be seen as similar to the word &quot;autism&quot;.

== Toxicity ==
Pure metallic (elemental) gold is non-toxic and non-irritating when ingested and is sometimes used as a food decoration in the form of gold leaf. Metallic gold is also a component of the alcoholic drinks Goldschläger, Gold Strike, and Goldwasser. Metallic gold is approved as a food additive in the EU (E175 in the Codex Alimentarius). Although the gold ion is toxic, the acceptance of metallic gold as a food additive is due to its relative chemical inertness, and resistance to being corroded or transformed into soluble salts (gold compounds) by any known chemical process which would be encountered in the human body.

Soluble compounds (gold salts) such as gold chloride are toxic to the liver and kidneys. Common cyanide salts of gold such as potassium gold cyanide, used in gold electroplating, are toxic by virtue of both their cyanide and gold content. There are rare cases of lethal gold poisoning from potassium gold cyanide. Gold toxicity can be ameliorated with chelation therapy with an agent such as dimercaprol.

Gold metal was voted Allergen of the Year in 2001 by the American Contact Dermatitis Society; gold contact allergies affect mostly women. Despite this, gold is a relatively non-potent contact allergen, in comparison with metals like nickel.

A sample of the fungus &quot;Aspergillus niger&quot; was found growing from gold mining solution; and was found to contain cyano metal complexes, such as gold, silver, copper, iron and zinc. The fungus also plays a role in the solubilization of heavy metal sulfides.

== See also ==
* Bulk leach extractable gold, for sampling ores
* Chrysiasis (dermatological condition)
* Digital gold currency, form of electronic currency
* GFMS business consultancy
* Gold fingerprinting, use impurities to identify an alloy
* Gold standard in banking
* List of countries by gold production
* Tumbaga, alloy of gold and copper
* Iron pyrite, fool&#x27;s gold
* Nordic gold, non-gold copper alloy
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Bachmann, H. G. &quot;The lure of gold : an artistic and cultural history&quot; (2006) online
* Bernstein, Peter L. &quot;The Power of Gold: The History of an Obsession&quot; (2000) online
* Brands, H.W. &quot;The Age of Gold: The California Gold Rush and the New American Dream&quot; (2003) excerpt
* Buranelli, Vincent. &quot;Gold : an illustrated history&quot; (1979) online&#x27; wide-ranging popular history
* Cassel, Gustav. &quot;The restoration of the gold standard.&quot; &quot;Economica&quot; 9 (1923): 171–185. online
* Eichengreen, Barry. &quot;Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919–1939&quot; (Oxford UP, 1992).
* Ferguson, Niall. &quot;The Ascent of Money – Financial History of the World&quot; (2009) online
* Hart, Matthew, Gold: The Race for the World&#x27;s Most Seductive Metal &quot;Gold : the race for the world&#x27;s most seductive metal&quot;, New York: Simon &amp; Schuster, 2013. &quot;
* Kwarteng, Kwasi. &quot;War and Gold: A Five-Hundred-Year History of Empires, Adventures, and Debt&quot; (2014) online
* Vilar, Pierre. &quot;A History of Gold and Money, 1450–1920&quot; (1960). online
* Vilches, Elvira. &quot;New World Gold: Cultural Anxiety and Monetary Disorder in Early Modern Spain&quot; (2010).

== External links ==

* Chemistry in its element podcast (MP3) from the Royal Society of Chemistry&#x27;s Chemistry World: Gold www.rsc.org
* Gold at &quot;The Periodic Table of Videos&quot; (University of Nottingham)
* &quot;Getting Gold&quot; 1898 book, www.lateralscience.co.uk
* , www.epa.gov
* Gold element information – rsc.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="0" end="4" title="Gold" label="Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="10" end="26" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q102500" start="36" end="51" title="chemical symbol" label="chemical symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="52" end="54" title="Gold" label="Au"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="61" end="66" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="73" end="86" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q221656" start="117" end="123" title="brightness" label="bright"/>
<link wikidata="Q211702" start="162" end="171" title="malleable" label="malleable"/>
<link wikidata="Q211702" start="177" end="184" title="ductile" label="ductile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="185" end="190" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19588" start="214" end="230" title="transition metal" label="transition metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q185870" start="234" end="250" title="group 11 element" label="group 11 element"/>
<link wikidata="Q585302" start="267" end="278" title="noble metal" label="noble metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q778774" start="304" end="312" title="reactivity (chemistry)" label="reactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q371578" start="363" end="380" title="reactivity series" label="reactivity series"/>
<link wikidata="Q102145" start="400" end="419" title="standard temperature and pressure" label="standard conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500213" start="443" end="455" title="free element" label="free element"/>
<link wikidata="Q104834223" start="459" end="471" title="native state (metallurgy)" label="native state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507004" start="477" end="484" title="gold nugget" label="nuggets"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="499" end="504" title="rock (geology)" label="rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q952465" start="506" end="511" title="vein (geology)" label="veins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="517" end="533" title="alluvial deposit" label="alluvial deposit"/>
<link wikidata="Q787619" start="551" end="565" title="solid solution" label="solid solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="597" end="603" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q239481" start="611" end="619" title="electrum" label="electrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="632" end="637" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="663" end="669" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089" start="674" end="683" title="palladium" label="palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q728944" start="689" end="706" title="mineral inclusion" label="mineral inclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="723" end="729" title="pyrite" label="pyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100" start="798" end="807" title="tellurium" label="tellurium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512885" start="809" end="823" title="gold telluride" label="gold telluride"/>
<link wikidata="Q174670" start="888" end="898" title="aqua regia" label="aqua regia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="913" end="924" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="929" end="946" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q411357" start="967" end="984" title="tetrachloroaurate" label="tetrachloroaurate"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="985" end="990" title="anion" label="anion"/>
<link wikidata="Q428855" start="1059" end="1069" title="base metal" label="base metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283324" start="1096" end="1102" title="refining (metallurgy)" label="refine"/>
<link wikidata="Q341324" start="1195" end="1204" title="acid test (gold)" label="acid test"/>
<link wikidata="Q485742" start="1230" end="1238" title="alkaline" label="alkaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q55076544" start="1252" end="1259" title="cyanide" label="cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q775155" start="1279" end="1285" title="gold cyanidation" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503392" start="1290" end="1304" title="electroplating" label="electroplating"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="1329" end="1336" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q182574" start="1346" end="1353" title="amalgam (chemistry)" label="amalgam"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="1417" end="1434" title="chemical reaction" label="chemical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q271449" start="1474" end="1488" title="precious metal" label="precious metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q860641" start="1512" end="1519" title="gold coin" label="coinage"/>
<link wikidata="Q161439" start="1521" end="1528" title="jewelry" label="jewelry"/>
<link wikidata="Q838948" start="1540" end="1552" title="works of art" label="works of art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145106" start="1564" end="1580" title="recorded history" label="recorded history"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="1597" end="1610" title="gold standard" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q178476" start="1638" end="1653" title="monetary policy" label="monetary policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q240532" start="1774" end="1787" title="fiat currency" label="fiat currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420512" start="1805" end="1816" title="Nixon shock" label="Nixon shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534566" start="1849" end="1883" title="list of countries by gold production" label="world&amp;#x27;s largest gold producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="1957" end="1962" title="tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290" start="2134" end="2144" title="investment" label="investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="2158" end="2166" title="Manufacturing" label="industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119531" start="2361" end="2381" title="electrical connector" label="electrical connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="2469" end="2477" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q8348044" start="2507" end="2520" title="colored glass" label="colored glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q929186" start="2522" end="2531" title="gold leaf" label="gold leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316230" start="2540" end="2557" title="restorative dentistry" label="tooth restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736147" start="2567" end="2577" title="gold salts" label="gold salts"/>
<link wikidata="Q581996" start="2596" end="2613" title="anti-inflammatory" label="anti-inflammatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q211702" start="2674" end="2683" title="malleable" label="malleable"/>
<link wikidata="Q737571" start="2873" end="2884" title="dislocation" label="dislocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q109856" start="2890" end="2903" title="Crystal twinning" label="crystal twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q48013" start="2995" end="3012" title="avoirdupois ounce" label="avoirdupois ounce"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="3226" end="3234" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q223571" start="3356" end="3365" title="spacesuit" label="spacesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7465774" start="3383" end="3400" title="Conduction (heat)" label="conductor of heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q124291" start="3405" end="3416" title="Electrical conductor" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="3481" end="3489" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q502918" start="3545" end="3559" title="counterfeiting" label="counterfeiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q945025" start="3563" end="3571" title="gold bar" label="gold bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="3649" end="3653" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q751" start="3703" end="3709" title="osmium" label="osmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754650" start="3857" end="3875" title="plasma oscillation" label="plasma oscillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330289" start="4001" end="4021" title="relativistic quantum chemistry" label="relativistic effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q53860" start="4036" end="4044" title="atomic orbital" label="orbitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="4112" end="4119" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q309191" start="4188" end="4197" title="rose gold" label="rose gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089" start="4251" end="4260" title="palladium" label="palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="4264" end="4270" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="4421" end="4427" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q799000" start="4485" end="4490" title="badge" label="badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q239481" start="4598" end="4608" title="green gold" label="green gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="4649" end="4653" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="4700" end="4709" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="4738" end="4747" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094" start="4749" end="4755" title="indium" label="indium"/>
<link wikidata="Q900961" start="4843" end="4857" title="Colloidal gold" label="Colloidal gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="5015" end="5022" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q337393" start="5096" end="5108" title="Mononuclidic element" label="mononuclidic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588104" start="5113" end="5133" title="monoisotopic element" label="monoisotopic element"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="5146" end="5159" title="radioisotopes" label="radioisotopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840065" start="5194" end="5205" title="atomic mass" label="atomic mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="5258" end="5267" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q902157" start="5321" end="5336" title="proton emission" label="proton emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q902157" start="5456" end="5471" title="proton emission" label="proton emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q179856" start="5473" end="5480" title="alpha decay" label="α decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="5486" end="5494" title="β+ decay" label="β+ decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="5620" end="5628" title="β− decay" label="β− decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q846110" start="5734" end="5748" title="nuclear isomer" label="nuclear isomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q846110" start="6041" end="6060" title="isomeric transition" label="isomeric transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="6227" end="6231" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="6318" end="6325" title="alchemy" label="alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81197" start="6450" end="6465" title="nuclear physics" label="nuclear physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936356" start="6551" end="6566" title="Hantaro Nagaoka" label="Hantaro Nagaoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="6594" end="6601" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330776" start="6795" end="6811" title="isotopes of gold" label="isotopes of gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="6836" end="6847" title="radioactive" label="radioactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q48973" start="6858" end="6871" title="Glenn T. Seaborg" label="Glenn Seaborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q484152" start="7228" end="7243" title="oxidation state" label="oxidation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q193161" start="7420" end="7426" title="ligand" label="ligand"/>
<link wikidata="Q727732" start="7436" end="7445" title="thioether" label="thioether"/>
<link wikidata="Q220410" start="7448" end="7456" title="thiolate" label="thiolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q108702082" start="7463" end="7478" title="organophosphine" label="organophosphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620211" start="7607" end="7618" title="gold halide" label="gold halide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371753" start="7629" end="7633" title="gold(I) chloride" label="AuCl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736147" start="7713" end="7732" title="Gold-containing drugs" label="drugs based on gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q174129" start="7839" end="7857" title="gold(III) chloride" label="gold(III) chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894013" start="7944" end="7957" title="square planar" label="square planar"/>
<link wikidata="Q44424" start="7964" end="7977" title="chemical bond" label="chemical bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q127920" start="7994" end="8002" title="covalent" label="covalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="8007" end="8010" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982809" start="8024" end="8044" title="Gold(I,III) chloride" label="Gold(I,III) chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q104902663" start="8076" end="8097" title="mixed-valence complex" label="mixed-valence complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605" start="8236" end="8243" title="halogen" label="halogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884055" start="8354" end="8372" title="gold(III) fluoride" label="gold(III) fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q174129" start="8428" end="8446" title="gold(III) chloride" label="gold(III) chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q419635" start="8509" end="8526" title="gold(III) bromide" label="gold(III) bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q526059" start="8531" end="8546" title="gold(I) bromide" label="gold(I) bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202650" start="8596" end="8610" title="gold(I) iodide" label="gold(I) iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534533" start="8995" end="9012" title="gold(III) sulfide" label="gold(III) sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="9036" end="9052" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q411357" start="9104" end="9119" title="chlorauric acid" label="chlorauric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q125019290" start="9210" end="9224" title="gold phosphide" label="gold phosphide"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="9261" end="9268" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q182574" start="9300" end="9307" title="amalgam (chemistry)" label="amalgam"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="9319" end="9324" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="9472" end="9485" title="melting point" label="melting point"/>
<link wikidata="Q209569" start="9572" end="9584" title="hydrofluoric acid" label="hydrofluoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="9586" end="9598" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric"/>
<link wikidata="Q423245" start="9600" end="9611" title="hydrobromic acid" label="hydrobromic"/>
<link wikidata="Q908093" start="9613" end="9622" title="hydriodic acid" label="hydriodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="9624" end="9632" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="9637" end="9648" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q413349" start="9669" end="9681" title="selenic acid" label="selenic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q174670" start="9703" end="9713" title="aqua regia" label="aqua regia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="9732" end="9743" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="9748" end="9765" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q411357" start="10021" end="10037" title="chloroauric acid" label="chloroauric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q906356" start="10364" end="10371" title="aqueous solution" label="aqueous"/>
<link wikidata="Q11438" start="10373" end="10378" title="solid" label="solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q106080" start="10383" end="10389" title="molten" label="molten"/>
<link wikidata="Q102769" start="10390" end="10396" title="sodium hydroxide" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q132298" start="10400" end="10419" title="potassium hydroxide" label="potassium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q410185" start="10449" end="10455" title="sodium cyanide" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q192470" start="10459" end="10476" title="potassium cyanide" label="potassium cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="10508" end="10514" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q484152" start="10561" end="10576" title="oxidation state" label="oxidation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="10700" end="10707" title="reduction (chemistry)" label="reduced"/>
<link wikidata="Q113796" start="10712" end="10724" title="precipitation (chemistry)" label="precipitated"/>
<link wikidata="Q216830" start="10767" end="10781" title="reducing agent" label="reducing agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="10802" end="10810" title="oxidation" label="oxidized"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="11075" end="11080" title="anion" label="anion"/>
<link wikidata="Q368965" start="11082" end="11096" title="Caesium auride" label="Caesium auride"/>
<link wikidata="Q296694" start="11138" end="11154" title="caesium chloride" label="caesium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q153485" start="11187" end="11206" title="tetramethylammonium" label="tetramethylammonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q271580" start="11252" end="11269" title="electron affinity" label="electron affinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q193086" start="11343" end="11349" title="halide" label="halide"/>
<link wikidata="Q189302" start="11419" end="11426" title="Group 4 element" label="group 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q762043" start="11579" end="11585" title="dimer (chemistry)" label="dimers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462914" start="11609" end="11629" title="titanium(IV) hydride" label="titanium(IV) hydride"/>
<link wikidata="Q201048" start="11663" end="11674" title="diamagnetic" label="diamagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q109888928" start="11777" end="11793" title="gold(II) sulfate" label="gold(II) sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818673" start="11916" end="11926" title="mercury(I)" label="mercury(I)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088465" start="11958" end="11977" title="tetraxenonogold(II)" label="tetraxenonogold(II)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106" start="12001" end="12006" title="xenon" label="xenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036449" start="12067" end="12099" title="Perovskite (structure)" label="metal-halide perovskite material"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239166" start="12244" end="12262" title="Gold pentafluoride" label="Gold pentafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q16910830" start="12307" end="12325" title="difluorine complex" label="difluorine complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578934" start="12327" end="12345" title="gold heptafluoride" label="gold heptafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822439" start="12452" end="12470" title="aurophilicity" label="aurophilic bonding"/>
<link wikidata="Q189627" start="12612" end="12633" title="Van der Waals force" label="van der Waals bonding"/>
<link wikidata="Q169324" start="12706" end="12719" title="hydrogen bond" label="hydrogen bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150817" start="12970" end="12995" title="supernova nucleosynthesis" label="supernova nucleosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42266247" start="13010" end="13036" title="Neutron star merger" label="collision of neutron stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535" start="13070" end="13074" title="solar nebula" label="dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="13090" end="13102" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q285033" start="13181" end="13190" title="r-process" label="r-process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150817" start="13218" end="13243" title="supernova nucleosynthesis" label="supernova nucleosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="13327" end="13331" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q42266247" start="13389" end="13398" title="neutron star merger" label="collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="13402" end="13414" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q38080891" start="13653" end="13661" title="GW170817" label="GW170817"/>
<link wikidata="Q190035" start="13695" end="13713" title="gravitational wave" label="gravitational wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q681996" start="13877" end="13887" title="Earth mass" label="Earth mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q156312" start="14182" end="14200" title="History of Earth" label="when it was formed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326645" start="14240" end="14251" title="early Earth" label="early Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q742129" start="14275" end="14289" title="core (geology)" label="planetary core"/>
<link wikidata="Q4232578" start="14369" end="14374" title="crust (geology)" label="crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364434" start="14379" end="14385" title="mantle (geology)" label="mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q463796" start="14432" end="14447" title="asteroid impact" label="asteroid impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q591571" start="14460" end="14482" title="Late Heavy Bombardment" label="Late Heavy Bombardment"/>
<link wikidata="Q330095" start="14640" end="14666" title="Vredefort impact structure" label="Vredefort impact structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q587808" start="14726" end="14745" title="Witwatersrand basin" label="Witwatersrand basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="14749" end="14761" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q587808" start="14862" end="14875" title="Witwatersrand" label="Witwatersrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835389" start="15060" end="15080" title="Transvaal Basin" label="Transvaal Supergroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q587808" start="15249" end="15268" title="Witwatersrand basin" label="Witwatersrand basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23580164" start="15339" end="15354" title="erosion surface" label="erosion surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="15358" end="15370" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q587808" start="15379" end="15392" title="Witwatersrand" label="Witwatersrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604396" start="15525" end="15548" title="Witwatersrand Gold Rush" label="Witwatersrand Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q389824" start="15822" end="15835" title="planetesimals" label="planetesimals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364434" start="15847" end="15853" title="Mantle (geology)" label="mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q39081378" start="16054" end="16068" title="Deseado Massif" label="Deseado Massif"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507" start="16076" end="16097" title="Argentinian Patagonia" label="Argentinian Patagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="16144" end="16147" title="ore" label="ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q103910" start="16173" end="16184" title="Precambrian" label="Precambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q310948" start="16224" end="16236" title="native metal" label="native metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q787619" start="16259" end="16273" title="solid solution" label="solid solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="16309" end="16314" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q239481" start="16369" end="16377" title="Electrum" label="Electrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q309191" start="16448" end="16458" title="white gold" label="white gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q11027905" start="16585" end="16601" title="specific gravity" label="specific gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="16700" end="16706" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q927407" start="16710" end="16725" title="sulfide mineral" label="sulfide mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="16741" end="16757" title="fool&amp;#x27;s gold" label="fool&amp;#x27;s gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="16776" end="16782" title="pyrite" label="pyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256418" start="16801" end="16805" title="lode" label="lode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507004" start="16903" end="16910" title="Gold nugget" label="nuggets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="16958" end="16966" title="alluvial" label="alluvial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141583" start="16983" end="16997" title="placer deposit" label="placer deposit"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="17091" end="17100" title="oxidation" label="oxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100" start="17308" end="17317" title="tellurium" label="tellurium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="17325" end="17332" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q414999" start="17334" end="17344" title="calaverite" label="calaverite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091116" start="17346" end="17356" title="krennerite" label="krennerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q213131" start="17358" end="17367" title="nagyagite" label="nagyagite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633289" start="17369" end="17376" title="petzite" label="petzite"/>
<link wikidata="Q414266" start="17381" end="17390" title="sylvanite" label="sylvanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697678" start="17396" end="17413" title="telluride mineral" label="telluride mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058777" start="17472" end="17483" title="aurostibite" label="aurostibite"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="17525" end="17531" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="17533" end="17537" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="17543" end="17550" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q418623" start="17565" end="17576" title="auricupride" label="auricupride"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="17959" end="17964" title="fault (geology)" label="fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="18435" end="18440" title="ocean" label="ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q672821" start="18537" end="18545" title="femtomolar" label="femtomol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151232" start="18567" end="18578" title="quadrillion" label="quadrillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="18918" end="18924" title="oceans" label="oceans"/>
<link wikidata="Q184395" start="19190" end="19199" title="sea water" label="sea water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817030" start="19269" end="19286" title="Prescott Jernegan" label="Prescott Jernegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="19327" end="19340" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q57075" start="19403" end="19414" title="Fritz Haber" label="Fritz Haber"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="19494" end="19501" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="19531" end="19542" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q310948" start="19919" end="19923" title="native metal" label="free"/>
<link wikidata="Q310948" start="19933" end="19939" title="native metal" label="native"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="20031" end="20042" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="20102" end="20110" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q946052" start="20207" end="20223" title="Varna Necropolis" label="Varna Necropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="20248" end="20257" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903308" start="20742" end="20751" title="Wadi Qana" label="Wadi Qana"/>
<link wikidata="Q115439" start="20773" end="20790" title="4th millennium BC" label="4th millennium BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q36678" start="20794" end="20803" title="West Bank" label="West Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q737406" start="20866" end="20877" title="golden hats" label="golden hats"/>
<link wikidata="Q157094" start="20886" end="20896" title="Nebra disk" label="Nebra disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394404" start="20951" end="20961" title="European Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q132659" start="21156" end="21175" title="Egyptian hieroglyph" label="Egyptian hieroglyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q317205" start="21228" end="21237" title="Tushratta" label="Tushratta"/>
<link wikidata="Q178665" start="21245" end="21252" title="Mitanni" label="Mitanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q135028" start="21333" end="21338" title="Nubia" label="Nubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889662" start="21463" end="21480" title="Turin Papyrus Map" label="Turin Papyrus Map"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071389" start="21502" end="21511" title="gold mine" label="gold mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="21560" end="21567" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="21621" end="21627" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="21632" end="21648" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q59049" start="21663" end="21675" title="fire-setting" label="fire-setting"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="21718" end="21725" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="21741" end="21753" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q235502" start="21780" end="21794" title="Amarna letters" label="Amarna letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002763" start="21804" end="21806" title="Amarna letter EA 19" label="19"/>
<link wikidata="Q20312499" start="21811" end="21813" title="Amarna letter EA 26" label="26"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="21884" end="21897" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="21913" end="21920" title="Book of Genesis" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591658" start="21930" end="21937" title="Havilah" label="Havilah"/>
<link wikidata="Q221323" start="21957" end="21968" title="golden calf" label="golden calf"/>
<link wikidata="Q170476" start="22013" end="22020" title="Menorah (Temple)" label="Menorah"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="22050" end="22063" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q876933" start="22102" end="22106" title="magi" label="magi"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="22145" end="22163" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q567888" start="22192" end="22205" title="New Jerusalem" label="New Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="22326" end="22335" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q308398" start="22369" end="22374" title="Midas" label="Midas"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="22482" end="22487" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212262" start="22521" end="22534" title="golden fleece" label="golden fleece"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141583" start="22621" end="22635" title="placer deposit" label="placer deposit"/>
<link wikidata="Q504759" start="22695" end="22706" title="Chu (state)" label="Chu (state)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7220621" start="22722" end="22731" title="Ying Yuan" label="Ying Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362308" start="22767" end="22783" title="Roman metallurgy" label="Roman metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062592" start="22864" end="22880" title="hydraulic mining" label="hydraulic mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q186513" start="22904" end="22912" title="Hispania" label="Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q173082" start="22939" end="22944" title="Dacia" label="Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q696803" start="23000" end="23011" title="Las Medulas" label="Las Medulas"/>
<link wikidata="Q71140" start="23015" end="23019" title="León (province)" label="León"/>
<link wikidata="Q474" start="23038" end="23047" title="aqueduct (watercourse)" label="aqueducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q12148992" start="23118" end="23131" title="Roşia Montană" label="Roşia Montană"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="23135" end="23147" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="23268" end="23275" title="Roman Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235312" start="23318" end="23328" title="Dolaucothi" label="Dolaucothi"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="23382" end="23397" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292" start="23405" end="23417" title="encyclopedia" label="encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q442" start="23424" end="23442" title="Naturalis Historia" label="Naturalis Historia"/>
<link wikidata="Q309333" start="23506" end="23516" title="Mansa Musa" label="Mansa Musa"/>
<link wikidata="Q184536" start="23538" end="23549" title="Mali Empire" label="Mali Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q234915" start="23569" end="23573" title="hajj" label="hajj"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="23577" end="23582" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="23610" end="23615" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4149527" start="23666" end="23677" title="camel train" label="camel train"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="23841" end="23850" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="24028" end="24043" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="24067" end="24078" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="24080" end="24084" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="24086" end="24093" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="24098" end="24106" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12542" start="24112" end="24117" title="Aztec" label="Aztec"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="24236" end="24243" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q141791" start="24256" end="24268" title="Moctezuma II" label="Moctezuma II"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="24338" end="24373" title="indigenous peoples of North America" label="indigenous peoples of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="24443" end="24451" title="minerals" label="minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q53754" start="24506" end="24514" title="obsidian" label="obsidian"/>
<link wikidata="Q83087" start="24516" end="24521" title="flint" label="flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q207079" start="24527" end="24532" title="slate" label="slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q192550" start="24535" end="24544" title="El Dorado" label="El Dorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="24944" end="24952" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552915" start="25030" end="25044" title="Lake Guatavita" label="Lake Guatavita"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="25202" end="25221" title="early modern period" label="early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="25232" end="25243" title="Age of Discovery" label="exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353647" start="25248" end="25260" title="Colonisation of Africa" label="colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="25264" end="25275" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535868" start="25403" end="25413" title="Gold Coast (region)" label="Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q82001" start="25536" end="25541" title="ivory" label="ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="25546" end="25552" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q722071" start="25605" end="25619" title="Ashanti Empire" label="Ashanti Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="25651" end="25661" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="25700" end="25707" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="25709" end="25715" title="French colonial empire" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="25717" end="25724" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q302132" start="25729" end="25735" title="Danish colonial empire" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q722051" start="25832" end="25850" title="Anglo-Ashanti wars" label="Anglo-Ashanti wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q503623" start="25906" end="25924" title="Gold Coast (British colony)" label="annexed by Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q693" start="26034" end="26039" title="fable" label="fable"/>
<link wikidata="Q322188" start="26049" end="26064" title="Rumpelstiltskin" label="Rumpelstiltskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455839" start="26244" end="26266" title="Jack and the Beanstalk" label="Jack and the Beanstalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="26290" end="26303" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q406039" start="26346" end="26356" title="gold medal" label="gold medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="26475" end="26485" title="alchemy" label="alchemists"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="26537" end="26541" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q182053" start="26611" end="26635" title="philosopher&amp;#x27;s stone" label="philosopher&amp;#x27;s stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="26786" end="26795" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q202651" start="26853" end="26874" title="nuclear transmutation" label="nuclear transmutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="26964" end="26976" title="astrology" label="astrological"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="27000" end="27017" title="Chinese character" label="Chinese character"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="27026" end="27029" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q172077" start="27036" end="27052" title="Dome of the Rock" label="Dome of the Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q582779" start="27104" end="27108" title="Sikh" label="Sikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q180422" start="27128" end="27143" title="Harmandir Sahib" label="Harmandir Sahib"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045876" start="27192" end="27205" title="Wat Phra Kaew" label="Wat Phra Kaew"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="27214" end="27222" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q44539" start="27223" end="27229" title="temple" label="temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q427287" start="27231" end="27234" title="wat" label="wat"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="27239" end="27247" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q170984" start="27330" end="27336" title="crown (headgear)" label="crowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646517" start="27382" end="27394" title="bridal crown" label="bridal crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7031085" start="27460" end="27487" title="Rachel, wife of Rabbi Akiva" label="Rachel, wife of Rabbi Akiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="27650" end="27657" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="27685" end="27703" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="27718" end="27732" title="Proto-Germanic" label="Proto-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="27738" end="27757" title="Proto-Indo-European" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="27799" end="27804" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q111029" start="27936" end="27940" title="Root (linguistics)" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q406039" start="28300" end="28310" title="gold medal" label="gold medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q381165" start="28318" end="28326" title="trophy" label="trophies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="28465" end="28476" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391704" start="28564" end="28575" title="gold plated" label="gold plated"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="28589" end="28603" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="28609" end="28628" title="Golden Globe Awards" label="Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="28634" end="28645" title="Emmy Awards" label="Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q179808" start="28651" end="28666" title="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="28676" end="28703" title="British Academy Film Awards" label="British Academy Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="28707" end="28716" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q777205" start="28724" end="28730" title="Aristotelian ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054131" start="28794" end="28805" title="golden mean (philosophy)" label="golden mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q41690" start="28899" end="28911" title="golden ratio" label="golden ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q189573" start="28920" end="28931" title="Golden Rule" label="Golden Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136848" start="29012" end="29031" title="wedding anniversary" label="wedding anniversary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233738" start="29233" end="29243" title="golden age (metaphor)" label="golden age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362894" start="29320" end="29329" title="Prehistoric religion" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q9190" start="29448" end="29462" title="Book of Exodus" label="Book of Exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q221323" start="29468" end="29479" title="Golden Calf" label="Golden Calf"/>
<link wikidata="Q840665" start="29495" end="29503" title="idolatry" label="idolatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="29518" end="29533" title="Book of Genesis" label="Book of Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9181" start="29535" end="29542" title="Abraham" label="Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916442" start="29621" end="29631" title="Mercy Seat" label="Mercy Seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q131316" start="29635" end="29658" title="Ark of the Covenant" label="the Ark of the Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="29678" end="29687" title="Eastern Christianity" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q132137" start="29688" end="29692" title="icon" label="icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341893" start="29704" end="29709" title="Halo (religious iconography)" label="halos"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="29721" end="29732" title="Virgin Mary" label="Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="29770" end="29775" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q37681" start="29794" end="29798" title="silk" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q12177857" start="29851" end="29870" title="Abu Bakr al-Jazaeri" label="Abu Bakr al-Jazaeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="29882" end="29888" title="hadith" label="hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q18281" start="30170" end="30180" title="embroidery" label="embroidery"/>
<link wikidata="Q855270" start="30204" end="30226" title="ancient Greek religion" label="ancient Greek religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="30231" end="30240" title="Greek mythology" label="mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q184232" start="30242" end="30247" title="Theia" label="Theia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83437" start="30298" end="30306" title="gemstone" label="gemstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="30323" end="30343" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q842096" start="30482" end="30494" title="Wedding ring" label="Wedding ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="30688" end="30706" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="30891" end="30897" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="30942" end="30947" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q167677" start="30986" end="30991" title="Yavne" label="Yavne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="31169" end="31186" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="31223" end="31254" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="31530" end="31542" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="31630" end="31635" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578941" start="31799" end="31804" title="Gold mining in China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670813" start="31976" end="31987" title="Pascua Lama" label="Pascua Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q47141" start="32049" end="32063" title="Atacama Desert" label="Atacama Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="32087" end="32092" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="32097" end="32106" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="32253" end="32265" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604396" start="32321" end="32344" title="Witwatersrand Gold Rush" label="Witwatersrand Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q587808" start="32519" end="32538" title="Witwatersrand basin" label="Witwatersrand basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q104168" start="32566" end="32573" title="archean" label="archean"/>
<link wikidata="Q160284" start="32620" end="32630" title="Free State (South African province)" label="Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q133083" start="32632" end="32639" title="Gauteng" label="Gauteng"/>
<link wikidata="Q587808" start="32727" end="32740" title="Witwatersrand" label="Witwatersrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q330095" start="32881" end="32895" title="Vredefort Dome" label="Vredefort Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5988006" start="32994" end="32998" title="strike and dip" label="dips"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33100" end="33106" title="Savuka Mine" label="Savuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140375" start="33111" end="33118" title="TauTona" label="TauTona"/>
<link wikidata="Q104168" start="33230" end="33237" title="archean" label="archean"/>
<link wikidata="Q590219" start="33299" end="33312" title="Braided river" label="Braided river"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="33442" end="33457" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="33483" end="33497" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q385799" start="33506" end="33515" title="Afrikaner" label="Afrikaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q188201" start="33516" end="33520" title="Boer" label="Boer"/>
<link wikidata="Q273182" start="33644" end="33653" title="gold rush" label="gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306649" start="33782" end="33796" title="Reed Gold Mine" label="Reed Gold Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003662" start="33934" end="33943" title="Dahlonega, Georgia" label="Dahlonega"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="33977" end="33987" title="California Gold Rush" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q331895" start="33989" end="33997" title="Pike&amp;#x27;s Peak Gold Rush" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453700" start="34003" end="34014" title="Black Hills Gold Rush" label="Black Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573076" start="34016" end="34021" title="Otago gold rush" label="Otago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914928" start="34067" end="34076" title="Australian gold rushes" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604396" start="34078" end="34091" title="Witwatersrand Gold Rush" label="Witwatersrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q631489" start="34117" end="34125" title="Klondike Gold Rush" label="Klondike"/>
<link wikidata="Q119297" start="34138" end="34151" title="Grasberg mine" label="Grasberg mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095" start="34163" end="34168" title="Papua (province)" label="Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="34170" end="34179" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071389" start="34195" end="34204" title="gold mining" label="gold mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976854" start="34252" end="34267" title="Gold extraction" label="Gold extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q15104297" start="34413" end="34421" title="open-pit mining" label="open-pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883681" start="34470" end="34479" title="Underground mining (hard rock)" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406603" start="34932" end="34948" title="Wohlwill process" label="Wohlwill process"/>
<link wikidata="Q64403" start="34967" end="34979" title="electrolysis" label="electrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859299" start="34990" end="35004" title="Miller process" label="Miller process"/>
<link wikidata="Q903707" start="35265" end="35276" title="cupellation" label="cupellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q30873" start="35550" end="35554" title="Dell" label="Dell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="35601" end="35615" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391345" start="35980" end="35998" title="World Gold Council" label="World Gold Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381247" start="36167" end="36176" title="Environmental effects of mining" label="pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="36224" end="36227" title="Parts per million" label="ppm"/>
<link wikidata="Q44494" start="36252" end="36258" title="Milling (grinding)" label="ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q410185" start="36274" end="36288" title="sodium cyanide" label="sodium cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348883" start="36423" end="36437" title="List of gold mining disasters" label="cyanide spills"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="36827" end="36834" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q876" start="36836" end="36844" title="selenium" label="selenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="36965" end="36978" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q341381" start="37109" end="37127" title="acid mine drainage" label="acid mine drainage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069369" start="37176" end="37191" title="hazardous waste" label="hazardous waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q414075" start="37498" end="37511" title="methylmercury" label="methylmercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q408089" start="37513" end="37530" title="Mercury poisoning" label="Mercury poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q182098" start="37754" end="37757" title="Kilowatt-hour" label="kWh"/>
<link wikidata="Q167328" start="37834" end="37845" title="History of money" label="widely used"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368" start="37870" end="37875" title="money" label="money"/>
<link wikidata="Q484830" start="37917" end="37923" title="barter" label="barter"/>
<link wikidata="Q164099" start="37949" end="37954" title="hoard" label="hoard"/>
<link wikidata="Q464780" start="37980" end="37985" title="Mint (coin)" label="mints"/>
<link wikidata="Q557709" start="38007" end="38019" title="bullion" label="gold bullion"/>
<link wikidata="Q41207" start="38020" end="38025" title="coins" label="coins"/>
<link wikidata="Q945025" start="38027" end="38031" title="gold bar" label="bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582525" start="38036" end="38047" title="Good delivery" label="other units"/>
<link wikidata="Q190139" start="38174" end="38180" title="talent (measurement)" label="talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033598" start="38493" end="38498" title="Real bills doctrine" label="Bills"/>
<link wikidata="Q791975" start="38532" end="38549" title="gold certificates" label="gold certificates"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="38633" end="38646" title="gold standard" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="38715" end="38726" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="39110" end="39122" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q397840" start="39166" end="39188" title="convertible currency" label="convertible currencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q188532" start="39235" end="39255" title="Bretton Woods system" label="Bretton Woods system"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="39257" end="39270" title="Gold standard" label="Gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q240532" start="39444" end="39457" title="Fiat currency" label="Fiat currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="39489" end="39500" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55648272" start="39712" end="39745" title="London Bullion Market Association" label="London Bullion Market Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071389" start="39836" end="39847" title="gold mining" label="gold mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046879" start="39975" end="39987" title="gold reserve" label="gold reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q183984" start="40161" end="40176" title="Futures contract" label="future contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401905" start="40405" end="40413" title="fineness" label="fineness"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40440" end="40445" title="fineness#karat" label="karat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189493" start="40661" end="40671" title="crown gold" label="crown gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q880" start="40813" end="40821" title="platinum" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q271449" start="40907" end="40921" title="precious metal" label="precious metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8142" start="40977" end="40987" title="currency" label="currencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q42544" start="41157" end="41168" title="Thomas More" label="Thomas More"/>
<link wikidata="Q404158" start="41191" end="41197" title="Utopia (More book)" label="Utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37431" start="41538" end="41546" title="ISO 4217" label="ISO 4217"/>
<link wikidata="Q557709" start="41618" end="41625" title="bullion" label="bullion"/>
<link wikidata="Q945025" start="41635" end="41639" title="gold bar" label="bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="41659" end="41668" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q557728" start="41829" end="41841" title="bullion coin" label="bullion coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q464731" start="41978" end="41997" title="American Gold Eagle" label="American Gold Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q584496" start="42014" end="42028" title="Sovereign (British coin)" label="gold sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057164" start="42118" end="42128" title="Krugerrand" label="Krugerrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q119457" start="42205" end="42229" title="Canadian Gold Maple Leaf" label="Canadian Gold Maple Leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q557728" start="42275" end="42287" title="bullion coin" label="bullion coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141049" start="42415" end="42433" title="United States Mint" label="United States Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q463624" start="42454" end="42470" title="American Buffalo (coin)" label="American Buffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="42518" end="42527" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412326" start="42577" end="42599" title="Australian Gold Nugget" label="Australian Gold Nugget"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="42671" end="42678" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q698495" start="42680" end="42699" title="Vienna Philharmonic (coin)" label="Vienna Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100469" start="42721" end="42739" title="Chinese Gold Panda" label="Chinese Gold Panda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974806" start="42805" end="42816" title="troy weight" label="troy weight"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42888" end="42893" title="fineness#karat" label="karat"/>
<link wikidata="Q945025" start="43022" end="43030" title="gold bar" label="gold bar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43115" end="43134" title="fineness#millesimal fineness" label="millesimal fineness"/>
<link wikidata="Q66295" start="43234" end="43245" title="derivative (finance)" label="derivatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q283635" start="43284" end="43295" title="Gold Fixing" label="Gold Fixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="43299" end="43305" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q464780" start="43580" end="43587" title="Mint (coin)" label="coinage"/>
<link wikidata="Q131938946" start="43622" end="43633" title="paper money" label="paper money"/>
<link wikidata="Q330190" start="43669" end="43676" title="receipt" label="receipt"/>
<link wikidata="Q557709" start="43705" end="43712" title="bullion" label="bullion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368" start="43719" end="43727" title="monetary" label="monetary"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="43748" end="43761" title="gold standard" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q25288" start="43773" end="43779" title="weight" label="weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974806" start="43921" end="43931" title="troy ounce" label="troy ounce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397852" start="44102" end="44133" title="London Gold Pool" label="a pool of US and European banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q220788" start="44185" end="44205" title="devaluation" label="currency devaluation"/>
<link wikidata="Q53536" start="44294" end="44319" title="Federal Reserve System" label="U.S. Federal Reserve Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="44323" end="44331" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798266" start="44434" end="44457" title="United States Bullion Depository" label="U.S. Bullion Depository"/>
<link wikidata="Q983650" start="44461" end="44470" title="Fort Knox" label="Fort Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391345" start="44484" end="44502" title="World Gold Council" label="World Gold Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420512" start="44642" end="44653" title="Nixon shock" label="Nixon shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974806" start="45027" end="45037" title="troy weight" label="troy ounce"/>
<link wikidata="Q791975" start="45407" end="45415" title="Gold as an investment" label="investor"/>
<link wikidata="Q33761" start="45443" end="45449" title="Arab Spring" label="unrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="45453" end="45465" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="45484" end="45495" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004322" start="45696" end="45715" title="secular bear market" label="secular bear market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004322" start="45732" end="45743" title="bull market" label="bull market"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035675" start="46192" end="46195" title="CQG" label="CQG"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="46352" end="46357" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46496" end="46508" title="fineness#Karat" label="karat rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q31576" start="46887" end="46902" title="sterling silver" label="sterling silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q976158" start="46926" end="46937" title="Mokume-gane" label="Mokume-gane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391345" start="47212" end="47230" title="World Gold Council" label="World Gold Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q866612" start="47245" end="47251" title="solder" label="solder"/>
<link wikidata="Q13389141" start="47341" end="47348" title="brazing" label="brazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118609" start="47374" end="47382" title="hallmark" label="hallmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304791" start="47850" end="47856" title="gold thread" label="thread"/>
<link wikidata="Q18281" start="47869" end="47879" title="embroidery" label="embroidery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119531" start="48069" end="48090" title="electrical connectors" label="electrical connectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119531" start="48731" end="48751" title="electrical connector" label="electrical connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="48899" end="48902" title="USB" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="48973" end="48976" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="49332" end="49340" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="49369" end="49379" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q206592" start="49381" end="49393" title="jet aircraft" label="jet aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q394001" start="49483" end="49502" title="electrical contacts" label="electrical contacts"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="49532" end="49541" title="corrosion" label="corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="49543" end="49566" title="electrical conductivity" label="electrical conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q211702" start="49568" end="49577" title="ductile" label="ductility"/>
<link wikidata="Q274160" start="49590" end="49598" title="toxicity" label="toxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q175805" start="49736" end="49756" title="semiconductor device" label="semiconductor device"/>
<link wikidata="Q750783" start="49803" end="49815" title="wire bonding" label="wire bonding"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="49902" end="49912" title="electrical conductivity" label="conductive"/>
<link wikidata="Q192043" start="49950" end="49967" title="electrical wiring" label="electrical wiring"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="50174" end="50191" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q605089" start="50272" end="50280" title="calutron" label="calutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q408295" start="50591" end="50612" title="sodium aurothiomalate" label="sodium aurothiomalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q421230" start="50617" end="50626" title="auranofin" label="auranofin"/>
<link wikidata="Q581996" start="50716" end="50733" title="anti-inflammatory" label="anti-inflammatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q187255" start="50831" end="50851" title="rheumatoid arthritis" label="rheumatoid arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="50885" end="50897" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="50924" end="50936" title="Western esotericism" label="esotericists"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="50950" end="50970" title="alternative medicine" label="alternative medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q297776" start="51262" end="51273" title="Dioscorides" label="Dioscorides"/>
<link wikidata="Q62903" start="51479" end="51489" title="anxiolytic" label="anxiolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="51524" end="51534" title="Depression (mood)" label="Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="51536" end="51544" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q133823" start="51546" end="51554" title="migraine" label="migraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q334655" start="51587" end="51597" title="amenorrhea" label="amenorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q184674" start="51602" end="51611" title="impotence" label="impotence"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="51643" end="51653" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316230" start="52070" end="52091" title="restorative dentistry" label="restorative dentistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q143720" start="52135" end="52141" title="Crown (dental restoration)" label="crowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q996044" start="52156" end="52163" title="bridge (dentistry)" label="bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q900961" start="52519" end="52533" title="Colloidal gold" label="Colloidal gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q900961" start="52563" end="52580" title="gold nanoparticle" label="gold nanoparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075" start="52610" end="52615" title="color" label="color"/>
<link wikidata="Q159683" start="52747" end="52754" title="citrate" label="citrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q199678" start="52758" end="52767" title="ascorbate" label="ascorbate"/>
<link wikidata="Q228736" start="52847" end="52864" title="materials science" label="materials science"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029513" start="52883" end="52902" title="immunogold labeling" label="immunogold labeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q132560" start="53185" end="53204" title="electron microscope" label="electron microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q103537" start="53289" end="53296" title="antigen" label="antigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089" start="53327" end="53336" title="palladium" label="palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q321095" start="53476" end="53504" title="scanning electron microscope" label="scanning electron microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q898444" start="53547" end="53557" title="sputtering" label="sputtering"/>
<link wikidata="Q696" start="53566" end="53571" title="argon" label="argon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10251" start="53572" end="53578" title="plasma (physics)" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111" start="53672" end="53689" title="electric charge" label="electrical charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q207340" start="53771" end="53784" title="electron beam" label="electron beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q740898" start="53963" end="53981" title="Angular resolution" label="spatial resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q905140" start="54032" end="54051" title="secondary emission" label="secondary electrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q18883176" start="54216" end="54224" title="gold-198" label="gold-198"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="54226" end="54235" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q214963" start="54257" end="54273" title="nuclear medicine" label="nuclear medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="54283" end="54289" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q207810" start="54391" end="54399" title="E number" label="E number"/>
<link wikidata="Q516521" start="54418" end="54448" title="European Food Safety Authority" label="European Food Safety Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q61231" start="54585" end="54597" title="nanoparticle" label="nanoparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009245" start="54671" end="54680" title="genotoxic" label="genotoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q221681" start="54700" end="54708" title="in vitro" label="in vitro"/>
<link wikidata="Q929186" start="54712" end="54721" title="Gold leaf" label="Gold leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="54866" end="54881" title="medieval Europe" label="medieval Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q836692" start="54974" end="54984" title="Goldwasser" label="Goldwasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q178780" start="55019" end="55026" title="liqueur" label="liqueur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="55053" end="55059" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="55061" end="55067" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q14889" start="55073" end="55082" title="Schwabach" label="Schwabach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412378" start="55353" end="55357" title="Vark" label="Vark"/>
<link wikidata="Q11074667" start="55363" end="55367" title="Metal leaf" label="foil"/>
<link wikidata="Q59541" start="55433" end="55443" title="Garnish (food)" label="garnishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536010" start="55571" end="55586" title="cranberry glass" label="cranberry glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q407515" start="55649" end="55663" title="silver bromide" label="silver bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518070" start="55756" end="55767" title="sepia tone" label="sepia-toned"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="55928" end="55953" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="55962" end="55970" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q76299" start="55975" end="55988" title="visible spectrum" label="visible light"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396184" start="56001" end="56012" title="radio frequency" label="radio waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="56072" end="56081" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q272826" start="56183" end="56201" title="electronic warfare" label="electronic warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q532428" start="56221" end="56234" title="EA-6B Prowler" label="EA-6B Prowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642668" start="56283" end="56295" title="Gold CD" label="high-end CDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q172030" start="56344" end="56351" title="McLaren" label="McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q849607" start="56400" end="56402" title="McLaren F1" label="F1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434081" start="56527" end="56535" title="Deicing" label="de-icing"/>
<link wikidata="Q55076544" start="56753" end="56760" title="cyanide" label="cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q775155" start="56868" end="56883" title="cyanide process" label="cyanide process"/>
<link wikidata="Q162908" start="56905" end="56916" title="electrolyte" label="electrolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503392" start="56936" end="56950" title="electroplating" label="electroplating"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358014" start="56980" end="56994" title="electroforming" label="electroforming"/>
<link wikidata="Q411357" start="57013" end="57029" title="chloroauric acid" label="chloroauric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q159683" start="57091" end="57098" title="citrate" label="citrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q199678" start="57102" end="57111" title="ascorbate" label="ascorbate"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="57112" end="57116" title="ions" label="ions"/>
<link wikidata="Q181780" start="57208" end="57215" title="colloid" label="colloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q900961" start="57268" end="57285" title="gold nanoparticle" label="gold nanoparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q55647876" start="57342" end="57364" title="Heterogeneous gold catalysis" label="heterogeneous catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920250" start="57454" end="57476" title="autism rights movement" label="autism rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="57538" end="57544" title="Autism spectrum disorder" label="autism"/>
<link wikidata="Q929186" start="57703" end="57712" title="gold leaf" label="gold leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110126" start="57772" end="57784" title="Goldschläger" label="Goldschläger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462990" start="57786" end="57797" title="Gold Strike (drink)" label="Gold Strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q836692" start="57803" end="57813" title="Goldwasser" label="Goldwasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q189567" start="57846" end="57859" title="food additive" label="food additive"/>
<link wikidata="Q207810" start="57871" end="57875" title="E number" label="E175"/>
<link wikidata="Q312100" start="57883" end="57901" title="Codex Alimentarius" label="Codex Alimentarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736147" start="58210" end="58220" title="gold salts" label="gold salts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982809" start="58230" end="58243" title="gold(I,III) chloride" label="gold chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q55076544" start="58287" end="58294" title="cyanide" label="cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503392" start="58354" end="58368" title="electroplating" label="electroplating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341604" start="58481" end="58503" title="potassium gold cyanide" label="potassium gold cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069061" start="58543" end="58560" title="chelation therapy" label="chelation therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q413968" start="58583" end="58594" title="dimercaprol" label="dimercaprol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732114" start="58618" end="58638" title="Allergen of the Year" label="Allergen of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="58830" end="58836" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q132014" start="58868" end="58885" title="Aspergillus niger" label="Aspergillus niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996480" start="59124" end="59151" title="Bulk leach extractable gold" label="Bulk leach extractable gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114603" start="59173" end="59183" title="Chrysiasis" label="Chrysiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q846773" start="59213" end="59234" title="Digital gold currency" label="Digital gold currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141267" start="59266" end="59270" title="GFMS" label="GFMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578925" start="59294" end="59313" title="Gold fingerprinting" label="Gold fingerprinting"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="59353" end="59366" title="Gold standard" label="Gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534566" start="59380" end="59416" title="List of countries by gold production" label="List of countries by gold production"/>
<link wikidata="Q478468" start="59419" end="59426" title="Tumbaga" label="Tumbaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="59455" end="59466" title="Iron pyrite" label="Iron pyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q112260" start="59487" end="59498" title="Nordic gold" label="Nordic gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q905549" start="60895" end="60921" title="Royal Society of Chemistry" label="Royal Society of Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090571" start="60929" end="60944" title="Chemistry World" label="Chemistry World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988689" start="60979" end="61007" title="The Periodic Table of Videos" label="The Periodic Table of Videos"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12241" wikidata="Q861" url="?curid=12241" title="Gallium">
<text>Gallium is a chemical element; it has the symbol Ga and atomic number 31. Discovered by the French chemist Paul-Émile Lecoq de Boisbaudran in 1875, gallium is in group 13 of the periodic table and is similar to the other metals of the group (aluminium, indium, and thallium).

Elemental gallium is a relatively soft, silvery metal at standard temperature and pressure. In its liquid state, it becomes silvery white. If enough force is applied, solid gallium may fracture conchoidally. Since its discovery in 1875, gallium has widely been used to make alloys with low melting points. It is also used in semiconductors, as a dopant in semiconductor substrates.

The melting point of gallium, , is used as a temperature reference point. Gallium alloys are used in thermometers as a non-toxic and environmentally friendly alternative to mercury, and can withstand higher temperatures than mercury. A melting point of , well below the freezing point of water, is claimed for the alloy galinstan (62–⁠95% gallium, 5–⁠22% indium, and 0–⁠16% tin by weight), but that may be the freezing point with the effect of supercooling.

Gallium does not occur as a free element in nature, but rather as gallium(III) compounds in trace amounts in zinc ores (such as sphalerite) and in bauxite. Elemental gallium is a liquid at temperatures greater than , and will melt in a person&#x27;s hands at normal human body temperature of .

Gallium is predominantly used in electronics. Gallium arsenide, the primary chemical compound of gallium in electronics, is used in microwave circuits, high-speed switching circuits, and infrared circuits. Semiconducting gallium nitride and indium gallium nitride produce blue and violet light-emitting diodes and diode lasers. Gallium is also used in the production of artificial gadolinium gallium garnet for jewelry. Gallium is considered a technology-critical element by the United States National Library of Medicine and Frontiers Media.

Gallium has no known natural role in biology. Gallium(III) behaves in a similar manner to ferric salts in biological systems and has been used in some medical applications, including pharmaceuticals and radiopharmaceuticals.

==Physical properties==

Elemental gallium is not found in nature, but it is easily obtained by smelting. Very pure gallium is a silvery blue metal that fractures conchoidally like glass. Gallium&#x27;s volume expands by 3.10% when it changes from a liquid to a solid so care must be taken when storing it in containers that may rupture when it changes state. Gallium shares the higher-density liquid state with a short list of other materials that includes water, silicon, germanium, bismuth, and plutonium.

Gallium forms alloys with most metals. It readily diffuses into cracks or grain boundaries of some metals such as aluminium, aluminium–zinc alloys and steel, causing extreme loss of strength and ductility called liquid metal embrittlement.

The melting point of gallium, at 302.9146 K (29.7646 °C, 85.5763 °F), is just above room temperature, and is approximately the same as the average summer daytime temperatures in Earth&#x27;s mid-latitudes. This melting point (mp) is one of the formal temperature reference points in the International Temperature Scale of 1990 (ITS-90) established by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM). The triple point of gallium, 302.9166 K (29.7666 °C, 85.5799 °F), is used by the US National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in preference to the melting point.

The melting point of gallium allows it to melt in the human hand, and then solidify if removed. The liquid metal has a strong tendency to supercool below its melting point/freezing point: Ga nanoparticles can be kept in the liquid state below 90 K. Seeding with a crystal helps to initiate freezing. Gallium is one of the four non-radioactive metals (with caesium, rubidium, and mercury) that are known to be liquid at, or near, normal room temperature. Of the four, gallium is the only one that is neither highly reactive (as are rubidium and caesium) nor highly toxic (as is mercury) and can, therefore, be used in metal-in-glass high-temperature thermometers. It is also notable for having one of the largest liquid ranges for a metal, and for having (unlike mercury) a low vapor pressure at high temperatures. Gallium&#x27;s boiling point, 2676 K, is nearly nine times higher than its melting point on the absolute scale, the greatest ratio between melting point and boiling point of any element. Unlike mercury, liquid gallium metal wets glass and skin, along with most other materials (with the exceptions of quartz, graphite, gallium(III) oxide and PTFE), making it mechanically more difficult to handle even though it is substantially less toxic and requires far fewer precautions than mercury. Gallium painted onto glass is a brilliant mirror. For this reason as well as the metal contamination and freezing-expansion problems, samples of gallium metal are usually supplied in polyethylene packets within other containers.

Gallium does not crystallize in any of the simple crystal structures. The stable phase under normal conditions is orthorhombic with 8 atoms in the conventional unit cell. Within a unit cell, each atom has only one nearest neighbor (at a distance of 244 pm). The remaining six unit cell neighbors are spaced 27, 30 and 39 pm farther away, and they are grouped in pairs with the same distance. Many stable and metastable phases are found as function of temperature and pressure.

The bonding between the two nearest neighbors is covalent; hence Ga2 dimers are seen as the fundamental building blocks of the crystal. This explains the low melting point relative to the neighbor elements, aluminium and indium. This structure is strikingly similar to that of iodine and may form because of interactions between the single 4p electrons of gallium atoms, further away from the nucleus than the 4s electrons and the [Ar]3d10 core. This phenomenon recurs with mercury with its &quot;pseudo-noble-gas&quot; [Xe]4f145d106s2 electron configuration, which is liquid at room temperature. The 3d10 electrons do not shield the outer electrons very well from the nucleus and hence the first ionisation energy of gallium is greater than that of aluminium. Ga2 dimers do not persist in the liquid state and liquid gallium exhibits a complex low-coordinated structure in which each gallium atom is surrounded by 10 others, rather than 11–12 neighbors typical of most liquid metals.

The physical properties of gallium are highly anisotropic, i.e. have different values along the three major crystallographic axes &quot;a&quot;, &quot;b&quot;, and &quot;c&quot; (see table), producing a significant difference between the linear (α) and volume thermal expansion coefficients. The properties of gallium are strongly temperature-dependent, particularly near the melting point. For example, the coefficient of thermal expansion increases by several hundred percent upon melting.

===Isotopes===

Gallium has 30 known isotopes, ranging in mass number from 60 to 89. Only two isotopes are stable and occur naturally, gallium-69 and gallium-71. Gallium-69 is more abundant: it makes up about 60.1% of natural gallium, while gallium-71 makes up the remaining 39.9%. All the other isotopes are radioactive, with gallium-67 being the longest-lived (half-life 3.261 days). Isotopes lighter than gallium-69 usually decay through beta plus decay (positron emission) or electron capture to isotopes of zinc, while isotopes heavier than gallium-71 decay through beta minus decay (electron emission), possibly with delayed neutron emission, to isotopes of germanium. Gallium-70 can decay through both beta minus decay and electron capture. Gallium-67 is unique among the light isotopes in having only electron capture as a decay mode, as its decay energy is not sufficient to allow positron emission. Gallium-67 and gallium-68 (half-life 67.7 min) are both used in nuclear medicine.

==Chemical properties==

Gallium is found primarily in the +3 oxidation state. The +1 oxidation state is also found in some compounds, although it is less common than it is for gallium&#x27;s heavier congeners indium and thallium. For example, the very stable GaCl2 contains both gallium(I) and gallium(III) and can be formulated as GaIGaIIICl4; in contrast, the monochloride is unstable above 0 °C, disproportionating into elemental gallium and gallium(III) chloride. Compounds containing Ga–Ga bonds are true gallium(II) compounds, such as GaS (which can be formulated as Ga24+(S2−)2) and the dioxan complex Ga2Cl4(C4H8O2)2.

===Aqueous chemistry===
Strong acids dissolve gallium, forming gallium(III) salts such as  (gallium nitrate). Aqueous solutions of gallium(III) salts contain the hydrated gallium ion, . Gallium(III) hydroxide, , may be precipitated from gallium(III) solutions by adding ammonia. Dehydrating at 100 °C produces gallium oxide hydroxide, GaO(OH).

Alkaline hydroxide solutions dissolve gallium, forming &quot;gallate&quot; salts (not to be confused with identically named gallic acid salts) containing the anion. Gallium hydroxide, which is amphoteric, also dissolves in alkali to form gallate salts. Although earlier work suggested as another possible gallate anion, it was not found in later work.

===Oxides and chalcogenides===
Gallium reacts with the chalcogens only at relatively high temperatures. At room temperature, gallium metal is not reactive with air and water because it forms a passive, protective oxide layer. At higher temperatures, however, it reacts with atmospheric oxygen to form gallium(III) oxide, . Reducing with elemental gallium in vacuum at 500 °C to 700 °C yields the dark brown gallium(I) oxide, . is a very strong reducing agent, capable of reducing  to . It disproportionates at 800 °C back to gallium and .

Gallium(III) sulfide, , has 3 possible crystal modifications. It can be made by the reaction of gallium with hydrogen sulfide () at 950 °C. Alternatively, can be used at 747 °C:
:2 + 3 → + 6 

Reacting a mixture of alkali metal carbonates and with leads to the formation of &quot;thiogallates&quot; containing the anion. Strong acids decompose these salts, releasing in the process. The mercury salt, , can be used as a phosphor.

Gallium also forms sulfides in lower oxidation states, such as gallium(II) sulfide and the green gallium(I) sulfide, the latter of which is produced from the former by heating to 1000 °C under a stream of nitrogen.

The other binary chalcogenides, and , have the zincblende structure. They are all semiconductors but are easily hydrolysed and have limited utility.

===Nitrides and pnictides===

Gallium reacts with ammonia at 1050 °C to form gallium nitride, GaN. Gallium also forms binary compounds with phosphorus, arsenic, and antimony: gallium phosphide (GaP), gallium arsenide (GaAs), and gallium antimonide (GaSb). These compounds have the same structure as ZnS, and have important semiconducting properties. GaP, GaAs, and GaSb can be synthesized by the direct reaction of gallium with elemental phosphorus, arsenic, or antimony. They exhibit higher electrical conductivity than GaN. GaP can also be synthesized by reacting with phosphorus at low temperatures.

Gallium forms ternary nitrides; for example:

Similar compounds with phosphorus and arsenic are possible: and . These compounds are easily hydrolyzed by dilute acids and water.

===Halides===

Gallium(III) oxide reacts with fluorinating agents such as HF or  to form gallium(III) fluoride, . It is an ionic compound strongly insoluble in water. However, it dissolves in hydrofluoric acid, in which it forms an adduct with water, . Attempting to dehydrate this adduct forms . The adduct reacts with ammonia to form , which can then be heated to form anhydrous .

Gallium trichloride is formed by the reaction of gallium metal with chlorine gas. Unlike the trifluoride, gallium(III) chloride exists as dimeric molecules, , with a melting point of 78 °C. Equivalent compounds are formed with bromine and iodine,  and .

Like the other group 13 trihalides, gallium(III) halides are Lewis acids, reacting as halide acceptors with alkali metal halides to form salts containing anions, where X is a halogen. They also react with alkyl halides to form carbocations and .

When heated to a high temperature, gallium(III) halides react with elemental gallium to form the respective gallium(I) halides. For example, reacts with Ga to form :
:2 Ga + 3 GaCl (g)

At lower temperatures, the equilibrium shifts toward the left and GaCl disproportionates back to elemental gallium and . GaCl can also be produced by reacting Ga with HCl at 950 °C; the product can be condensed as a red solid.

Gallium(I) compounds can be stabilized by forming adducts with Lewis acids. For example:
:GaCl + → 

The so-called &quot;gallium(II) halides&quot;, , are actually adducts of gallium(I) halides with the respective gallium(III) halides, having the structure . For example:
:GaCl + → 

===Hydrides===
Like aluminium, gallium also forms a hydride, , known as &quot;gallane&quot;, which may be produced by reacting lithium gallanate () with gallium(III) chloride at −30 °C:
:3 + → 3 LiCl + 4 

In the presence of dimethyl ether as solvent, polymerizes to . If no solvent is used, the dimer (&quot;digallane&quot;) is formed as a gas. Its structure is similar to diborane, having two hydrogen atoms bridging the two gallium centers, unlike α- in which aluminium has a coordination number of 6.

Gallane is unstable above −10 °C, decomposing to elemental gallium and hydrogen.

===Organogallium compounds===

Organogallium compounds are of similar reactivity to organoindium compounds, less reactive than organoaluminium compounds, but more reactive than organothallium compounds. Alkylgalliums are monomeric. Lewis acidity decreases in the order Al &gt; Ga &gt; In and as a result organogallium compounds do not form bridged dimers as organoaluminium compounds do. Organogallium compounds are also less reactive than organoaluminium compounds. They do form stable peroxides. These alkylgalliums are liquids at room temperature, having low melting points, and are quite mobile and flammable. Triphenylgallium is monomeric in solution, but its crystals form chain structures due to weak intermolecluar Ga···C interactions.

Gallium trichloride is a common starting reagent for the formation of organogallium compounds, such as in carbogallation reactions. Gallium trichloride reacts with lithium cyclopentadienide in diethyl ether to form the trigonal planar gallium cyclopentadienyl complex GaCp3. Gallium(I) forms complexes with arene ligands such as hexamethylbenzene. Because this ligand is quite bulky, the structure of the [Ga(η6-C6Me6)]+ is that of a half-sandwich. Less bulky ligands such as mesitylene allow two ligands to be attached to the central gallium atom in a bent sandwich structure. Benzene is even less bulky and allows the formation of dimers: an example is [Ga(η6-C6H6)2] [GaCl4]·3C6H6.

==History==

In 1871, the existence of gallium was first predicted by Russian chemist Dmitri Mendeleev, who named it &quot;eka-aluminium&quot; from its position in his periodic table. He also predicted several properties of eka-aluminium that correspond closely to the real properties of gallium, such as its density, melting point, oxide character, and bonding in chloride.

Mendeleev further predicted that eka-aluminium would be discovered by means of the spectroscope, and that metallic eka-aluminium would dissolve slowly in both acids and alkalis and would not react with air. He also predicted that M2O3 would dissolve in acids to give MX3 salts, that eka-aluminium salts would form basic salts, that eka-aluminium sulfate should form alums, and that anhydrous MCl3 should have a greater volatility than ZnCl2: all of these predictions turned out to be true.

Gallium was discovered using spectroscopy by French chemist Paul-Émile Lecoq de Boisbaudran in 1875 from its characteristic spectrum (two violet lines) in a sample of sphalerite. Later that year, Lecoq obtained the free metal by electrolysis of the hydroxide in potassium hydroxide solution.

He named the element &quot;gallia&quot;, from Latin meaning &#x27;Gaul&#x27;, a name for his native land of France. It was later claimed that, in a multilingual pun of a kind favoured by men of science in the 19th century, he had also named gallium after himself: is French for &#x27;the rooster&#x27;, and the Latin word for &#x27;rooster&#x27; is . In an 1877 article, Lecoq denied this conjecture.

Originally, de Boisbaudran determined the density of gallium as 4.7 g/cm3, the only property that failed to match Mendeleev&#x27;s predictions; Mendeleev then wrote to him and suggested that he should remeasure the density, and de Boisbaudran then obtained the correct value of 5.9 g/cm3, that Mendeleev had predicted exactly.

From its discovery in 1875 until the era of semiconductors, the primary uses of gallium were high-temperature thermometrics and metal alloys with unusual properties of stability or ease of melting (some such being liquid at room temperature).

The development of gallium arsenide as a direct bandgap semiconductor in the 1960s ushered in the most important stage in the applications of gallium. In the late 1960s, the electronics industry started using gallium on a commercial scale to fabricate light emitting diodes, photovoltaics and semiconductors, while the metals industry used it to reduce the melting point of alloys.

First blue gallium nitride LED were developed in 1971-1973, but they were feeble. Only in the early 1990s Shuji Nakamura managed to combine GaN with indium gallium nitride and develop the modern blue LED, now making the basis of ubiquitous white LEDs, which Nichia commercialized in 1993. He and two other Japanese scientists received a Nobel in Physics in 2014 for this work.

Global gallium production slowly grew from several tens of t/year in the 1970s til ca. 2010, when it passed 100 t/yr and rapidly accelerated, by 2024 reaching about 450 t/yr.

==Occurrence==
Gallium does not exist as a free element in the Earth&#x27;s crust, and the few high-content minerals, such as gallite (CuGaS2), are too rare to serve as a primary source. The abundance in the Earth&#x27;s crust is approximately 16.9 ppm. It is the 34th most abundant element in the crust. This is comparable to the crustal abundances of lead, cobalt, and niobium. Yet unlike these elements, gallium does not form its own ore deposits with concentrations of &gt; 0.1 wt.% in ore. Rather it occurs at trace concentrations similar to the crustal value in zinc ores, and at somewhat higher values (~ 50 ppm) in aluminium ores, from both of which it is extracted as a by-product. This lack of independent deposits is due to gallium&#x27;s geochemical behaviour, showing no strong enrichment in the processes relevant to the formation of most ore deposits.

The United States Geological Survey (USGS) estimates that more than 1 million tons of gallium is contained in known reserves of bauxite and zinc ores. Some coal flue dusts contain small quantities of gallium, typically less than 1% by weight. However, these amounts are not extractable without mining of the host materials (see below). Thus, the availability of gallium is fundamentally determined by the rate at which bauxite, zinc ores, and coal are extracted.

==Production and availability==

Gallium is produced exclusively as a by-product during the processing of the ores of other metals. Its main source material is bauxite, the chief ore of aluminium, but minor amounts are also extracted from sulfidic zinc ores (sphalerite being the main host mineral). In the past, certain coals were an important source.

During the processing of bauxite to alumina in the Bayer process, gallium accumulates in the sodium hydroxide liquor. From this it can be extracted by a variety of methods. The most recent is the use of ion-exchange resin. Achievable extraction efficiencies critically depend on the original concentration in the feed bauxite. At a typical feed concentration of 50 ppm, about 15% of the contained gallium is extractable. The remainder reports to the red mud and aluminium hydroxide streams. Gallium is removed from the ion-exchange resin in solution. Electrolysis then gives gallium metal. For semiconductor use, it is further purified with zone melting or single-crystal extraction from a melt (Czochralski process). Purities of 99.9999% are routinely achieved and commercially available.
Its by-product status means that gallium production is constrained by the amount of bauxite, sulfidic zinc ores (and coal) extracted per year. Therefore, its availability needs to be discussed in terms of supply potential. The supply potential of a by-product is defined as that amount which is economically extractable from its host materials &quot;per year&quot; under current market conditions (i.e. technology and price). Reserves and resources are not relevant for by-products, since they &quot;cannot&quot; be extracted independently from the main-products. Recent estimates put the supply potential of gallium at a minimum of 2,100 t/yr from bauxite, 85 t/yr from sulfidic zinc ores, and potentially 590 t/yr from coal. These figures are significantly greater than current production (375 t in 2016). Thus, major future increases in the by-product production of gallium will be possible without significant increases in production costs or price. The average price for low-grade gallium was $120 per kilogram in 2016 and $135–140 per kilogram in 2017.

In 2017, the world&#x27;s production of low-grade gallium was tons—an increase of 15% from 2016. China, Japan, South Korea, Russia, and Ukraine were the leading producers, while Germany ceased primary production of gallium in 2016. The yield of high-purity gallium was ca. 180 tons, mostly originating from China, Japan, Slovakia, UK and U.S. The 2017 world annual production capacity was estimated at 730 tons for low-grade and 320 tons for refined gallium.

China produced tons of low-grade gallium in 2016 and tons in 2017. It also accounted for more than half of global LED production. As of July 2023, China accounted for between 80% and 95% of its production.

==Applications==
Semiconductor applications dominate the commercial demand for gallium, accounting for 98% of the total. The next major application is for gadolinium gallium garnets. As of 2022, 44% of world use went to light fixtures and 36% to integrated circuits, with smaller shares equal to ~7% going to photovoltaics and magnets each.

===Semiconductors===

Extremely high-purity (&gt;99.9999%) gallium is commercially available to serve the semiconductor industry. Gallium arsenide (GaAs) and gallium nitride (GaN) used in electronic components represented about 98% of the gallium consumption in the United States in 2007. About 66% of semiconductor gallium is used in the U.S. in integrated circuits (mostly gallium arsenide), such as the manufacture of ultra-high-speed logic chips and MESFETs for low-noise microwave preamplifiers in cell phones. About 20% of this gallium is used in optoelectronics.

Worldwide, gallium arsenide makes up 95% of the annual global gallium consumption. It amounted to $7.5 billion in 2016, with 53% originating from cell phones, 27% from wireless communications, and the rest from automotive, consumer, fiber-optic, and military applications. The recent increase in GaAs consumption is mostly related to the emergence of 3G and 4G smartphones, which employ up to 10 times the amount of GaAs in older models.

Gallium arsenide and gallium nitride can also be found in a variety of optoelectronic devices which had a market share of $15.3 billion in 2015 and $18.5 billion in 2016. Aluminium gallium arsenide (AlGaAs) is used in high-power infrared laser diodes. The semiconductors gallium nitride and indium gallium nitride are used in blue and violet optoelectronic devices, mostly laser diodes and light-emitting diodes. For example, gallium nitride 405 nm diode lasers are used as a violet light source for higher-density Blu-ray Disc compact data disc drives.

Other major applications of gallium nitride are cable television transmission, commercial wireless infrastructure, power electronics, and satellites. The GaN radio frequency device market alone was estimated at $370 million in 2016 and $420 million in 2016.

Multijunction photovoltaic cells, developed for satellite power applications, are made by molecular-beam epitaxy or metalorganic vapour-phase epitaxy of thin films of gallium arsenide, indium gallium phosphide, or indium gallium arsenide. The Mars Exploration Rovers and several satellites use triple-junction gallium arsenide on germanium cells. Gallium is also a component in photovoltaic compounds (such as copper indium gallium selenium sulfide ) used in solar panels as a cost-efficient alternative to crystalline silicon.

===Galinstan and other alloys===
Gallium readily alloys with most metals, and is used as an ingredient in low-melting alloys. The nearly eutectic alloy of gallium, indium, and tin is a room temperature liquid used in medical thermometers. This alloy, with the trade-name &quot;Galinstan&quot; (with the &quot;-stan&quot; referring to the tin, in Latin), has a low melting point of −19 °C (−2.2 °F). It has been suggested that this family of alloys could also be used to cool computer chips in place of water, and is often used as a replacement for thermal paste in high-performance computing. Gallium alloys have been evaluated as substitutes for mercury dental amalgams, but these materials have yet to see wide acceptance. Liquid alloys containing mostly gallium and indium have been found to precipitate gaseous CO2 into solid carbon and are being researched as potential methodologies for carbon capture and possibly carbon removal.

Because gallium wets glass or porcelain, gallium can be used to create brilliant mirrors. When the wetting action of gallium-alloys is not desired (as in Galinstan glass thermometers), the glass must be protected with a transparent layer of gallium(III) oxide.

Due to their high surface tension and deformability, gallium-based liquid metals can be used to create actuators by controlling the surface tension. Researchers have demonstrated the potentials of using liquid metal actuators as artificial muscle in robotic actuation.

The plutonium used in nuclear weapon pits is stabilized in the δ phase and made machinable by alloying with gallium.

===Biomedical applications===
Although gallium has no natural function in biology, gallium ions interact with processes in the body in a manner similar to iron(III). Because these processes include inflammation, a marker for many disease states, several gallium salts are used (or are in development) as pharmaceuticals and radiopharmaceuticals in medicine. Interest in the anticancer properties of gallium emerged when it was discovered that 67Ga(III) citrate injected in tumor-bearing animals localized to sites of tumor. Clinical trials have shown gallium nitrate to have antineoplastic activity against non-Hodgkin&#x27;s lymphoma and urothelial cancers. A new generation of gallium-ligand complexes such as tris(8-quinolinolato)gallium(III) (KP46) and gallium maltolate has emerged. Gallium nitrate (brand name Ganite) has been used as an intravenous pharmaceutical to treat hypercalcemia associated with tumor metastasis to bones. Gallium is thought to interfere with osteoclast function, and the therapy may be effective when other treatments have failed. Gallium maltolate, an oral, highly absorbable form of gallium(III) ion, is an anti-proliferative to pathologically proliferating cells, particularly cancer cells and some bacteria that accept it in place of ferric iron (Fe3+). Researchers are conducting clinical and preclinical trials on this compound as a potential treatment for a number of cancers, infectious diseases, and inflammatory diseases.

When gallium ions are mistakenly taken up in place of iron(III) by bacteria such as &quot;Pseudomonas&quot;, the ions interfere with respiration, and the bacteria die. This happens because iron is redox-active, allowing the transfer of electrons during respiration, while gallium is redox-inactive.

A complex amine-phenol Ga(III) compound MR045 is selectively toxic to parasites resistant to chloroquine, a common drug against malaria. Both the Ga(III) complex and chloroquine act by inhibiting crystallization of hemozoin, a disposal product formed from the digestion of blood by the parasites.

====Radiogallium salts====
Gallium-67 salts such as gallium citrate and gallium nitrate are used as radiopharmaceutical agents in the nuclear medicine imaging known as gallium scan. The radioactive isotope 67Ga is used, and the compound or salt of gallium is unimportant. The body handles Ga3+ in many ways as though it were Fe3+, and the ion is bound (and concentrates) in areas of inflammation, such as infection, and in areas of rapid cell division. This allows such sites to be imaged by nuclear scan techniques.

Gallium-68, a positron emitter with a half-life of 68 min, is now used as a diagnostic radionuclide in PET-CT when linked to pharmaceutical preparations such as DOTATOC, a somatostatin analogue used for neuroendocrine tumors investigation, and DOTA-TATE, a newer one, used for neuroendocrine metastasis and lung neuroendocrine cancer, such as certain types of &quot;microcytoma&quot;. Gallium-68&#x27;s preparation as a pharmaceutical is chemical, and the radionuclide is extracted by elution from germanium-68, a synthetic radioisotope of germanium, in gallium-68 generators.

===Other uses===
Neutrino detection: Gallium is used for neutrino detection. Possibly the largest amount of pure gallium ever collected in a single location is the Gallium-Germanium Neutrino Telescope used by the SAGE experiment at the Baksan Neutrino Observatory in Russia. This detector contains 55–57 tonnes (~9 cubic metres) of liquid gallium. Another experiment was the GALLEX neutrino detector operated in the early 1990s in an Italian mountain tunnel. The detector contained 12.2 tons of watered gallium-71. Solar neutrinos caused a few atoms of 71Ga to become radioactive 71Ge, which were detected. This experiment showed that the solar neutrino flux is 40% less than theory predicted. This deficit (solar neutrino problem) was not explained until better solar neutrino detectors and theories were constructed (see SNO).

Ion source: Gallium is also used as a liquid metal ion source for a focused ion beam. For example, a focused gallium-ion beam was used to create the world&#x27;s smallest book, &quot;Teeny Ted from Turnip Town&quot;.

Lubricants: Gallium serves as an additive in glide wax for skis and other low-friction surface materials.

Flexible electronics: Materials scientists speculate that the properties of gallium could make it suitable for the development of flexible and wearable devices.

Hydrogen generation: Gallium disrupts the protective oxide layer on aluminium, allowing water to react with the aluminium in AlGa to produce hydrogen gas.

Humor: A well-known practical joke among chemists is to fashion gallium spoons and use them to serve tea to unsuspecting guests, since gallium has a similar appearance to its lighter homolog aluminium. The spoons then melt in the hot tea.

==Gallium in the ocean==
Advances in trace element testing have allowed scientists to discover traces of dissolved gallium in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. In recent years, dissolved gallium concentrations have presented in the Beaufort Sea. These reports reflect the possible profiles of the Pacific and Atlantic Ocean waters. For the Pacific Oceans, typical dissolved gallium concentrations are between 4 and 6 pmol/kg at depths &lt;~150 m. In comparison, for Atlantic waters 25–28 pmol/kg at depths &gt;~350 m.

Gallium has entered oceans mainly through aeolian input, but having gallium in our oceans can be used to resolve aluminium distribution in the oceans. The reason for this is that gallium is geochemically similar to aluminium, just less reactive. Gallium also has a slightly larger surface water residence time than aluminium. Gallium has a similar dissolved profile similar to that of aluminium, due to this gallium can be used as a tracer for aluminium. Gallium can also be used as a tracer of aeolian inputs of iron. Gallium is used as a tracer for iron in the northwest Pacific, south and central Atlantic Oceans. For example, in the northwest Pacific, low gallium surface waters, in the subpolar region suggest that there is low dust input, which can subsequently explain the following high-nutrient, low-chlorophyll environmental behavior.

==Precautions==

Metallic gallium is not toxic. However, several gallium compounds are toxic.

Gallium halide complexes can be toxic. The Ga3+ ion of soluble gallium salts tends to form the insoluble hydroxide when injected in large doses; precipitation of this hydroxide resulted in nephrotoxicity in animals. In lower doses, soluble gallium is tolerated well and does not accumulate as a poison, instead being excreted mostly through urine. Excretion of gallium occurs in two phases: the first phase has a biological half-life of 1 hour, while the second has a biological half-life of 25 hours.

Inhaled Ga2O3 particles are probably toxic.
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Gallium at &quot;The Periodic Table of Videos&quot; (University of Nottingham)
* Safety data sheet at acialloys.com
* High-resolution photographs of molten gallium, gallium crystals and gallium ingots under Creative Commons licence
* Textbook information regarding gallium
* Environmental effects of gallium
* Gallium Statistics and Information
* Gallium: A Smart Metal United States Geological Survey
* Thermal conductivity
* Physical and thermodynamical properties of liquid gallium (doc pdf)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q861" start="0" end="7" title="Gallium" label="Gallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="13" end="29" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q102500" start="42" end="48" title="Chemical symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q861" start="49" end="51" title="Gallium" label="Ga"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="56" end="69" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="99" end="106" title="chemist" label="chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q366827" start="107" end="138" title="Paul-Émile Lecoq de Boisbaudran" label="Paul-Émile Lecoq de Boisbaudran"/>
<link wikidata="Q189294" start="162" end="170" title="boron group" label="group 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="242" end="251" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094" start="253" end="259" title="indium" label="indium"/>
<link wikidata="Q932" start="265" end="273" title="thallium" label="thallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="325" end="330" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q102145" start="334" end="367" title="standard temperature and pressure" label="standard temperature and pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747476" start="471" end="483" title="conchoidal fracture" label="conchoidally"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="551" end="556" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="602" end="615" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15119237" start="623" end="629" title="dopant" label="dopant"/>
<link wikidata="Q646" start="761" end="772" title="thermometer" label="thermometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q655870" start="793" end="817" title="environmentally friendly" label="environmentally friendly"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="833" end="840" title="Mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q675176" start="980" end="989" title="galinstan" label="galinstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094" start="1015" end="1021" title="indium" label="indium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="1034" end="1037" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q213659" start="1104" end="1116" title="supercooling" label="supercooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="1228" end="1232" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q105006" start="1247" end="1257" title="sphalerite" label="sphalerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078" start="1266" end="1273" title="bauxite" label="bauxite"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="1447" end="1458" title="electronics" label="electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q422819" start="1460" end="1476" title="Gallium arsenide" label="Gallium arsenide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11173" start="1490" end="1507" title="chemical compound" label="chemical compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="1546" end="1555" title="microwave" label="microwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="1601" end="1609" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q411713" start="1635" end="1650" title="gallium nitride" label="gallium nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q425734" start="1655" end="1677" title="indium gallium nitride" label="indium gallium nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="1702" end="1722" title="light-emitting diode" label="light-emitting diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q321098" start="1728" end="1739" title="diode laser" label="diode laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516414" start="1795" end="1820" title="gadolinium gallium garnet" label="gadolinium gallium garnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q61977883" start="1858" end="1885" title="technology-critical element" label="technology-critical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q611833" start="1893" end="1935" title="United States National Library of Medicine" label="United States National Library of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q80796" start="1940" end="1955" title="Frontiers Media" label="Frontiers Media"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2048" end="2054" title="ferric#Ferric iron and life" label="ferric"/>
<link wikidata="Q325669" start="2161" end="2181" title="radiopharmacology" label="radiopharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748405" start="2280" end="2288" title="smelting" label="smelting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747476" start="2347" end="2359" title="conchoidal fracture" label="conchoidally"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="2365" end="2370" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478447" start="2642" end="2647" title="properties of water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="2649" end="2656" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q867" start="2658" end="2667" title="germanium" label="germanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q942" start="2669" end="2676" title="bismuth" label="bismuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102" start="2682" end="2691" title="plutonium" label="plutonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q900515" start="2768" end="2784" title="grain boundary" label="grain boundaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="2819" end="2828" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="2829" end="2833" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="2834" end="2839" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="2845" end="2850" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17097288" start="2906" end="2932" title="liquid metal embrittlement" label="liquid metal embrittlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="2939" end="2952" title="melting point" label="melting point"/>
<link wikidata="Q907684" start="3222" end="3261" title="International Temperature Scale of 1990" label="International Temperature Scale of 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q229478" start="3290" end="3334" title="International Bureau of Weights and Measures" label="International Bureau of Weights and Measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q106410" start="3347" end="3359" title="triple point" label="triple point"/>
<link wikidata="Q176691" start="3427" end="3473" title="National Institute of Standards and Technology" label="National Institute of Standards and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q213659" start="3656" end="3665" title="supercooling" label="supercool"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="3676" end="3689" title="melting point" label="melting point"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="3690" end="3704" title="freezing point" label="freezing point"/>
<link wikidata="Q61231" start="3709" end="3721" title="nanoparticle" label="nanoparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q899429" start="3767" end="3774" title="Seed crystal" label="Seeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="3874" end="3881" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q895" start="3883" end="3891" title="rubidium" label="rubidium"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="3897" end="3904" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661322" start="4295" end="4309" title="vapor pressure" label="vapor pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="4428" end="4442" title="Kelvin" label="absolute scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q817136" start="4556" end="4560" title="wetting" label="wets"/>
<link wikidata="Q419487" start="4651" end="4669" title="gallium(III) oxide" label="gallium(III) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q143252" start="4674" end="4678" title="PTFE" label="PTFE"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="5068" end="5075" title="crystal" label="crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="5101" end="5118" title="crystal structure" label="crystal structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q648961" start="5165" end="5177" title="orthorhombic" label="orthorhombic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11878049" start="5211" end="5220" title="unit cell" label="unit cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q192274" start="5304" end="5306" title="picometre" label="pm"/>
<link wikidata="Q849516" start="5459" end="5469" title="metastability in molecules" label="metastable"/>
<link wikidata="Q127920" start="5578" end="5586" title="covalent" label="covalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q762043" start="5598" end="5604" title="Dimer (chemistry)" label="dimers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103" start="5806" end="5812" title="iodine" label="iodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="6003" end="6010" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q466686" start="6561" end="6572" title="Anisotropy" label="anisotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583695" start="6775" end="6792" title="thermal expansion" label="thermal expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q101395" start="7066" end="7077" title="mass number" label="mass number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357356" start="7449" end="7464" title="beta plus decay" label="beta plus decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q109910" start="7488" end="7504" title="electron capture" label="electron capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="7520" end="7524" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="7579" end="7595" title="beta minus decay" label="beta minus decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q898923" start="7639" end="7655" title="neutron emission" label="neutron emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q867" start="7672" end="7681" title="germanium" label="germanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187969" start="7932" end="7942" title="gallium-68" label="gallium-68"/>
<link wikidata="Q214963" start="7981" end="7997" title="nuclear medicine" label="nuclear medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q484152" start="8062" end="8077" title="oxidation state" label="oxidation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094" start="8210" end="8216" title="indium" label="indium"/>
<link wikidata="Q932" start="8221" end="8229" title="thallium" label="thallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q664231" start="8400" end="8418" title="disproportionating" label="disproportionating"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616882" start="8542" end="8545" title="gallium(II) sulfide" label="GaS"/>
<link wikidata="Q161532" start="8595" end="8601" title="dioxan" label="dioxan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321582" start="8718" end="8718" title="gallium(III) nitrate" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q906356" start="8738" end="8745" title="Aqueous" label="Aqueous"/>
<link wikidata="Q419661" start="8814" end="8836" title="Gallium(III) hydroxide" label="Gallium(III) hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="8898" end="8905" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q425597" start="8982" end="8991" title="hydroxide" label="hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q375837" start="9097" end="9108" title="gallic acid" label="gallic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q182677" start="9166" end="9176" title="amphoteric" label="amphoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q104567" start="9381" end="9390" title="chalcogen" label="chalcogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q917260" start="9519" end="9526" title="passivation (chemistry)" label="passive"/>
<link wikidata="Q50690" start="9539" end="9544" title="oxide" label="oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="9612" end="9618" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q419487" start="9627" end="9645" title="gallium(III) oxide" label="gallium(III) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4332806" start="9733" end="9749" title="gallium(I) oxide" label="gallium(I) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q216830" start="9770" end="9784" title="reducing agent" label="reducing agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="9806" end="9806" title="sulfuric acid" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="9810" end="9810" title="hydrogen sulfide" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q4445840" start="9866" end="9886" title="Gallium(III) sulfide" label="Gallium(III) sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="9975" end="9991" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248330" start="10286" end="10294" title="phosphor" label="phosphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616882" start="10360" end="10379" title="gallium(II) sulfide" label="gallium(II) sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10394" end="10412" title="gallium(I) sulfide" label="gallium(I) sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q473227" start="10560" end="10570" title="zincblende (crystal structure)" label="zincblende"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="10625" end="10635" title="hydrolysis" label="hydrolysed"/>
<link wikidata="Q411713" start="10740" end="10755" title="gallium nitride" label="gallium nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="10803" end="10813" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="10815" end="10822" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="10828" end="10836" title="antimony" label="antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q421416" start="10838" end="10855" title="gallium phosphide" label="gallium phosphide"/>
<link wikidata="Q422819" start="10863" end="10879" title="gallium arsenide" label="gallium arsenide"/>
<link wikidata="Q418807" start="10892" end="10910" title="gallium antimonide" label="gallium antimonide"/>
<link wikidata="Q204952" start="10962" end="10965" title="zinc sulfide" label="ZnS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="10986" end="11000" title="semiconductor" label="semiconducting"/>
<link wikidata="Q410851" start="11289" end="11296" title="nitride" label="nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="11427" end="11431" title="acid" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q888529" start="11491" end="11510" title="Halogenation" label="fluorinating agents"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468" start="11519" end="11521" title="hydrogen fluoride" label="HF"/>
<link wikidata="Q650" start="11525" end="11525" title="fluorine" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q418788" start="11534" end="11555" title="gallium(III) fluoride" label="gallium(III) fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q209569" start="11637" end="11654" title="hydrofluoric acid" label="hydrofluoric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q353392" start="11677" end="11683" title="adduct" label="adduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q31153" start="11829" end="11848" title="Gallium trichloride" label="Gallium trichloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="11897" end="11905" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2175117" start="12076" end="12076" title="gallium(III) bromide" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q2613252" start="12081" end="12081" title="gallium(III) iodide" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q900337" start="12145" end="12155" title="Lewis acid" label="Lewis acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q271026" start="12289" end="12302" title="haloalkane" label="alkyl halides"/>
<link wikidata="Q212270" start="12311" end="12322" title="carbocation" label="carbocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="13048" end="13057" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q106520" start="13080" end="13087" title="hydride" label="hydride"/>
<link wikidata="Q15410964" start="13106" end="13113" title="gallane" label="gallane"/>
<link wikidata="Q31153" start="13181" end="13202" title="gallium(III) chloride" label="gallium(III) chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q408050" start="13253" end="13267" title="dimethyl ether" label="dimethyl ether"/>
<link wikidata="Q516785" start="13337" end="13346" title="digallane" label="digallane"/>
<link wikidata="Q407684" start="13402" end="13410" title="diborane" label="diborane"/>
<link wikidata="Q412361" start="13481" end="13481" title="aluminium hydride" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="13605" end="13613" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025195" start="13700" end="13712" title="Organoindium chemistry" label="organoindium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2176535" start="13743" end="13758" title="Organoaluminium chemistry" label="organoaluminium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13793" end="13807" title="Thallium#Organothallium compounds" label="organothallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q900337" start="13848" end="13858" title="Lewis acid" label="Lewis acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037886" start="14467" end="14481" title="carbometalation" label="carbogallation"/>
<link wikidata="Q568" start="14525" end="14532" title="lithium" label="lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q202218" start="14554" end="14567" title="diethyl ether" label="diethyl ether"/>
<link wikidata="Q19834818" start="14668" end="14673" title="arene" label="arene"/>
<link wikidata="Q193161" start="14674" end="14680" title="ligand" label="ligand"/>
<link wikidata="Q413592" start="14690" end="14707" title="hexamethylbenzene" label="hexamethylbenzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570545" start="14795" end="14808" title="half sandwich compound" label="half-sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q425161" start="14837" end="14847" title="mesitylene" label="mesitylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270" start="14939" end="14946" title="Benzene" label="Benzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q9106" start="15133" end="15149" title="Dmitri Mendeleev" label="Dmitri Mendeleev"/>
<link wikidata="Q428940" start="15170" end="15183" title="Mendeleev&amp;#x27;s predicted elements" label="eka-aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="15215" end="15229" title="periodic table" label="periodic table"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="15356" end="15363" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="15365" end="15378" title="melting point" label="melting point"/>
<link wikidata="Q912034" start="15506" end="15518" title="spectroscope" label="spectroscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="15710" end="15724" title="aluminium salt" label="aluminium salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q190527" start="15789" end="15793" title="alum" label="alum"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="15943" end="15955" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q366827" start="15974" end="16005" title="Paul-Émile Lecoq de Boisbaudran" label="Paul-Émile Lecoq de Boisbaudran"/>
<link wikidata="Q428124" start="16052" end="16058" title="violet (color)" label="violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q105006" start="16081" end="16091" title="sphalerite" label="sphalerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q64403" start="16143" end="16155" title="electrolysis" label="electrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q419661" start="16163" end="16172" title="Gallium(III) hydroxide" label="hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q132298" start="16176" end="16195" title="potassium hydroxide" label="potassium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="16253" end="16258" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="16273" end="16277" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q263668" start="16368" end="16371" title="pun" label="pun"/>
<link wikidata="Q422819" start="17200" end="17216" title="gallium arsenide" label="gallium arsenide"/>
<link wikidata="Q959336" start="17222" end="17250" title="direct and indirect band gaps" label="direct bandgap semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358497" start="17355" end="17375" title="electronics industry" label="electronics industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q192127" start="17456" end="17469" title="photovoltaics" label="photovoltaics"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="17555" end="17561" title="alloys" label="alloys"/>
<link wikidata="Q411713" start="17575" end="17590" title="gallium nitride" label="gallium nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q730065" start="17670" end="17684" title="Shuji Nakamura" label="Shuji Nakamura"/>
<link wikidata="Q425734" start="17713" end="17735" title="indium gallium nitride" label="indium gallium nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926489" start="17822" end="17828" title="Nichia" label="Nichia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="17901" end="17917" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18319" end="18344" title="Earth#Chemical composition" label="in the Earth&amp;#x27;s crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="18367" end="18370" title="parts per million" label="ppm"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="18471" end="18475" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q740" start="18477" end="18483" title="cobalt" label="cobalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046" start="18489" end="18496" title="niobium" label="niobium"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="18990" end="19021" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532617" start="19147" end="19151" title="flue" label="flue"/>
<link wikidata="Q165632" start="19152" end="19156" title="dust" label="dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128255" start="19520" end="19530" title="by-product" label="by-product"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19610" end="19617" title="Bauxite#Source of gallium" label="bauxite"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="19636" end="19645" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q105006" start="19709" end="19719" title="sphalerite" label="sphalerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078" start="19829" end="19836" title="bauxite" label="bauxite"/>
<link wikidata="Q177342" start="19840" end="19847" title="aluminium oxide" label="alumina"/>
<link wikidata="Q248670" start="19855" end="19868" title="Bayer process" label="Bayer process"/>
<link wikidata="Q102769" start="19897" end="19913" title="sodium hydroxide" label="sodium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989369" start="20007" end="20025" title="ion-exchange resin" label="ion-exchange resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q747996" start="20254" end="20261" title="red mud" label="red mud"/>
<link wikidata="Q407125" start="20266" end="20285" title="aluminium hydroxide" label="aluminium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="20398" end="20411" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q219909" start="20445" end="20457" title="zone melting" label="zone melting"/>
<link wikidata="Q594666" start="20500" end="20519" title="Czochralski process" label="Czochralski process"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="22228" end="22231" title="Light-emitting_diode" label="LED"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516414" start="22476" end="22501" title="gadolinium gallium garnet" label="gadolinium gallium garnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="22769" end="22782" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q422819" start="22793" end="22809" title="Gallium arsenide" label="Gallium arsenide"/>
<link wikidata="Q411713" start="22821" end="22836" title="gallium nitride" label="gallium nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837339" start="23117" end="23123" title="MESFET" label="MESFET"/>
<link wikidata="Q193091" start="23216" end="23230" title="optoelectronic" label="optoelectronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="23585" end="23587" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q79697" start="23592" end="23594" title="4G" label="4G"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="23595" end="23605" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q304176" start="23844" end="23870" title="Aluminium gallium arsenide" label="Aluminium gallium arsenide"/>
<link wikidata="Q425734" start="23964" end="23986" title="indium gallium nitride" label="indium gallium nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q321098" start="24046" end="24057" title="laser diode" label="laser diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="24063" end="24083" title="light-emitting diode" label="light-emitting diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="24188" end="24200" title="Blu-ray Disc" label="Blu-ray Disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q452346" start="24487" end="24518" title="Multijunction photovoltaic cell" label="Multijunction photovoltaic cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="24535" end="24544" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q898542" start="24577" end="24599" title="molecular-beam epitaxy" label="molecular-beam epitaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924991" start="24603" end="24636" title="metalorganic vapour-phase epitaxy" label="metalorganic vapour-phase epitaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137203" start="24640" end="24649" title="thin film" label="thin film"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025190" start="24672" end="24696" title="indium gallium phosphide" label="indium gallium phosphide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618059" start="24701" end="24724" title="indium gallium arsenide" label="indium gallium arsenide"/>
<link wikidata="Q220827" start="24730" end="24752" title="Mars Exploration Rover" label="Mars Exploration Rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q192127" start="24865" end="24877" title="photovoltaic" label="photovoltaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206302" start="24994" end="25013" title="crystalline silicon" label="crystalline silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="25065" end="25070" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q428729" start="25122" end="25139" title="low-melting alloy" label="low-melting alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q628595" start="25153" end="25161" title="eutectic" label="eutectic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094" start="25180" end="25186" title="indium" label="indium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="25192" end="25195" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q675176" start="25293" end="25302" title="Galinstan" label="Galinstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q868947" start="25564" end="25577" title="Thermal grease" label="thermal paste"/>
<link wikidata="Q898259" start="25671" end="25685" title="dental amalgam" label="dental amalgam"/>
<link wikidata="Q41491" start="25909" end="25923" title="Carbon capture and storage" label="carbon capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q56298528" start="25937" end="25951" title="Carbon dioxide removal" label="carbon removal"/>
<link wikidata="Q817136" start="25970" end="25974" title="wetting" label="wets"/>
<link wikidata="Q130693" start="25984" end="25993" title="porcelain" label="porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q35197" start="26035" end="26041" title="mirror" label="mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q419487" start="26195" end="26213" title="gallium(III) oxide" label="gallium(III) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q170749" start="26234" end="26249" title="surface tension" label="surface tension"/>
<link wikidata="Q172145" start="26254" end="26267" title="fluid mechanics" label="deformability"/>
<link wikidata="Q423488" start="26319" end="26327" title="actuator" label="actuator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801090" start="26445" end="26462" title="artificial muscles" label="artificial muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102" start="26490" end="26499" title="plutonium" label="plutonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198547" start="26508" end="26527" title="plutonium pit" label="nuclear weapon pits"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733227" start="26549" end="26556" title="allotropes of plutonium" label="δ phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205706" start="26580" end="26601" title="Plutonium–gallium alloy" label="alloying with gallium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26759" end="26768" title="Ferric#Ferric iron and life" label="iron(III)"/>
<link wikidata="Q101991" start="26802" end="26814" title="inflammation" label="inflammation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="26908" end="26923" title="pharmaceutical drug" label="pharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q325669" start="26928" end="26948" title="radiopharmacology" label="radiopharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321582" start="27392" end="27407" title="Gallium nitrate" label="Gallium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474877" start="27484" end="27497" title="hypercalcemia" label="hypercalcemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181876" start="27520" end="27530" title="metastasis" label="metastasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q828410" start="27578" end="27588" title="osteoclast" label="osteoclast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519111" start="27667" end="27684" title="Gallium maltolate" label="Gallium maltolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q131143" start="28159" end="28170" title="Pseudomonas" label="Pseudomonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q167198" start="28379" end="28384" title="amine" label="amine"/>
<link wikidata="Q130336" start="28385" end="28391" title="phenol" label="phenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q422438" start="28462" end="28473" title="chloroquine" label="chloroquine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="28497" end="28504" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3144960" start="28584" end="28592" title="hemozoin" label="hemozoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187969" start="28694" end="28704" title="Gallium-67" label="Gallium-67"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="28705" end="28710" title="Salt (chemistry)" label="salts"/>
<link wikidata="Q159683" start="28727" end="28734" title="citrate" label="citrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182168" start="28747" end="28754" title="nitrate" label="nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9178218" start="28767" end="28786" title="radiopharmaceutical" label="radiopharmaceutical"/>
<link wikidata="Q214963" start="28801" end="28817" title="nuclear medicine" label="nuclear medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519107" start="28835" end="28847" title="gallium scan" label="gallium scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="28853" end="28872" title="radionuclide" label="radioactive isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2187969" start="29185" end="29195" title="Gallium-68" label="Gallium-68"/>
<link wikidata="Q908790" start="29346" end="29353" title="DOTATOC" label="DOTATOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q407166" start="29357" end="29369" title="somatostatin" label="somatostatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981276" start="29388" end="29409" title="neuroendocrine tumors" label="neuroendocrine tumors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205896" start="29429" end="29438" title="DOTA-TATE" label="DOTA-TATE"/>
<link wikidata="Q181876" start="29477" end="29487" title="metastasis" label="metastasis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29551" end="29562" title="microcytoma" label="microcytoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q684907" start="29670" end="29677" title="elution" label="elution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194370" start="29699" end="29721" title="synthetic radioisotope" label="synthetic radioisotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q867" start="29725" end="29734" title="germanium" label="germanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492493" start="29739" end="29759" title="gallium-68 generator" label="gallium-68 generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q583152" start="29820" end="29838" title="neutrino detection" label="neutrino detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379200" start="29976" end="29991" title="SAGE (Soviet-American Gallium Experiment)" label="SAGE experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388193" start="29999" end="30026" title="Baksan Neutrino Observatory" label="Baksan Neutrino Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302608" start="30138" end="30144" title="GALLEX" label="GALLEX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2216633" start="30278" end="30292" title="Solar neutrino" label="Solar neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q867" start="30345" end="30347" title="germanium" label="Ge"/>
<link wikidata="Q31937" start="30471" end="30493" title="solar neutrino problem" label="solar neutrino problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q176822" start="30586" end="30589" title="Sudbury Neutrino Observatory" label="SNO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6557458" start="30631" end="30654" title="liquid metal ion source" label="liquid metal ion source"/>
<link wikidata="Q258563" start="30661" end="30677" title="focused ion beam" label="focused ion beam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694495" start="30776" end="30802" title="Teeny Ted from Turnip Town" label="Teeny Ted from Turnip Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894423" start="30856" end="30865" title="glide wax" label="glide wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q917260" start="31122" end="31144" title="Passivation (chemistry)" label="protective oxide layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q27963807" start="31205" end="31209" title="AlGa" label="AlGa"/>
<link wikidata="Q931092" start="31256" end="31270" title="practical joke" label="practical joke"/>
<link wikidata="Q131274" start="31707" end="31719" title="Beaufort Sea" label="Beaufort Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q919178" start="32784" end="32814" title="high-nutrient, low-chlorophyll" label="high-nutrient, low-chlorophyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468324" start="33124" end="33138" title="nephrotoxicity" label="nephrotoxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q686886" start="33348" end="33368" title="biological half-life" label="biological half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988689" start="33545" end="33573" title="The Periodic Table of Videos" label="The Periodic Table of Videos"/>
<link wikidata="Q222067" start="33609" end="33626" title="Safety data sheet" label="Safety data sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="33898" end="33929" title="United States Geological Survey" label="United States Geological Survey"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12242" wikidata="Q867" url="?curid=12242" title="Germanium">
<text>Germanium is a chemical element; it has symbol Ge and atomic number 32. It is lustrous, hard-brittle, grayish-white and similar in appearance to silicon. It is a metalloid or a nonmetal in the carbon group that is chemically similar to silicon. Like silicon, germanium naturally reacts and forms complexes with oxygen in nature.

Because it seldom appears in high concentration, germanium was found comparatively late in the discovery of the elements. Germanium ranks 50th in abundance of the elements in the Earth&#x27;s crust. In 1869, Dmitri Mendeleev predicted its existence and some of its properties from its position on his periodic table, and called the element ekasilicon. On February 6, 1886, Clemens Winkler at Freiberg University found the new element, along with silver and sulfur, in the mineral argyrodite. Winkler named the element after Germany, his country of birth. Germanium is mined primarily from sphalerite (the primary ore of zinc), though germanium is also recovered commercially from silver, lead, and copper ores.

Elemental germanium is used as a semiconductor in transistors and various other electronic devices. Historically, the first decade of semiconductor electronics was based entirely on germanium. Presently, the major end uses are fibre-optic systems, infrared optics, solar cell applications, and light-emitting diodes (LEDs). Germanium compounds are also used for polymerization catalysts and have most recently found use in the production of nanowires. This element forms a large number of organogermanium compounds, such as tetraethylgermanium, useful in organometallic chemistry. Germanium is considered a technology-critical element.

Germanium is not thought to be an essential element for any living organism. Similar to silicon and aluminium, naturally-occurring germanium compounds tend to be insoluble in water and thus have little oral toxicity. However, synthetic soluble germanium salts are nephrotoxic, and synthetic chemically reactive germanium compounds with halogens and hydrogen are irritants and toxins.

== History ==
In his report on &quot;The Periodic Law of the Chemical Elements&quot; in 1869, the Russian chemist Dmitri Mendeleev predicted the existence of several unknown chemical elements, including one that would fill a gap in the carbon family, located between silicon and tin. Because of its position in his periodic table, Mendeleev called it &quot;ekasilicon (Es)&quot;, and he estimated its atomic weight to be 70 (later 72).

In mid-1885, at a mine near Freiberg, Saxony, a new mineral was discovered and named &quot;argyrodite&quot; because of its high silver content. The chemist Clemens Winkler analyzed this new mineral, which proved to be a combination of silver, sulfur, and a new element. Winkler was able to isolate the new element in 1886 and found it similar to antimony. He initially considered the new element to be eka-antimony, but was soon convinced that it was instead eka-silicon. Before Winkler published his results on the new element, he decided that he would name his element &quot;neptunium&quot;, since the recent discovery of planet Neptune in 1846 had similarly been preceded by mathematical predictions of its existence. However, the name &quot;neptunium&quot; had already been given to another proposed chemical element (though not the element that today bears the name neptunium, which was discovered in 1940). So instead, Winkler named the new element &quot;germanium&quot; (from the Latin word, &quot;Germania&quot;, for Germany) in honor of his homeland. Argyrodite proved empirically to be Ag8GeS6.
Because this new element showed some similarities with the elements arsenic and antimony, its proper place in the periodic table was under consideration, but its similarities with Dmitri Mendeleev&#x27;s predicted element &quot;ekasilicon&quot; confirmed that place on the periodic table. With further material from 500 kg of ore from the mines in Saxony, Winkler confirmed the chemical properties of the new element in 1887. He also determined an atomic weight of 72.32 by analyzing pure germanium tetrachloride (), while Lecoq de Boisbaudran deduced 72.3 by a comparison of the lines in the spark spectrum of the element.

Winkler was able to prepare several new compounds of germanium, including fluorides, chlorides, sulfides, dioxide, and tetraethylgermane (Ge(C2H5)4), the first organogermane. The physical data from those compounds—which corresponded well with Mendeleev&#x27;s predictions—made the discovery an important confirmation of Mendeleev&#x27;s idea of element periodicity. Here is a comparison between the prediction and Winkler&#x27;s data:


Until the late 1930s, germanium was thought to be a poorly conducting metal. Germanium did not become economically significant until after 1945 when its properties as an electronic semiconductor were recognized. During World War II, small amounts of germanium were used in some special electronic devices, mostly diodes. The first major use was the point-contact Schottky diodes for radar pulse detection during the War. The first silicon–germanium alloys were obtained in 1955. Before 1945, only a few hundred kilograms of germanium were produced in smelters each year, but by the end of the 1950s, the annual worldwide production had reached .

The development of the germanium transistor in 1948 opened the door to countless applications of solid state electronics. From 1950 through the early 1970s, this area provided an increasing market for germanium, but then high-purity silicon began replacing germanium in transistors, diodes, and rectifiers. For example, the company that became Fairchild Semiconductor was founded in 1957 with the express purpose of producing silicon transistors. Silicon has superior electrical properties, but it requires much greater purity that could not be commercially achieved in the early years of semiconductor electronics.

Meanwhile, the demand for germanium for fiber optic communication networks, infrared night vision systems, and polymerization catalysts increased dramatically. These end uses represented 85% of worldwide germanium consumption in 2000. The US government even designated germanium as a strategic and critical material, calling for a 146 ton (132 tonne) supply in the national defense stockpile in 1987.

Germanium differs from silicon in that the supply is limited by the availability of exploitable sources, while the supply of silicon is limited only by production capacity since silicon comes from ordinary sand and quartz. While silicon could be bought in 1998 for less than $10 per kg, the price of germanium was almost $800 per kg.

== Characteristics ==

Under standard conditions, germanium is a brittle, silvery-white, semiconductor. This form constitutes an allotrope known as &quot;α-germanium&quot;, which has a metallic luster and a diamond cubic crystal structure, the same structure as silicon and diamond. In this form, germanium has a threshold displacement energy of formula_1. At pressures above 120 kbar, germanium becomes the metallic allotrope &quot;β-germanium&quot; with the same structure as β-tin. Like silicon, gallium, bismuth, antimony, and water, germanium is one of the few substances that expands as it solidifies (i.e. freezes) from the molten state.

Germanium is a semiconductor having an indirect bandgap, as is crystalline silicon. Zone refining techniques have led to the production of crystalline germanium for semiconductors that has an impurity of only one part in 1010,
making it one of the purest materials ever obtained.
The first semi-metallic material discovered (in 2005) to become a superconductor in the presence of an extremely strong electromagnetic field was an alloy of germanium, uranium, and rhodium.

Pure germanium is known to spontaneously extrude very long screw dislocations, referred to as &quot;germanium whiskers&quot;. The growth of these whiskers is one of the primary reasons for the failure of older diodes and transistors made from germanium, as, depending on what they eventually touch, they may lead to an electrical short.

=== Chemistry ===
Elemental germanium starts to oxidize slowly in air at around 250 °C, forming GeO2 . Germanium is insoluble in dilute acids and alkalis but dissolves slowly in hot concentrated sulfuric and nitric acids and reacts violently with molten alkalis to produce germanates (). Germanium occurs mostly in the oxidation state +4 although many +2 compounds are known. Other oxidation states are rare: +3 is found in compounds such as Ge2Cl6, and +3 and +1 are found on the surface of oxides, or negative oxidation states in germanides, such as −4 in . Germanium cluster anions (Zintl ions) such as Ge42−, Ge94−, Ge92−, [(Ge9)2]6− have been prepared by the extraction from alloys containing alkali metals and germanium in liquid ammonia in the presence of ethylenediamine or a cryptand. The oxidation states of the element in these ions are not integers—similar to the ozonides O3−.

Two oxides of germanium are known: germanium dioxide (, germania) and germanium monoxide, (). The dioxide, GeO2, can be obtained by roasting germanium disulfide (), and is a white powder that is only slightly soluble in water but reacts with alkalis to form germanates. The monoxide, germanous oxide, can be obtained by the high temperature reaction of GeO2 with elemental Ge. The dioxide (and the related oxides and germanates) exhibits the unusual property of having a high refractive index for visible light, but transparency to infrared light. Bismuth germanate, Bi4Ge3O12 (BGO), is used as a scintillator.

Binary compounds with other chalcogens are also known, such as the disulfide () and diselenide (), and the monosulfide (GeS), monoselenide (GeSe), and monotelluride (GeTe). GeS2 forms as a white precipitate when hydrogen sulfide is passed through strongly acid solutions containing Ge(IV). The disulfide is appreciably soluble in water and in solutions of caustic alkalis or alkaline sulfides. Nevertheless, it is not soluble in acidic water, which allowed Winkler to discover the element. By heating the disulfide in a current of hydrogen, the monosulfide (GeS) is formed, which sublimes in thin plates of a dark color and metallic luster, and is soluble in solutions of the caustic alkalis. Upon melting with alkaline carbonates and sulfur, germanium compounds form salts known as thiogermanates.
Four tetrahalides are known. Under normal conditions germanium tetraiodide (GeI4) is a solid, germanium tetrafluoride (GeF4) a gas and the others volatile liquids. For example, germanium tetrachloride, GeCl4, is obtained as a colorless fuming liquid boiling at 83.1 °C by heating the metal with chlorine. All the tetrahalides are readily hydrolyzed to hydrated germanium dioxide. GeCl4 is used in the production of organogermanium compounds. All four dihalides are known and in contrast to the tetrahalides are polymeric solids. Additionally Ge2Cl6 and some higher compounds of formula Ge&quot;n&quot;Cl2&quot;n&quot;+2 are known. The unusual compound Ge6Cl16 has been prepared that contains the Ge5Cl12 unit with a neopentane structure.

Germane (GeH4) is a compound similar in structure to methane. Polygermanes—compounds that are similar to alkanes—with formula Ge&quot;n&quot;H2&quot;n&quot;+2 containing up to five germanium atoms are known. The germanes are less volatile and less reactive than their corresponding silicon analogues. GeH4 reacts with alkali metals in liquid ammonia to form white crystalline MGeH3 which contain the GeH3− anion. The germanium hydrohalides with one, two and three halogen atoms are colorless reactive liquids.
The first organogermanium compound was synthesized by Winkler in 1887; the reaction of germanium tetrachloride with diethylzinc yielded tetraethylgermane (). Organogermanes of the type R4Ge (where R is an alkyl) such as tetramethylgermane () and tetraethylgermane are accessed through the cheapest available germanium precursor germanium tetrachloride and alkyl nucleophiles. Organic germanium hydrides such as isobutylgermane () were found to be less hazardous and may be used as a liquid substitute for toxic germane gas in semiconductor applications. Many germanium reactive intermediates are known: germyl free radicals, germylenes (similar to carbenes), and germynes (similar to carbynes). The organogermanium compound 2-carboxyethylgermasesquioxane was first reported in the 1970s, and for a while was used as a dietary supplement and thought to possibly have anti-tumor qualities.

Using a ligand called Eind (1,1,3,3,5,5,7,7-octaethyl-s-hydrindacen-4-yl) germanium is able to form a double bond with oxygen (germanone). Germanium hydride and germanium tetrahydride are very flammable and even explosive when mixed with air.

=== Isotopes ===

Germanium occurs in five natural isotopes: , , , , and . Of these, is very slightly radioactive, decaying by double beta decay with a half-life of . is the most common isotope, having a natural abundance of approximately 36%. is the least common with a natural abundance of approximately 7%. When bombarded with alpha particles, the isotope will generate stable , releasing high energy electrons in the process. Because of this, it is used in combination with radon for nuclear batteries.

At least 27 radioisotopes have also been synthesized, ranging in atomic mass from 58 to 89. The most stable of these is , decaying by electron capture with a half-life of ays. The least stable is , with a half-life of . While most of germanium&#x27;s radioisotopes decay by beta decay, and decay by  delayed proton emission. through isotopes also exhibit minor  delayed neutron emission decay paths.

=== Occurrence ===
Germanium is created by stellar nucleosynthesis, mostly by the s-process in asymptotic giant branch stars. The s-process is a slow neutron capture of lighter elements inside pulsating red giant stars. Germanium has been detected in some of the most distant stars and in the atmosphere of Jupiter.

Germanium&#x27;s abundance in the Earth&#x27;s crust is approximately 1.6 ppm. Only a few minerals like argyrodite, briartite, germanite, renierite and sphalerite contain appreciable amounts of germanium. Only few of them (especially germanite) are, very rarely, found in mineable amounts. Some zinc–copper–lead ore bodies contain enough germanium to justify extraction from the final ore concentrate. An unusual natural enrichment process causes a high content of germanium in some coal seams, discovered by Victor Moritz Goldschmidt during a broad survey for germanium deposits. The highest concentration ever found was in Hartley coal ash with as much as 1.6% germanium. The coal deposits near Xilinhaote, Inner Mongolia, contain an estimated 1600 tonnes of germanium.

== Production ==
About 118 tonnes of germanium were produced in 2011 worldwide, mostly in China (80 t), Russia (5 t) and United States (3 t). Germanium is recovered as a by-product from sphalerite zinc ores where it is concentrated in amounts as great as 0.3%, especially from low-temperature sediment-hosted, massive Zn–Pb–Cu(–Ba) deposits and carbonate-hosted Zn–Pb deposits. A recent study found that at least 10,000 t of extractable germanium is contained in known zinc reserves, particularly those hosted by Mississippi-Valley type deposits, while at least 112,000 t will be found in coal reserves. In 2007 35% of the demand was met by recycled germanium.


While it is produced mainly from sphalerite, it is also found in silver, lead, and copper ores. Another source of germanium is fly ash of power plants fueled from coal deposits that contain germanium. Russia and China used this as a source for germanium. Russia&#x27;s deposits are located in the far east of Sakhalin Island, and northeast of Vladivostok. The deposits in China are located mainly in the lignite mines near Lincang, Yunnan; coal is also mined near Xilinhaote, Inner Mongolia.

The ore concentrates are mostly sulfidic; they are converted to the oxides by heating under air in a process known as roasting:

: GeS2 + 3 O2 → GeO2 + 2 SO2

Some of the germanium is left in the dust produced, while the rest is converted to germanates, which are then leached (together with zinc) from the cinder by sulfuric acid. After neutralization, only the zinc stays in solution while germanium and other metals precipitate. After removing some of the zinc in the precipitate by the Waelz process, the residing Waelz oxide is leached a second time. The dioxide is obtained as precipitate and converted with chlorine gas or hydrochloric acid to germanium tetrachloride, which has a low boiling point and can be isolated by distillation:

: GeO2 + 4 HCl → GeCl4 + 2 H2O
: GeO2 + 2 Cl2 → GeCl4 + O2

Germanium tetrachloride is either hydrolyzed to the oxide (GeO2) or purified by fractional distillation and then hydrolyzed. The highly pure GeO2 is now suitable for the production of germanium glass. It is reduced to the element by reacting it with hydrogen, producing germanium suitable for infrared optics and semiconductor production:

: GeO2 + 2 H2 → Ge + 2 H2O

The germanium for steel production and other industrial processes is normally reduced using carbon:

: GeO2 + C → Ge + CO2

== Applications ==
The major end uses for germanium in 2007, worldwide, were estimated to be: 35% for fiber-optics, 30% infrared optics, 15% polymerization catalysts, and 15% electronics and solar electric applications. The remaining 5% went into such uses as phosphors, metallurgy, and chemotherapy.

=== Optics ===

The notable properties of germania (GeO2) are its high index of refraction and its low optical dispersion. These make it especially useful for wide-angle camera lenses, microscopy, and the core part of optical fibers. It has replaced titania as the dopant for silica fiber, eliminating the subsequent heat treatment that made the fibers brittle. At the end of 2002, the fiber optics industry consumed 60% of the annual germanium use in the United States, but this is less than 10% of worldwide consumption. GeSbTe is a phase change material used for its optic properties, such as that used in rewritable DVDs.

Because germanium is transparent in the infrared wavelengths, it is an important infrared optical material that can be readily cut and polished into lenses and windows. It is especially used as the front optic in thermal imaging cameras working in the 8 to 14 micron range for passive thermal imaging and for hot-spot detection in military, mobile night vision, and fire fighting applications. It is used in infrared spectroscopes and other optical equipment that require extremely sensitive infrared detectors. It has a very high refractive index (4.0) and must be coated with anti-reflection agents. Particularly, a very hard special antireflection coating of diamond-like carbon (DLC), refractive index 2.0, is a good match and produces a diamond-hard surface that can withstand much environmental abuse.

=== Electronics ===
Germanium can be alloyed with silicon, and silicon–germanium alloys are rapidly becoming an important semiconductor material for high-speed integrated circuits. Circuits using the properties of Si-SiGe heterojunctions can be much faster than those using silicon alone. The SiGe chips, with high-speed properties, can be made with low-cost, well-established production techniques of the silicon chip industry.

High efficiency solar panels are a major use of germanium. Because germanium and gallium arsenide have nearly identical lattice constant, germanium substrates can be used to make gallium-arsenide solar cells. Germanium is the substrate of the wafers for high-efficiency multijunction photovoltaic cells for space applications, such as the Mars Exploration Rovers, which use triple-junction gallium arsenide on germanium cells. High-brightness LEDs, used for automobile headlights and to backlight LCD screens, are also an important application.

Germanium-on-insulator (GeOI) substrates are seen as a potential replacement for silicon on miniaturized chips. CMOS circuit based on GeOI substrates has been reported recently. Other uses in electronics include phosphors in fluorescent lamps and solid-state light-emitting diodes (LEDs). Germanium transistors are still used in some effects pedals by musicians who wish to reproduce the distinctive tonal character of the &quot;fuzz&quot;-tone from the early rock and roll era, most notably the Dallas Arbiter Fuzz Face.

Germanium has been studied as a potential material for implantable bioelectronic sensors that are resorbed in the body without generating harmful hydrogen gas, replacing zinc oxide- and indium gallium zinc oxide-based implementations.

Germanium was also used to create many of the circuits found in some of the very first pieces of electronic musical gear, initially 1950s, primarily in early transistor-based circuits. The first guitar effects pedals in the 1960s – Fuzz pedals like the Maestro FZ-1 (1962), Dallas-Arbiter Fuzz Face (1966), and Tone Bender (1965) - used germanium transistors. Silicon diodes are more frequently used in more modern equipment, but germanium diodes are still used in some applications as they have lower barrier potential and smoother transconductance curves, leading to less harsh clipping.

=== Other uses ===

Germanium dioxide is also used in catalysts for polymerization in the production of polyethylene terephthalate (PET). The high brilliance of this polyester is especially favored for PET bottles marketed in Japan. In the United States, germanium is not used for polymerization catalysts.

Due to the similarity between silica (SiO2) and germanium dioxide (GeO2), the silica stationary phase in some gas chromatography columns can be replaced by GeO2.

In recent years germanium has seen increasing use in precious metal alloys. In sterling silver alloys, for instance, it reduces firescale, increases tarnish resistance, and improves precipitation hardening. A tarnish-proof silver alloy trademarked Argentium contains 1.2% germanium.

Semiconductor detectors made of single crystal high-purity germanium can precisely identify radiation sources—for example in airport security. Germanium is useful for monochromators for beamlines used in single crystal neutron scattering and synchrotron X-ray diffraction. The reflectivity has advantages over silicon in neutron and high energy X-ray applications. Crystals of high purity germanium are used in detectors for gamma spectroscopy and the search for dark matter. Germanium crystals are also used in X-ray spectrometers for the determination of phosphorus, chlorine and sulfur.

Germanium is emerging as an important material for spintronics and spin-based quantum computing applications. In 2010, researchers demonstrated room temperature spin transport and more recently donor electron spins in germanium has been shown to have very long coherence times.

== Strategic importance ==
Due to its use in advanced electronics and optics, Germanium is considered a technology-critical element (by e.g. the European Union), essential to fulfill the green and digital transition. As China controls 60% of global Germanium production it holds a dominant position over the world&#x27;s supply chains. 

On 3 July 2023 China suddenly imposed restrictions on the exports of germanium (and gallium), ratcheting up trade tensions with Western allies. Invoking &quot;national security interests,&quot; the Chinese Ministry of Commerce informed that companies that intend to sell products containing germanium would need an export licence. The products/compounds targeted are: germanium dioxide, germanium epitaxial growth substrate, germanium ingot, germanium metal, germanium tetrachloride and zinc germanium phosphide. It sees such products as &quot;dual-use&quot; items that may have military purposes and therefore warrant an extra layer of oversight. 

The new dispute opened a new chapter in the increasingly fierce technology race that has pitted the United States, and to a lesser extent Europe, against China. The US wants its allies to heavily curb, or downright prohibit, advanced electronic components bound to the Chinese market to prevent Beijing from securing global technology supremacy. China denied any tit-for-tat intention behind the Germanium export restrictions. 

Following China&#x27;s export restrictions, Russian state-owned company Rostec announced an increase in germanium production to meet domestic demand.

== Germanium and health ==
Germanium is not considered essential to the health of plants or animals. Germanium in the environment has little or no health impact. This is primarily because it usually occurs only as a trace element in ores and carbonaceous materials, and the various industrial and electronic applications involve very small quantities that are not likely to be ingested. For similar reasons, end-use germanium has little impact on the environment as a biohazard. Some reactive intermediate compounds of germanium are poisonous (see precautions, below).

Germanium supplements, made from both organic and inorganic germanium, have been marketed as an alternative medicine capable of treating leukemia and lung cancer. There is, however, no medical evidence of benefit; some evidence suggests that such supplements are actively harmful. U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) research has concluded that inorganic germanium, when used as a nutritional supplement, &quot;presents potential human health hazard&quot;.

Some germanium compounds have been administered by alternative medical practitioners as non-FDA-allowed injectable solutions. Soluble inorganic forms of germanium used at first, notably the citrate-lactate salt, resulted in some cases of renal dysfunction, hepatic steatosis, and peripheral neuropathy in individuals using them over a long term. Plasma and urine germanium concentrations in these individuals, several of whom died, were several orders of magnitude greater than endogenous levels. A more recent organic form, beta-carboxyethylgermanium sesquioxide (propagermanium), has not exhibited the same spectrum of toxic effects.

Certain compounds of germanium have low toxicity to mammals, but have toxic effects against certain bacteria.

=== Precautions for chemically reactive germanium compounds ===
While use of germanium itself does not require precautions, some of germanium&#x27;s artificially produced compounds are quite reactive and present an immediate hazard to human health on exposure. For example, Germanium tetrachloride and germane (GeH4) are a liquid and gas, respectively, that can be very irritating to the eyes, skin, lungs, and throat.

== See also ==
* Germanene
* Vitrain
* History of the transistor

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==

* Germanium at &quot;The Periodic Table of Videos&quot; (University of Nottingham)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q867" start="0" end="9" title="Germanium" label="Germanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="15" end="31" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q102500" start="40" end="46" title="Symbol (chemistry)" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q867" start="47" end="49" title="Germanium" label="Ge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="54" end="67" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="145" end="152" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19596" start="162" end="171" title="metalloid" label="metalloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600" start="177" end="185" title="nonmetal" label="nonmetal"/>
<link wikidata="Q106693" start="193" end="205" title="carbon group" label="carbon group"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="236" end="243" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="279" end="285" title="Chemical reaction" label="reacts"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="311" end="317" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195325" start="425" end="450" title="Timeline of chemical element discoveries" label="discovery of the elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q24580" start="473" end="527" title="Abundance of elements in Earth&amp;#x27;s crust" label="in abundance of the elements in the Earth&amp;#x27;s crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q9106" start="538" end="554" title="Dmitri Mendeleev" label="Dmitri Mendeleev"/>
<link wikidata="Q428940" start="555" end="564" title="Mendeleev&amp;#x27;s predicted elements" label="predicted"/>
<link wikidata="Q764285" start="595" end="605" title="Chemical property" label="properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="631" end="645" title="periodic table" label="periodic table"/>
<link wikidata="Q867" start="670" end="680" title="Germanium" label="ekasilicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q73523" start="703" end="718" title="Clemens Winkler" label="Clemens Winkler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="776" end="782" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="787" end="793" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q425364" start="810" end="820" title="argyrodite" label="argyrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="854" end="861" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q105006" start="919" end="929" title="sphalerite" label="sphalerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="950" end="954" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="1018" end="1022" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="1028" end="1034" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="1092" end="1102" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="1269" end="1280" title="fibre-optic" label="fibre-optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q328989" start="1290" end="1305" title="Night-vision device" label="infrared optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q58803" start="1307" end="1317" title="solar cell" label="solar cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="1336" end="1356" title="light-emitting diode" label="light-emitting diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q181898" start="1404" end="1418" title="polymerization" label="polymerization"/>
<link wikidata="Q631739" start="1483" end="1491" title="nanowire" label="nanowire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402526" start="1531" end="1555" title="organogermanium compound" label="organogermanium compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277172" start="1566" end="1585" title="tetraethylgermanium" label="tetraethylgermanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q237200" start="1597" end="1621" title="organometallic chemistry" label="organometallic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q61977883" start="1649" end="1676" title="technology-critical element" label="technology-critical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351" start="1739" end="1754" title="Organic chemistry" label="living organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q274160" start="1886" end="1894" title="toxicity" label="toxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468324" start="1943" end="1954" title="nephrotoxic" label="nephrotoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605" start="2015" end="2022" title="halogen" label="halogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="2028" end="2036" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9106" start="2178" end="2194" title="Dmitri Mendeleev" label="Dmitri Mendeleev"/>
<link wikidata="Q106693" start="2300" end="2313" title="group 14 element" label="carbon family"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="2331" end="2338" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="2343" end="2346" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41377" start="2465" end="2478" title="atomic weight" label="atomic weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q14819" start="2529" end="2545" title="Freiberg, Saxony" label="Freiberg, Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="2553" end="2560" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q425364" start="2592" end="2602" title="argyrodite" label="argyrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="2629" end="2635" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q73523" start="2657" end="2672" title="Clemens Winkler" label="Clemens Winkler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="2847" end="2855" title="antimony" label="antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q332" start="3132" end="3139" title="Neptune" label="Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105" start="3372" end="3381" title="neptunium" label="neptunium"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3488" end="3493" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q62646" start="3506" end="3514" title="Germania" label="Germania"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="3674" end="3681" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q421389" start="4095" end="4118" title="germanium tetrachloride" label="germanium tetrachloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q366827" start="4129" end="4149" title="Lecoq de Boisbaudran" label="Lecoq de Boisbaudran"/>
<link wikidata="Q654182" start="4205" end="4213" title="spectrum" label="spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514197" start="4305" end="4314" title="Germanium fluoride" label="fluorides"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551961" start="4316" end="4325" title="Germanium chloride" label="chlorides"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551968" start="4327" end="4335" title="Germanium sulfide (disambiguation)" label="sulfides"/>
<link wikidata="Q419133" start="4337" end="4344" title="Germanium dioxide" label="dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277172" start="4350" end="4367" title="tetraethylgermane" label="tetraethylgermane"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="4584" end="4595" title="Periodic table" label="periodicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="4738" end="4743" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="4838" end="4848" title="electronics" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4887" end="4899" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="4954" end="4972" title="electronics" label="electronic devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q11656" start="4981" end="4986" title="diode" label="diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q176066" start="5031" end="5045" title="Schottky diode" label="Schottky diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="5051" end="5056" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q367849" start="5099" end="5116" title="silicon–germanium" label="silicon–germanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="5348" end="5358" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q611957" start="5412" end="5435" title="solid state (electronics)" label="solid state electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q171486" start="5610" end="5619" title="rectifier" label="rectifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096013" start="5659" end="5682" title="Fairchild Semiconductor" label="Fairchild Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q611957" start="5904" end="5929" title="solid-state electronics" label="semiconductor electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="5972" end="5983" title="fiber optics" label="fiber optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353651" start="6017" end="6029" title="night vision" label="night vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q181898" start="6043" end="6057" title="polymerization" label="polymerization"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="6058" end="6067" title="catalysts" label="catalysts"/>
<link wikidata="Q469356" start="6267" end="6270" title="Short ton" label="ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="6276" end="6281" title="tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="6549" end="6555" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q102145" start="6698" end="6717" title="standard conditions" label="standard conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="6758" end="6771" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q81915" start="6798" end="6807" title="allotrope" label="allotrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q905169" start="6876" end="6907" title="diamond cubic" label="diamond cubic crystal structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="6931" end="6938" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="6943" end="6950" title="diamond" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798099" start="6982" end="7011" title="threshold displacement energy" label="threshold displacement energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q103510" start="7049" end="7053" title="bar (unit)" label="kbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="7149" end="7152" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q861" start="7168" end="7175" title="gallium" label="gallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q942" start="7177" end="7184" title="bismuth" label="bismuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099" start="7186" end="7194" title="antimony" label="antimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="7200" end="7205" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q108000" start="7282" end="7289" title="freezing" label="freezes"/>
<link wikidata="Q959336" start="7354" end="7370" title="Direct and indirect band gaps" label="indirect bandgap"/>
<link wikidata="Q219909" start="7399" end="7412" title="Zone refining" label="Zone refining"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="7661" end="7675" title="superconductor" label="superconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q177625" start="7715" end="7736" title="electromagnetic field" label="electromagnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552130" start="7744" end="7784" title="Uranium rhodium germanium" label="alloy of germanium, uranium, and rhodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q737571" start="7846" end="7863" title="screw dislocation" label="screw dislocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q206907" start="8106" end="8122" title="electrical short" label="electrical short"/>
<link wikidata="Q419133" start="8221" end="8225" title="germanium dioxide" label="GeO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="8261" end="8266" title="acids" label="acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q485742" start="8271" end="8278" title="alkalis" label="alkalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551886" start="8398" end="8407" title="germanate" label="germanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q484152" start="8444" end="8459" title="oxidation state" label="oxidation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551947" start="8657" end="8666" title="germanide" label="germanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q128575" start="8711" end="8716" title="Zintl phase" label="Zintl"/>
<link wikidata="Q411362" start="8888" end="8903" title="ethylenediamine" label="ethylenediamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q596999" start="8909" end="8917" title="cryptand" label="cryptand"/>
<link wikidata="Q424253" start="9001" end="9008" title="ozonide" label="ozonide"/>
<link wikidata="Q50690" start="9020" end="9025" title="oxide" label="oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q419133" start="9051" end="9068" title="germanium dioxide" label="germanium dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115313" start="9086" end="9104" title="germanium monoxide" label="germanium monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420582" start="9157" end="9176" title="germanium disulfide" label="germanium disulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551886" start="9274" end="9283" title="germanate" label="germanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="9548" end="9556" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q205629" start="9564" end="9581" title="Bismuth germanate" label="Bismuth germanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q910990" start="9613" end="9625" title="scintillator" label="scintillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q66392" start="9628" end="9643" title="Binary compound" label="Binary compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q104567" start="9656" end="9665" title="chalcogen" label="chalcogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420582" start="9695" end="9704" title="Germanium disulfide" label="disulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413570" start="9712" end="9722" title="Germanium diselenide" label="diselenide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4445841" start="9735" end="9746" title="germanium monosulfide" label="monosulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279263" start="9754" end="9766" title="Germanium monoselenide" label="monoselenide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131169" start="9779" end="9792" title="Germanium telluride" label="monotelluride"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="10159" end="10167" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19557" start="10339" end="10358" title="alkali metal compound" label="alkaline carbonates"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="10363" end="10369" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q193086" start="10437" end="10444" title="halides" label="halides"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202655" start="10480" end="10501" title="Germanium(IV) iodide" label="germanium tetraiodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q424958" start="10521" end="10544" title="germanium tetrafluoride" label="germanium tetrafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q421389" start="10604" end="10627" title="germanium tetrachloride" label="germanium tetrachloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q422723" start="11143" end="11153" title="neopentane" label="neopentane"/>
<link wikidata="Q415811" start="11166" end="11173" title="Germane" label="Germane"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="11219" end="11226" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q41581" start="11271" end="11277" title="alkane" label="alkane"/>
<link wikidata="Q27113863" start="11566" end="11571" title="germyl" label="GeH3−"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="11572" end="11577" title="anion" label="anion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402526" start="11686" end="11710" title="organogermanium compound" label="organogermanium compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q420423" start="11792" end="11803" title="diethylzinc" label="diethylzinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277172" start="11812" end="11829" title="tetraethylgermane" label="tetraethylgermane"/>
<link wikidata="Q335268" start="11881" end="11886" title="alkyl" label="alkyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402526" start="11896" end="11914" title="tetramethylgermane" label="tetramethylgermane"/>
<link wikidata="Q421389" start="12004" end="12027" title="germanium tetrachloride" label="germanium tetrachloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826394" start="12087" end="12102" title="isobutylgermane" label="isobutylgermane"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="12202" end="12215" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134627" start="12245" end="12266" title="reactive intermediate" label="reactive intermediate"/>
<link wikidata="Q898422" start="12279" end="12285" title="-yl" label="germyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q185056" start="12286" end="12298" title="free radical" label="free radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q110828326" start="12301" end="12310" title="germylene" label="germylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q419257" start="12324" end="12331" title="carbene" label="carbene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623215" start="12360" end="12367" title="carbyne" label="carbyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250075" start="12400" end="12430" title="Propagermanium" label="2-carboxyethylgermasesquioxane"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="12860" end="12867" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q901747" start="12936" end="12953" title="double beta decay" label="double beta decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="12961" end="12970" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q659662" start="13013" end="13030" title="natural abundance" label="natural abundance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133" start="13287" end="13292" title="radon" label="radon"/>
<link wikidata="Q195533" start="13297" end="13314" title="Atomic battery" label="nuclear batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="13329" end="13341" title="radioisotope" label="radioisotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q109910" start="13451" end="13467" title="electron capture" label="electron capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="13591" end="13601" title="beta decay" label="beta decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357356" start="13616" end="13616" title="Positron emission" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q902157" start="13625" end="13640" title="proton emission" label="proton emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="13678" end="13678" title="Beta decay" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q898923" start="13687" end="13703" title="neutron emission" label="neutron emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057093" start="13761" end="13784" title="stellar nucleosynthesis" label="stellar nucleosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q277209" start="13800" end="13809" title="s-process" label="s-process"/>
<link wikidata="Q50089" start="13813" end="13836" title="asymptotic giant branch" label="asymptotic giant branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="13868" end="13875" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q50081" start="13921" end="13930" title="red giant" label="red giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q24580" start="14062" end="14087" title="abundance of elements in Earth&amp;#x27;s crust" label="in the Earth&amp;#x27;s crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="14109" end="14112" title="Parts per million" label="ppm"/>
<link wikidata="Q425364" start="14139" end="14149" title="argyrodite" label="argyrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q411555" start="14151" end="14160" title="briartite" label="briartite"/>
<link wikidata="Q425076" start="14162" end="14171" title="germanite" label="germanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q425630" start="14173" end="14182" title="renierite" label="renierite"/>
<link wikidata="Q105006" start="14187" end="14197" title="sphalerite" label="sphalerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q213668" start="14544" end="14569" title="Victor Moritz Goldschmidt" label="Victor Moritz Goldschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783557" start="14660" end="14667" title="Hartley, Northumberland" label="Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009416" start="14732" end="14742" title="Xilinhaote" label="Xilinhaote"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="14744" end="14758" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="14786" end="14791" title="tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="14835" end="14840" title="tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q105006" start="14994" end="15004" title="sphalerite" label="sphalerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="15126" end="15128" title="zinc" label="Zn"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="15129" end="15131" title="lead" label="Pb"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="15132" end="15134" title="copper" label="Cu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112" start="15136" end="15138" title="barium" label="Ba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038012" start="15321" end="15353" title="Carbonate-hosted lead-zinc ore deposits" label="Mississippi-Valley type deposits"/>
<link wikidata="Q105006" start="15504" end="15514" title="sphalerite" label="sphalerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="15536" end="15542" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="15544" end="15548" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="15554" end="15560" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137808" start="15598" end="15605" title="fly ash" label="fly ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792" start="15780" end="15788" title="Sakhalin" label="Sakhalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q959" start="15814" end="15825" title="Vladivostok" label="Vladivostok"/>
<link wikidata="Q156267" start="15875" end="15882" title="lignite" label="lignite"/>
<link wikidata="Q496837" start="15894" end="15901" title="Lincang" label="Lincang"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="15903" end="15909" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009416" start="15935" end="15945" title="Xilinhaote" label="Xilinhaote"/>
<link wikidata="Q41079" start="15947" end="15961" title="Inner Mongolia" label="Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221205" start="15996" end="16004" title="sulfide" label="sulfidic"/>
<link wikidata="Q50690" start="16032" end="16037" title="oxide" label="oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228460" start="16082" end="16090" title="Roasting (metallurgy)" label="roasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596041" start="16454" end="16467" title="Waelz process" label="Waelz process"/>
<link wikidata="Q419133" start="16524" end="16531" title="germanium dioxide" label="dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="16578" end="16586" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q421389" start="16615" end="16638" title="germanium tetrachloride" label="germanium tetrachloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="17362" end="17373" title="fiber-optic" label="fiber-optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q328989" start="17380" end="17395" title="Night-vision device" label="infrared optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q181898" start="17401" end="17415" title="polymerization" label="polymerization"/>
<link wikidata="Q419133" start="17604" end="17612" title="Germanium dioxide" label="germania"/>
<link wikidata="Q174102" start="17633" end="17652" title="refractive index" label="index of refraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q182893" start="17665" end="17683" title="Dispersion (optics)" label="optical dispersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q632867" start="17721" end="17743" title="wide-angle camera lens" label="wide-angle camera lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074953" start="17747" end="17757" title="microscopy" label="microscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="17780" end="17793" title="optical fiber" label="optical fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q193521" start="17812" end="17819" title="titanium dioxide" label="titania"/>
<link wikidata="Q15119237" start="17827" end="17833" title="dopant" label="dopant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3759140" start="18085" end="18091" title="GeSbTe" label="GeSbTe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806889" start="18097" end="18118" title="phase change material" label="phase change material"/>
<link wikidata="Q5206377" start="18171" end="18186" title="DVD-RW" label="rewritable DVDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="18270" end="18278" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q624587" start="18402" end="18425" title="Thermographic camera" label="thermal imaging cameras"/>
<link wikidata="Q175821" start="18449" end="18455" title="micrometre" label="micron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353651" start="18537" end="18549" title="night vision" label="night vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q912034" start="18606" end="18618" title="spectroscope" label="spectroscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q624587" start="18681" end="18699" title="thermography" label="infrared detectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q174102" start="18720" end="18736" title="refractive index" label="refractive index"/>
<link wikidata="Q4389419" start="18851" end="18870" title="diamond-like carbon" label="diamond-like carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="19048" end="19055" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q367849" start="19061" end="19078" title="silicon–germanium" label="silicon–germanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616270" start="19220" end="19234" title="heterojunction" label="heterojunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="19404" end="19416" title="silicon chip" label="silicon chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q774583" start="19444" end="19455" title="solar panel" label="solar panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q422819" start="19509" end="19525" title="gallium arsenide" label="gallium arsenide"/>
<link wikidata="Q625641" start="19548" end="19564" title="lattice constant" label="lattice constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q58803" start="19624" end="19634" title="solar cell" label="solar cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q452346" start="19698" end="19729" title="multijunction photovoltaic cell" label="multijunction photovoltaic cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q220827" start="19767" end="19789" title="Mars Exploration Rover" label="Mars Exploration Rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248330" start="20186" end="20194" title="phosphor" label="phosphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q182925" start="20199" end="20215" title="fluorescent lamp" label="fluorescent lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q862880" start="20308" end="20321" title="effects pedal" label="effects pedal"/>
<link wikidata="Q899871" start="20397" end="20418" title="Distortion (music)" label="&amp;quot;fuzz&amp;quot;-tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="20434" end="20447" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3172485" start="20470" end="20494" title="Fuzz Face" label="Dallas Arbiter Fuzz Face"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914745" start="20595" end="20603" title="Biodegradable electronics" label="resorbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q190077" start="20667" end="20677" title="zinc oxide" label="zinc oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661614" start="20683" end="20708" title="indium gallium zinc oxide" label="indium gallium zinc oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632964" start="21266" end="21282" title="transconductance" label="transconductance"/>
<link wikidata="Q334002" start="21313" end="21321" title="Clipping (audio)" label="clipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="21378" end="21386" title="catalyst" label="catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q181898" start="21392" end="21406" title="polymerization" label="polymerization"/>
<link wikidata="Q145863" start="21428" end="21454" title="polyethylene terephthalate" label="polyethylene terephthalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q677065" start="21742" end="21760" title="gas chromatography" label="gas chromatography"/>
<link wikidata="Q31576" start="21874" end="21889" title="sterling silver" label="sterling silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451948" start="21923" end="21932" title="firescale" label="firescale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789510" start="22043" end="22052" title="Argentium sterling silver" label="Argentium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22079" end="22102" title="Semiconductor detector#Germanium detectors" label="Semiconductor detectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191410" start="22246" end="22260" title="Crystal monochromator" label="monochromators"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300772" start="22265" end="22273" title="beamline" label="beamline"/>
<link wikidata="Q754943" start="22283" end="22297" title="single crystal" label="single crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451740" start="22298" end="22316" title="neutron scattering" label="neutron scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q212871" start="22321" end="22338" title="Synchrotron light" label="synchrotron X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754517" start="22412" end="22429" title="High energy X-rays" label="high energy X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q906816" start="22504" end="22522" title="gamma spectroscopy" label="gamma spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="22542" end="22553" title="dark matter" label="dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q258659" start="22721" end="22732" title="spintronics" label="spintronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17995793" start="22748" end="22765" title="quantum computing" label="quantum computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118612" start="22931" end="22945" title="coherence time" label="coherence time"/>
<link wikidata="Q61977883" start="23053" end="23080" title="technology-critical element" label="technology-critical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="23094" end="23108" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q795757" start="23136" end="23164" title="Energy transition" label="green and digital transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="23169" end="23174" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q861" start="23371" end="23378" title="gallium" label="gallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064994" start="23485" end="23513" title="Ministry of Commerce (China)" label="Chinese Ministry of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="24102" end="24104" title="United States" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840188" start="24438" end="24444" title="Rostec" label="Rostec"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="24759" end="24765" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="25183" end="25203" title="alternative medicine" label="alternative medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="25224" end="25232" title="leukemia" label="leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47912" start="25237" end="25248" title="lung cancer" label="lung cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q691640" start="25272" end="25288" title="evidence-based medicine" label="medical evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="25368" end="25401" title="U.S. Food and Drug Administration" label="U.S. Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q645858" start="25472" end="25494" title="nutritional supplement" label="nutritional supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132455" start="25527" end="25540" title="health hazard" label="health hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="25787" end="25792" title="renal" label="renal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6058862" start="25806" end="25823" title="hepatic steatosis" label="hepatic steatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q945238" start="25840" end="25850" title="neuropathy" label="neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q285982" start="26027" end="26037" title="endogenous" label="endogenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250075" start="26114" end="26128" title="propagermanium" label="propagermanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="26238" end="26244" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="26286" end="26294" title="bacterium" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q421389" start="26571" end="26594" title="Germanium tetrachloride" label="Germanium tetrachloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q415811" start="26599" end="26606" title="germane" label="germane"/>
<link wikidata="Q18043425" start="26734" end="26743" title="Germanene" label="Germanene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937223" start="26746" end="26753" title="Vitrain" label="Vitrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2335216" start="26756" end="26781" title="History of the transistor" label="History of the transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988689" start="26855" end="26883" title="The Periodic Table of Videos" label="The Periodic Table of Videos"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12243" wikidata="Q1832" url="?curid=12243" title="Gadolinium">
<text>Gadolinium is a chemical element; it has symbol Gd and atomic number 64. It is a silvery-white metal when oxidation is removed. Gadolinium is a malleable and ductile rare-earth element. It reacts with atmospheric oxygen or moisture slowly to form a black coating. Gadolinium below its Curie point of is ferromagnetic, with an attraction to a magnetic field higher than that of nickel. Above this temperature it is the most paramagnetic element. It is found in nature only in an oxidized form. When separated, it usually has impurities of the other rare earths because of their similar chemical properties.

Gadolinium was discovered in 1880 by Jean Charles de Marignac, who detected its oxide by using spectroscopy. It is named after the mineral gadolinite, one of the minerals in which gadolinium is found, itself named for the Finnish chemist Johan Gadolin. Pure gadolinium was first isolated by the chemist Félix Trombe in 1935.

Gadolinium possesses unusual metallurgical properties, to the extent that as little as 1% of gadolinium can significantly improve the workability and resistance to oxidation at high temperatures of iron, chromium, and related metals. Gadolinium as a metal or a salt absorbs neutrons and is, therefore, used sometimes for shielding in neutron radiography and in nuclear reactors.

Like most of the rare earths, gadolinium forms trivalent ions with fluorescent properties, and salts of gadolinium(III) are used as phosphors in various applications.

Gadolinium(III) ions in water-soluble salts are highly toxic to mammals. However, chelated gadolinium(III) compounds prevent the gadolinium(III) from being exposed to the organism, and the majority is excreted by healthy kidneys before it can deposit in tissues. Because of its paramagnetic properties, solutions of chelated organic gadolinium complexes are used as intravenously administered gadolinium-based MRI contrast agents in medical magnetic resonance imaging.

The main uses of gadolinium, in addition to use as a contrast agent for MRI scans, are in nuclear reactors, in alloys, as a phosphor in medical imaging, as a gamma ray emitter, in electronic devices, in optical devices, and in superconductors.

==Characteristics==
===Physical properties===
Gadolinium is the eighth member of the lanthanide series. In the periodic table, it appears between the elements europium to its left and terbium to its right, and above the actinide curium. It is a silvery-white, malleable, ductile rare-earth element. Its 64 electrons are arranged in the configuration of [Xe]4f75d16s2, of which the ten 4f, 5d, and 6s electrons are valence.

Like most other metals in the lanthanide series, three electrons are usually available as valence electrons. The remaining 4f electrons are too strongly bound: this is because the 4f orbitals penetrate the most through the inert xenon core of electrons to the nucleus, followed by 5d and 6s, and this increases with higher ionic charge. Gadolinium crystallizes in the hexagonal close-packed α-form at room temperature. At temperatures above , it forms or transforms into its β-form, which has a body-centered cubic structure.

The isotope gadolinium-157 has the highest thermal-neutron capture cross-section among any stable nuclide: about 259,000 barns. Only xenon-135 has a higher capture cross-section, about 2.0 million barns, but this isotope is radioactive.

Gadolinium is believed to be ferromagnetic at temperatures below and is strongly paramagnetic above this temperature. In fact, at body temperature, gadolinium exhibits the greatest paramagnetic effect of any element. There is evidence that gadolinium is a helical antiferromagnetic, rather than a ferromagnetic, below . Gadolinium demonstrates a magnetocaloric effect whereby its temperature increases when it enters a magnetic field and decreases when it leaves the magnetic field. A significant magnetocaloric effect is observed at higher temperatures, up to about 300 kelvins, in the compounds Gd5(Si1−&quot;x&quot;Ge&quot;x&quot;)4.

Individual gadolinium atoms can be isolated by encapsulating them into fullerene molecules, where they can be visualized with a transmission electron microscope. Individual Gd atoms and small Gd clusters can be incorporated into carbon nanotubes.

===Chemical properties===

Gadolinium combines with most elements to form Gd(III) derivatives. It also combines with nitrogen, carbon, sulfur, phosphorus, boron, selenium, silicon, and arsenic at elevated temperatures, forming binary compounds.

Unlike the other rare-earth elements, metallic gadolinium is relatively stable in dry air. However, it tarnishes quickly in moist air, forming a loosely-adhering gadolinium(III) oxide (Gd2O3):
:4 Gd + 3 O2 → 2 Gd2O3,
which spalls off, exposing more surface to oxidation.

Gadolinium is a strong reducing agent, which reduces oxides of several metals into their elements. Gadolinium is quite electropositive and reacts slowly with cold water and quite quickly with hot water to form gadolinium(III) hydroxide (Gd(OH)3):
:2 Gd + 6 H2O → 2 Gd(OH)3 + 3 H2.

Gadolinium metal is attacked readily by dilute sulfuric acid to form solutions containing the colorless Gd(III) ions, which exist as [Gd(H2O)9]3+ complexes:
:2 Gd + 3 H2SO4 + 18 H2O → 2 [Gd(H2O)9]3+ + 3 + 3 H2.

====Chemical compounds====
In the great majority of its compounds, like many rare-earth metals, gadolinium adopts the oxidation state +3. However, gadolinium can be found on rare occasions in the 0, +1 and +2 oxidation states. All four trihalides are known. All are white, except for the iodide, which is yellow. Most commonly encountered of the halides is gadolinium(III) chloride (GdCl3). The oxide dissolves in acids to give the salts, such as gadolinium(III) nitrate.

Gadolinium(III), like most lanthanide ions, forms complexes with high coordination numbers. This tendency is illustrated by the use of the chelating agent DOTA, an octadentate ligand. Salts of [Gd(DOTA)]− are useful in magnetic resonance imaging. A variety of related chelate complexes have been developed, including gadodiamide.

Reduced gadolinium compounds are known, especially in the solid state. Gadolinium(II) halides are obtained by heating Gd(III) halides in presence of metallic Gd in tantalum containers. Gadolinium also forms the sesquichloride Gd2Cl3, which can be further reduced to GdCl by annealing at . This gadolinium(I) chloride forms platelets with layered graphite-like structure.

===Isotopes===

Naturally occurring gadolinium is composed of six stable isotopes, 154Gd, 155Gd, 156Gd, 157Gd, 158Gd and 160Gd, and one radioisotope, 152Gd, with the isotope 158Gd being the most abundant (24.8% natural abundance). The predicted double beta decay of 160Gd has never been observed (an experimental lower limit on its half-life of more than 1.3×1021 years has been measured).

Thirty-three radioisotopes of gadolinium have been observed, with the most stable being 152Gd (naturally occurring), with a half-life of about 1.08×1014 years, and 150Gd, with a half-life of 1.79×106 years. All of the remaining radioactive isotopes have half-lives of less than 75 years. The majority of these have half-lives of less than 25 seconds. Gadolinium isotopes have four metastable isomers, with the most stable being 143mGd (&quot;t&quot;1/2= 110 seconds), 145mGd (&quot;t&quot;1/2= 85 seconds) and 141mGd (&quot;t&quot;1/2= 24.5 seconds).

The isotopes with atomic masses lower than the most abundant stable isotope, 158Gd, primarily decay by electron capture to isotopes of europium. At higher atomic masses, the primary decay mode is beta decay, and the primary products are isotopes of terbium.

==History==
Gadolinium is named after the mineral gadolinite. Gadolinite was first chemically analyzed by the Finnish chemist Johan Gadolin in 1794. In 1802 German chemist Martin Klaproth gave gadolinite its name. In 1880, the Swiss chemist Jean Charles Galissard de Marignac observed the spectroscopic lines from gadolinium in samples of gadolinite (which actually contains relatively little gadolinium, but enough to show a spectrum) and in the separate mineral cerite. The latter mineral proved to contain far more of the element with the new spectral line. De Marignac eventually separated a mineral oxide from cerite, which he realized was the oxide of this new element. He designated the element with the provisional symbol Yα. The French chemist Paul-Émile Lecoq de Boisbaudran named the element &quot;gadolinium&quot; in 1886. The pure element was isolated in 1935 by Félix Trombe.

==Occurrence==

Gadolinium is a constituent in many minerals, such as monazite and bastnäsite. The metal is too reactive to exist naturally. Paradoxically, as noted above, the mineral gadolinite actually contains only traces of this element. The abundance in the Earth&#x27;s crust is about 6.2 mg/kg. The main mining areas are in China, the US, Brazil, Sri Lanka, India, and Australia with reserves expected to exceed one million tonnes. World production of pure gadolinium is about 400 tonnes per year. The only known mineral with essential gadolinium, lepersonnite-(Gd), is very rare.

==Production==
Gadolinium is produced both from monazite and bastnäsite.
# Crushed minerals are extracted with hydrochloric acid or sulfuric acid, which converts the insoluble oxides into soluble chlorides or sulfates.
# The acidic filtrates are partially neutralized with caustic soda to pH 3–4. Thorium precipitates as its hydroxide, and is then removed.
# The remaining solution is treated with ammonium oxalate to convert rare earths into their insoluble oxalates. The oxalates are converted to oxides by heating.
# The oxides are dissolved in nitric acid that excludes one of the main components, cerium, whose oxide is insoluble in HNO3.
# The solution is treated with magnesium nitrate to produce a crystallized mixture of double salts of gadolinium, samarium and europium.
# The salts are separated by ion exchange chromatography.
# The rare-earth ions are then selectively washed out by a suitable complexing agent.

Gadolinium metal is obtained from its oxide or salts by heating it with calcium at in an argon atmosphere. Sponge gadolinium can be produced by reducing molten GdCl3 with an appropriate metal at temperatures below (the melting point of Gd) at reduced pressure.

==Applications==

Gadolinium has no large-scale applications, but it has a variety of specialized uses.

===Neutron absorber===
Because gadolinium has a high neutron cross-section, it is effective for use with neutron radiography and in shielding of nuclear reactors. It is used as a secondary, emergency shut-down measure in some nuclear reactors, particularly of the CANDU reactor type. Gadolinium is used in nuclear marine propulsion systems as a burnable poison. The use of gadolinium in neutron capture therapy to target tumors has been investigated, and gadolinium-containing compounds have proven promising.

===Alloys===
Gadolinium possesses unusual metallurgic properties, with as little as 1% of gadolinium improving the workability of iron, chromium, and related alloys, and their resistance to high temperatures and oxidation.

===Magnetic contrast agent===
Gadolinium is paramagnetic at room temperature, with a ferromagnetic Curie point of . Paramagnetic ions, such as gadolinium, increase nuclear spin relaxation rates, making gadolinium useful as a contrast agent for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Solutions of organic gadolinium complexes and gadolinium compounds are used as intravenous contrast agents to enhance images in medical and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) procedures. Magnevist is the most widespread example. Nanotubes packed with gadolinium, called &quot;gadonanotubes&quot;, are 40 times more effective than the usual gadolinium contrast agent. Traditional gadolinium-based contrast agents are un-targeted, generally distributing throughout the body after injection, but will not readily cross the intact blood–brain barrier. Brain tumors, and other disorders that degrade the blood-brain barrier, allow these agents to penetrate into the brain and facilitate their detection by contrast-enhanced MRI. Similarly, delayed gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging of cartilage uses an ionic compound agent, originally Magnevist, that is excluded from healthy cartilage based on electrostatic repulsion but will enter proteoglycan-depleted cartilage in diseases such as osteoarthritis.

===Phosphors===
Gadolinium is used as a phosphor in medical imaging. It is contained in the phosphor layer of X-ray detectors, suspended in a polymer matrix. Terbium-doped gadolinium oxysulfide (Gd2O2S:Tb) at the phosphor layer converts the X-rays released from the source into light. This material emits green light at 540 nm because of the presence of Tb3+, which is very useful for enhancing the imaging quality. The energy conversion of Gd is up to 20%, which means that one fifth of the X-ray energy striking the phosphor layer can be converted into visible photons. Gadolinium oxyorthosilicate (Gd2SiO5, GSO; usually doped by 0.1–1.0% of Ce) is a single crystal that is used as a scintillator in medical imaging such as positron emission tomography, and for detecting neutrons.

Gadolinium compounds were also used for making green phosphors for color TV tubes.

===Gamma ray emitter===
Gadolinium-153 is produced in a nuclear reactor from elemental europium or enriched gadolinium targets. It has a half-life of days and emits gamma radiation with strong peaks at 41 keV and 102 keV. It is used in many quality-assurance applications, such as line sources and calibration phantoms, to ensure that nuclear-medicine imaging systems operate correctly and produce useful images of radioisotope distribution inside the patient. It is also used as a gamma-ray source in X-ray absorption measurements and in bone density gauges for osteoporosis screening.

===Electronic and optical devices===
Gadolinium is used for making gadolinium yttrium garnet (Gd:Y3Al5O12), which has microwave applications and is used in fabrication of various optical components and as substrate material for magneto-optical films.

===Electrolyte in fuel cells===
Gadolinium can also serve as an electrolyte in solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs). Using gadolinium as a dopant for materials like cerium oxide (in the form of gadolinium-doped ceria) gives an electrolyte having both high ionic conductivity and low operating temperatures.

===Magnetic refrigeration===
Research is being conducted on magnetic refrigeration near room temperature, which could provide significant efficiency and environmental advantages over conventional refrigeration methods. Gadolinium-based materials, such as Gd5(Si&quot;x&quot;Ge1−&quot;x&quot;)4, are currently the most promising materials, owing to their high Curie temperature and giant magnetocaloric effect. Pure Gd itself exhibits a large magnetocaloric effect near its Curie temperature of , and this has sparked interest into producing Gd alloys having a larger effect and tunable Curie temperature. In Gd5(Si&quot;x&quot;Ge1−&quot;x&quot;)4, Si and Ge compositions can be varied to adjust the Curie temperature.

===Superconductors===
Gadolinium barium copper oxide (GdBCO) is a superconductor with applications in superconducting motors or generators such as in wind turbines. It can be manufactured in the same way as the most widely researched cuprate high temperature superconductor, yttrium barium copper oxide (YBCO) and uses an analogous chemical composition (GdBa2Cu3O7−&quot;δ&quot; ). It was used in 2014 to set a new world record for the highest trapped magnetic field in a bulk high temperature superconductor, with a field of 17.6T being trapped within two GdBCO bulks.

===Asthma treatment===
Gadolinium is being investigated as a possible treatment for preventing lung tissue scarring in asthma. A positive effect has been observed in mice.

===Niche and former applications===
Gadolinium is used for antineutrino detection in the Japanese Super-Kamiokande detector in order to sense supernova explosions. Low-energy neutrons that arise from antineutrino absorption by protons in the detector&#x27;s ultrapure water are captured by gadolinium nuclei, which subsequently emit gamma rays that are detected as part of the antineutrino signature.

Gadolinium gallium garnet (GGG, Gd3Ga5O12) was used for imitation diamonds and for computer bubble memory.

==Safety==


As a free ion, gadolinium is reported often to be highly toxic, but MRI contrast agents are chelated compounds and are considered safe enough to be used in most persons. The toxicity of free gadolinium ions in animals is due to interference with a number of calcium-ion channel dependent processes. The 50% lethal dose is about 0.34 mmol/kg (IV, mouse) or 100–200 mg/kg. Toxicity studies in rodents show that chelation of gadolinium (which also improves its solubility) decreases its toxicity with regard to the free ion by a factor of 31 (i.e., the lethal dose for the Gd-chelate increases by 31 times). It is believed therefore that clinical toxicity of gadolinium-based contrast agents (GBCAs) in humans will depend on the strength of the chelating agent; however this research is still not complete. About a dozen different Gd-chelated agents have been approved as MRI contrast agents around the world.

Use of gadolinium-based contrast agents results in deposition of gadolinium in tissues of the brain, bone, skin, and other tissues in amounts that depend on kidney function, structure of the chelates (linear or macrocyclic) and the dose administered. In patients with kidney failure, there is a risk of a rare but serious illness called nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF) that is caused by the use of gadolinium-based contrast agents. The disease resembles scleromyxedema and to some extent scleroderma. It may occur months after a contrast agent has been injected. Its association with gadolinium and not the carrier molecule is confirmed by its occurrence with various contrast materials in which gadolinium is carried by very different carrier molecules. Because of the risk of NSF, use of these agents is not recommended for any individual with end-stage kidney failure as they may require emergent dialysis.

Included in the current guidelines from the Canadian Association of Radiologists are that dialysis patients should receive gadolinium agents only where essential and that they should receive dialysis after the exam. If a contrast-enhanced MRI must be performed on a dialysis patient, it is recommended that certain high-risk contrast agents be avoided but not that a lower dose be considered. The American College of Radiology recommends that contrast-enhanced MRI examinations be performed as closely before dialysis as possible as a precautionary measure, although this has not been proven to reduce the likelihood of developing NSF. The FDA recommends that potential for gadolinium retention be considered when choosing the type of GBCA used in patients requiring multiple lifetime doses, pregnant women, children, and patients with inflammatory conditions.

Anaphylactoid reactions are rare, occurring in approximately 0.03–0.1%.

Long-term environmental impacts of gadolinium contamination due to human usage are a topic of ongoing research.

==Biological use==
Gadolinium has no known native biological role, but its compounds are used as research tools in biomedicine. Gd3+ compounds are components of MRI contrast agents. It is used in various ion channel electrophysiology experiments to block sodium leak channels and stretch activated ion channels. Gadolinium has recently been used to measure the distance between two points in a protein via electron paramagnetic resonance, something that gadolinium is especially amenable to thanks to EPR sensitivity at w-band (95 GHz) frequencies.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Nephrogenic Systemic Fibrosis – Complication of Gadolinium MR Contrast (series of images at MedPix website)
* It&#x27;s Elemental – Gadolinium
* Refrigerator uses gadolinium metal that heats up when exposed to magnetic field
* FDA advisory on gadolinium-based contrast
* Abdominal MR imaging: important considerations for evaluation of gadolinium enhancement Rafael O.P. de Campos, Vasco Herédia, Ersan Altun, Richard C. Semelka, Department of Radiology University of North Carolina Hospitals Chapel Hill
* Inside Japan’s Super Kamiokande 360 degree tour including details on adding Gadolinium to the pure water to aid in studying neutrinos</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1832" start="0" end="10" title="Gadolinium" label="Gadolinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="16" end="32" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q102500" start="41" end="47" title="Symbol (chemistry)" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1832" start="48" end="50" title="Gadolinium" label="Gd"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="55" end="68" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q211702" start="144" end="153" title="malleable" label="malleable"/>
<link wikidata="Q211702" start="158" end="165" title="ductile" label="ductile"/>
<link wikidata="Q190444" start="166" end="184" title="rare-earth element" label="rare-earth element"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="213" end="219" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q191073" start="285" end="296" title="Curie point" label="Curie point"/>
<link wikidata="Q184207" start="303" end="316" title="ferromagnetism" label="ferromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="377" end="383" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q188479" start="423" end="435" title="paramagnetism" label="paramagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q124045" start="644" end="668" title="Jean Charles Galissard de Marignac" label="Jean Charles de Marignac"/>
<link wikidata="Q410903" start="746" end="756" title="gadolinite" label="gadolinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q312571" start="845" end="858" title="Johan Gadolin" label="Johan Gadolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q899754" start="910" end="922" title="Félix Trombe" label="Félix Trombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="962" end="975" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgical"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="1097" end="1106" title="oxidation" label="oxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="1137" end="1145" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="1207" end="1214" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202639" start="1267" end="1286" title="neutron radiography" label="neutron radiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="1294" end="1309" title="nuclear reactor" label="nuclear reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q171407" start="1360" end="1369" title="trivalent" label="trivalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q319827" start="1563" end="1571" title="chelation" label="chelated"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="1702" end="1708" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q188479" start="1759" end="1771" title="paramagnetism" label="paramagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351" start="1806" end="1813" title="organic chemistry" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="1825" end="1834" title="coordination complex" label="complexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="1847" end="1858" title="intravenous" label="intravenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717498" start="1874" end="1909" title="gadolinium-based MRI contrast agent" label="gadolinium-based MRI contrast agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="1922" end="1948" title="magnetic resonance imaging" label="magnetic resonance imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717498" start="2004" end="2032" title="MRI contrast agent" label="contrast agent for MRI scans"/>
<link wikidata="Q19569" start="2281" end="2291" title="lanthanide" label="lanthanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="2307" end="2321" title="periodic table" label="periodic table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396" start="2355" end="2363" title="europium" label="europium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1838" start="2380" end="2387" title="terbium" label="terbium"/>
<link wikidata="Q19577" start="2416" end="2424" title="actinide" label="actinide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876" start="2425" end="2431" title="curium" label="curium"/>
<link wikidata="Q211702" start="2456" end="2465" title="malleability" label="malleable"/>
<link wikidata="Q211702" start="2467" end="2474" title="ductility" label="ductile"/>
<link wikidata="Q190444" start="2475" end="2493" title="rare-earth element" label="rare-earth element"/>
<link wikidata="Q107414" start="2610" end="2617" title="valence electron" label="valence"/>
<link wikidata="Q663314" start="2988" end="3010" title="hexagonal crystal system" label="hexagonal close-packed"/>
<link wikidata="Q473227" start="3115" end="3134" title="body-centered cubic" label="body-centered cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="3151" end="3158" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969703" start="3190" end="3205" title="thermal neutron" label="thermal-neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064418" start="3206" end="3213" title="neutron capture" label="capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q209351" start="3268" end="3273" title="barn (unit)" label="barns"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501182" start="3280" end="3289" title="xenon-135" label="xenon-135"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="3371" end="3382" title="radioactive" label="radioactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q184207" start="3414" end="3427" title="ferromagnetism" label="ferromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188479" start="3466" end="3478" title="paramagnetism" label="paramagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3731" end="3752" title="magnetic refrigeration#The magnetocaloric effect" label="magnetocaloric effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="3956" end="3962" title="kelvin" label="kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q178026" start="4094" end="4103" title="fullerene" label="fullerene"/>
<link wikidata="Q110779037" start="4151" end="4183" title="transmission electron microscope" label="transmission electron microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778729" start="4252" end="4268" title="carbon nanotubes" label="carbon nanotubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="4456" end="4463" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q445686" start="4620" end="4627" title="tarnish" label="tarnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q419919" start="4679" end="4700" title="gadolinium(III) oxide" label="gadolinium(III) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4740" end="4746" title="spall#Corrosion" label="spalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q216830" start="4812" end="4826" title="reducing agent" label="reducing agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q18212338" start="4999" end="5024" title="gadolinium(III) hydroxide" label="gadolinium(III) hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="5118" end="5131" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q190444" start="5360" end="5377" title="rare-earth metals" label="rare-earth metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q484152" start="5401" end="5416" title="oxidation state" label="oxidation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q415113" start="5640" end="5664" title="gadolinium(III) chloride" label="gadolinium(III) chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516416" start="5730" end="5753" title="gadolinium(III) nitrate" label="gadolinium(III) nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="5806" end="5815" title="coordination complex" label="complexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q397226" start="5826" end="5845" title="coordination number" label="coordination number"/>
<link wikidata="Q161515" start="5911" end="5915" title="DOTA (chelator)" label="DOTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023362" start="5924" end="5931" title="denticity" label="dentate"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="5975" end="6001" title="magnetic resonance imaging" label="magnetic resonance imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031078" start="6073" end="6084" title="gadodiamide" label="gadodiamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123" start="6251" end="6259" title="tantalum" label="tantalum"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="6595" end="6607" title="radioisotope" label="radioisotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q659662" start="6670" end="6687" title="natural abundance" label="natural abundance"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="6791" end="6800" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q846110" start="7242" end="7249" title="nuclear isomer" label="isomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840065" start="7420" end="7431" title="atomic mass" label="atomic mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q109910" start="7505" end="7521" title="electron capture" label="electron capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396" start="7537" end="7545" title="europium" label="europium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11448" start="7584" end="7594" title="decay mode" label="decay mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="7598" end="7608" title="beta decay" label="beta decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1838" start="7651" end="7658" title="terbium" label="terbium"/>
<link wikidata="Q410903" start="7711" end="7721" title="gadolinite" label="gadolinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q312571" start="7787" end="7800" title="Johan Gadolin" label="Johan Gadolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="7894" end="7901" title="chemist" label="chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q124045" start="7902" end="7936" title="Jean Charles Galissard de Marignac" label="Jean Charles Galissard de Marignac"/>
<link wikidata="Q410903" start="8000" end="8010" title="gadolinite" label="gadolinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q415904" start="8125" end="8131" title="cerite" label="cerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q366827" start="8414" end="8445" title="Paul-Émile Lecoq de Boisbaudran" label="Paul-Émile Lecoq de Boisbaudran"/>
<link wikidata="Q899754" start="8537" end="8549" title="Félix Trombe" label="Félix Trombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q422011" start="8622" end="8630" title="monazite" label="monazite"/>
<link wikidata="Q424266" start="8635" end="8645" title="bastnäsite" label="bastnäsite"/>
<link wikidata="Q410903" start="8736" end="8746" title="gadolinite" label="gadolinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820045" start="9107" end="9124" title="lepersonnite-(Gd)" label="lepersonnite-(Gd)"/>
<link wikidata="Q424266" start="9202" end="9212" title="bastnäsite" label="bastnäsite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="9252" end="9269" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="9273" end="9286" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115" start="9438" end="9445" title="Thorium" label="Thorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q419626" start="9539" end="9555" title="ammonium oxalate" label="ammonium oxalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q417351" start="9600" end="9607" title="oxalate" label="oxalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="9689" end="9700" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385" start="9743" end="9749" title="cerium" label="cerium"/>
<link wikidata="Q411014" start="9816" end="9833" title="magnesium nitrate" label="magnesium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819" start="9899" end="9907" title="samarium" label="samarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396" start="9912" end="9920" title="europium" label="europium"/>
<link wikidata="Q389137" start="9951" end="9963" title="ion exchange" label="ion exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="10139" end="10146" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202639" start="10539" end="10558" title="neutron radiography" label="neutron radiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="10579" end="10595" title="nuclear reactors" label="nuclear reactors"/>
<link wikidata="Q558181" start="10698" end="10711" title="CANDU reactor" label="CANDU reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142489" start="10740" end="10765" title="nuclear marine propulsion" label="nuclear marine propulsion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10779" end="10794" title="burnable poison#Burnable poisons" label="burnable poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q893257" start="10821" end="10844" title="Neutron capture therapy of cancer" label="neutron capture therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="10987" end="10998" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgic"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="11081" end="11089" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="11103" end="11108" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="11157" end="11166" title="oxidation" label="oxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188479" start="11213" end="11225" title="paramagnetic" label="paramagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q111092" start="11229" end="11245" title="room temperature" label="room temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q191073" start="11254" end="11279" title="Curie temperature" label="ferromagnetic Curie point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879445" start="11333" end="11345" title="nuclear spin" label="nuclear spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717498" start="11394" end="11408" title="MRI contrast agent" label="contrast agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="11413" end="11439" title="magnetic resonance imaging" label="magnetic resonance imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351" start="11460" end="11467" title="organic chemistry" label="organic"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="11479" end="11488" title="coordination complex" label="complexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q640448" start="11526" end="11537" title="intravenous" label="intravenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q907325" start="11587" end="11617" title="magnetic resonance angiography" label="magnetic resonance angiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q413793" start="11636" end="11645" title="Magnevist" label="Magnevist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015187" start="11725" end="11737" title="gadonanotube" label="gadonanotube"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="11976" end="11995" title="blood–brain barrier" label="blood–brain barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q233309" start="11997" end="12009" title="Brain tumors" label="Brain tumors"/>
<link wikidata="Q221694" start="12048" end="12059" title="blood-brain" label="blood-brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="12168" end="12171" title="MRI" label="MRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253487" start="12184" end="12251" title="delayed gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging of cartilage" label="delayed gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging of cartilage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="12260" end="12274" title="ionic compound" label="ionic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q413793" start="12293" end="12302" title="Magnevist" label="Magnevist"/>
<link wikidata="Q502730" start="12334" end="12343" title="cartilage" label="cartilage"/>
<link wikidata="Q26336" start="12353" end="12376" title="electrostatic repulsion" label="electrostatic repulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q407976" start="12392" end="12404" title="proteoglycan" label="proteoglycan"/>
<link wikidata="Q62736" start="12444" end="12458" title="osteoarthritis" label="osteoarthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="12571" end="12576" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1838" start="12619" end="12626" title="Terbium" label="Terbium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130571" start="12627" end="12632" title="doping (semiconductors)" label="doped"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850226" start="12633" end="12654" title="gadolinium oxysulfide" label="gadolinium oxysulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385" start="13105" end="13107" title="Cerium" label="Ce"/>
<link wikidata="Q910990" start="13147" end="13159" title="scintillator" label="scintillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q208376" start="13187" end="13215" title="positron emission tomography" label="positron emission tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248330" start="13299" end="13307" title="phosphor" label="phosphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396" start="13417" end="13425" title="europium" label="europium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="13495" end="13510" title="gamma radiation" label="gamma radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q444351" start="13869" end="13887" title="bone density gauge" label="bone density gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q165328" start="13893" end="13905" title="osteoporosis" label="osteoporosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516417" start="13985" end="14010" title="gadolinium yttrium garnet" label="gadolinium yttrium garnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="14036" end="14045" title="microwave" label="microwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q162908" start="14234" end="14245" title="electrolyte" label="electrolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q899633" start="14249" end="14270" title="solid oxide fuel cell" label="solid oxide fuel cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q15119237" start="14303" end="14309" title="dopant" label="dopant"/>
<link wikidata="Q411844" start="14329" end="14341" title="cerium(IV) oxide" label="cerium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015179" start="14358" end="14380" title="gadolinium-doped ceria" label="gadolinium-doped ceria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063658" start="14420" end="14438" title="Ionic conductivity (solid state)" label="ionic conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q899364" start="14532" end="14554" title="magnetic refrigeration" label="magnetic refrigeration"/>
<link wikidata="Q191073" start="14945" end="14962" title="Curie temperature" label="Curie temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q414015" start="15466" end="15493" title="yttrium barium copper oxide" label="yttrium barium copper oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q846667" start="15668" end="15699" title="High-temperature superconductivity" label="high temperature superconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="15881" end="15887" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15994" end="16006" title="neutrino#antineutrinos" label="antineutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q647227" start="16033" end="16049" title="Super-Kamiokande" label="Super-Kamiokande"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="16077" end="16086" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="16268" end="16277" title="gamma ray" label="gamma ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516414" start="16337" end="16362" title="Gadolinium gallium garnet" label="Gadolinium gallium garnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752093" start="16429" end="16442" title="bubble memory" label="bubble memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q319827" start="16550" end="16558" title="chelation" label="chelated"/>
<link wikidata="Q711849" start="16761" end="16776" title="LD50" label="50% lethal dose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880534" start="17523" end="17538" title="Ultrafiltration (kidney)" label="kidney function"/>
<link wikidata="Q677803" start="17703" end="17732" title="nephrogenic systemic fibrosis" label="nephrogenic systemic fibrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144875" start="17824" end="17838" title="scleromyxedema" label="scleromyxedema"/>
<link wikidata="Q958797" start="17858" end="17869" title="scleroderma" label="scleroderma"/>
<link wikidata="Q168800" start="19143" end="19165" title="Anaphylactoid reaction" label="Anaphylactoid reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717498" start="19490" end="19508" title="MRI contrast agent" label="MRI contrast agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q62536" start="19533" end="19544" title="ion channel" label="ion channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q260463" start="19735" end="19766" title="electron paramagnetic resonance" label="electron paramagnetic resonance"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12244" wikidata="Q157582" url="?curid=12244" title="German Unity Day">
<text>German Unity Day (, ) is the National Day of Germany, celebrated on 3 October as a public holiday. It commemorates German reunification in 1990 when the German Democratic Republic (East Germany) joined the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany), so that for the first time since 1945 there existed a single German state. German Unity Day on 3 October has been the German National Holiday since 1990, when the reunification was formally completed.

An alternative choice to commemorate the reunification could have been the day the Berlin Wall came down: 9 November 1989, which coincided with the anniversary of the proclamation of the German Republic in 1918, and the defeat of Hitler&#x27;s first coup in 1923. However, 9 November was also the anniversary of the first large-scale Nazi-led pogroms against Jews in 1938 (&quot;Kristallnacht&quot;), so the day was considered racist as a national holiday (see 9 November in German history). Therefore, 3 October 1990, the day of the formal reunification, was chosen instead. It replaced the &quot;German Unity Day&quot; on 17 June, the national holiday of the Federal Republic of Germany from 1954.

==History==
Germany has historically associated various dates with its nationhood and unity.
===Imperial Germany===
Before 1871, in the area where the single state of Germany now exists, different kingdoms and principalities existed. After the unification of Germany, and the Founding of the Empire 1871, there was still no common national holiday. The Sedantag was, however, celebrated every year on 2 September, recalling the decisive victory in the Franco-Prussian War on 2 September 1870.

Before the Empire was founded in 1872, there were calls for a national holiday, and there were three suggestions. No decision was made. Until 1873, the Sedantag was moved to 18 January or the day of the Frankfurt Treaty (10 May 1871). The Sedantag would soon also be celebrated at the universities and in many German cities. It never occurred to them to think about &quot;Empire Parade&quot; or &quot;Emperor&#x27;s Birthday&quot;. Some Culture Ministers of the states, especially in Prussia, decided that the Sedantag would be an official festival in schools. Upon many suggestions, the date of the Emperor&#x27;s proclamation on 18 January would be established as day of remembrance. Emperor Wilhelm I declined this: &quot;This was also the day of the first Prussian coronation of the king, which should not fall into the shadow of a united German holiday.&quot; 

Despite this, the Day of the founding of the German Empire was still celebrated locally and nationally to some degree. These celebrations continued in the Weimar Republic and Nazi Germany. Following World War II, East Germany completely abandoned the holiday, while West Germany still celebrated it on a smaller scale. West Germany did acknowledge the centennial of the German Empire as the founding of the German state in 1871. 

===Weimar Republic===
On 31 July 1919, the Weimar Constitution would be accepted in its form by the Weimar National Congress. In memorial of this &quot;Hour of birth of democracy&quot;, 11 August was created as Constitution Day, because the President of Germany Friedrich Ebert, signed the constitution on this day.

===National Socialism===
Shortly after the Nazis took power in 1933 (the so-called ), May Day (1 May) was established as a national holiday in the &quot;German Reich&quot;. It was already celebrated as a &quot;Day of the Labor Movement&quot; since 1890, and also was part of the tradition for the May dance commemorating the Walpurgis Night. Immediately after the establishment of the holiday in 1933, the Nazis banned trade unions on 2 May 1933 and occupied their buildings as offices for the Nazi Movement. On 1 March 1939, Hitler declared 9 November (the day of the failed Beer Hall Putsch in 1923) as the &quot;Memorial Day for the movement&quot; as the national holiday.

===Federal Republic of Germany===
From 1954 to 1990, 17 June was an official holiday in the Federal Republic of Germany to commemorate the East German uprising of 1953, even with the name &quot;German Unity Day&quot;. Since 1963, it was proclaimed by the President of the Federal Republic as &quot;National Day of Memorial of the German People&quot;. However, by the mid-1960s as hope faded that the two Germanys would ever be re-united, this date became more of a holiday and day of recreation than a day to consider national unity.
In the year 1990, the &quot;German Unity Day&quot; was celebrated twice, on this date and on 3 October.

===German Democratic Republic===
In East Germany, the Founding Day in 1949 was celebrated on 7 October as Republic Day, until the 40th anniversary in 1989.

==Decision for GDR&#x27;s unity with the Federal Republic==
The motive for setting the date of 3 October as the possible Day of Unity was decided by the Volkskammer, the East German parliament, on the impending economical and political collapse of the GDR. The Helsinki Conference was set for 2 October, at which the foreign ministers would be informed of the results of the Two-plus-Four talks.

At the beginning of July, the governments of both German states decided on the schedule: State elections in the GDR would be held on 14 October, and a Bundestag election for the entire country on 2 December.

The decision on the date was finally made on 22 August by the GDR&#x27;s Minister-President, Lothar de Maizière, at a special session of the Volkskammer, which began at 9 p.m. After a heated debate, the President of the Volkskammer, Sabine Bergmann-Pohl, announced the results at 2:30 a.m. on 23 August:

Gregor Gysi, Chairman of the SED-PDS, was visibly moved and made a personal statement: &quot;Madame President! The Parliament has no more and no less decided on the downfall of the German Democratic Republic as of 3 October 1990&quot;. This statement was met by jubilant cheers from the CDU/DA, DSU and SPD.

===Attempt to change the date of Unity Day===
On 3 November 2004, the Federal Chancellor, Gerhard Schröder, suggested that the &quot;German Unity Day&quot; be celebrated on a Sunday, for economic reasons. Instead of 3 October, the National Reunification should be celebrated on the first Sunday of October. This suggestion received a lot of criticism from many sides, amongst them from Federal President Horst Köhler as well as the President of the Bundestag, Wolfgang Thierse. The demand worried a part of the population because of discontent for increased working hours would be seen as a provocation and devaluing the national holiday. In addition, fixing the Unity Day on the first Sunday of October would have meant that it would sometimes fall on 7 October, which happens to have been the national day of East Germany; this date would thus have been seen as commemorating the division of Germany rather than the reunification. The idea was dropped after a short but angry debate.

==Celebrations==

The Day of German Unity is celebrated each year with a ceremonial act and a citizen&#x27;s festival (&quot;&quot;).

The celebrations are hosted by a major city, usually the state capital, in the German state presiding over the Bundesrat in the respective year (a sequence determined by the Königstein Agreement). After Bonn in 2011, Frankfurt am Main was the second non-state capital to host the celebrations in 2015; however, both cities are significant in German political history (Bonn as former capital of West Germany and Frankfurt as the place of the Frankfurt Parliament of 1848–49).

In addition, various celebrations are held in the federal capital Berlin, mainly based on the Straße des 17. Juni and around the Brandenburg Gate. State capitals and also other cities often have additional festivities. Furthermore, the Oktoberfest beer festival in Munich, which traditionally runs until the first Sunday in October, now runs until 3 October, if the Sunday in question falls on the first or second day of October. The celebrations in the host city always includes a festival and fireworks show.

===Zipfelbund: compass communities===
At the 1999 Day of German Unity celebration in Wiesbaden the (Compass Confederation) was formalised. The Zipfelbund are the four communities at the cardinal compass points of Germany: North – List on the island of Sylt, West – Selfkant, South – Oberstdorf and East – Görlitz. Together, they always participate in the respective annual celebration to represent the modern borders of Germany.

==See also==
* East German uprising of 1953

==References==
==External links==
* Tag der Deutschen Einheit 2014 Niedersächsische Staatskanzlei
* Tag der Deutschen Einheit 2011 Bonn 
* Chronik der Mauer chronik-der-mauer.de 1990 
* Video: Volkskammerbeschluss 23. August 1990 zum Beitritt der DDR zur Bundesrepublik Deutsches Rundfunkarchiv 1989 
* German Embassy Publication, Infocus:German Unity Day</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q157582" start="0" end="16" title="German Unity Day" label="German Unity Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q57598" start="29" end="41" title="National Day" label="National Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="45" end="52" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="115" end="135" title="German reunification" label="German reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="181" end="193" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="235" end="247" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q649352" start="368" end="391" title="Public holidays in Germany" label="German National Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="535" end="546" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q170306" start="619" end="654" title="German Revolution of 1918–1919" label="proclamation of the German Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36749" start="682" end="706" title="Beer Hall Putsch" label="Hitler&amp;#x27;s first coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="795" end="801" title="pogrom" label="pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="811" end="815" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q36756" start="831" end="844" title="Kristallnacht" label="Kristallnacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q275705" start="913" end="941" title="9 November in German history" label="9 November in German history"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="1113" end="1140" title="West Germany" label="Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q154705" start="1397" end="1419" title="unification of Germany" label="unification of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q678916" start="1506" end="1514" title="Sedantag" label="Sedantag"/>
<link wikidata="Q156681" start="1577" end="1597" title="Battle of Sedan" label="the decisive victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="1605" end="1624" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q158021" start="1850" end="1866" title="Treaty of Frankfurt (1871)" label="Frankfurt Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="2131" end="2138" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139492" start="2532" end="2572" title="Day of the founding of the German Empire" label="Day of the founding of the German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q156003" start="2988" end="3007" title="Weimar Constitution" label="Weimar Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q649746" start="3045" end="3069" title="Weimar National Assembly" label="Weimar National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q157740" start="3186" end="3206" title="President of Germany (1919–1945)" label="President of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646" start="3207" end="3222" title="Friedrich Ebert" label="Friedrich Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q900013" start="3348" end="3355" title="May Day" label="May Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206012" start="3415" end="3427" title="German Reich" label="German Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q47499" start="3472" end="3497" title="International Workers&amp;#x27; Day" label="Day of the Labor Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q200982" start="3587" end="3602" title="Walpurgis Night" label="Walpurgis Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q275705" start="3804" end="3814" title="November 9 in German history" label="9 November"/>
<link wikidata="Q36749" start="3838" end="3854" title="Beer Hall Putsch" label="Beer Hall Putsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q157682" start="4078" end="4106" title="East German uprising of 1953" label="East German uprising of 1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q896286" start="4684" end="4696" title="Republic Day (East Germany)" label="Republic Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q168396" start="4888" end="4899" title="Volkskammer" label="Volkskammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q159644" start="5110" end="5129" title="Treaty on the Final Settlement with Respect to Germany" label="Two-plus-Four talks"/>
<link wikidata="Q154797" start="5283" end="5292" title="Bundestag" label="Bundestag"/>
<link wikidata="Q704648" start="5328" end="5338" title="1990 German federal election" label="2 December"/>
<link wikidata="Q57412" start="5434" end="5452" title="Lothar de Maizière" label="Lothar de Maizière"/>
<link wikidata="Q57232" start="5574" end="5594" title="Sabine Bergmann-Pohl" label="Sabine Bergmann-Pohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q65126" start="5646" end="5657" title="Gregor Gysi" label="Gregor Gysi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530" start="6045" end="6061" title="Gerhard Schröder" label="Gerhard Schröder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542" start="6359" end="6371" title="Horst Köhler" label="Horst Köhler"/>
<link wikidata="Q154797" start="6404" end="6413" title="Bundestag" label="Bundestag"/>
<link wikidata="Q62703" start="6415" end="6431" title="Wolfgang Thierse" label="Wolfgang Thierse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="7156" end="7168" title="States of Germany" label="German state"/>
<link wikidata="Q146138" start="7188" end="7197" title="Bundesrat of Germany" label="Bundesrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="7280" end="7284" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="7294" end="7311" title="Frankfurt am Main" label="Frankfurt am Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="7471" end="7483" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q157638" start="7518" end="7538" title="Frankfurt Parliament" label="Frankfurt Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="7619" end="7625" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q317094" start="7647" end="7666" title="Straße des 17. Juni" label="Straße des 17. Juni"/>
<link wikidata="Q82425" start="7682" end="7698" title="Brandenburg Gate" label="Brandenburg Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q102400" start="7789" end="7800" title="Oktoberfest" label="Oktoberfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919327" start="7801" end="7814" title="beer festival" label="beer festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="7818" end="7824" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721" start="8150" end="8159" title="Wiesbaden" label="Wiesbaden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8260" end="8274" title="Points of the compass#Compass point names" label="compass points"/>
<link wikidata="Q21160" start="8295" end="8299" title="List, Schleswig-Holstein" label="List"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107" start="8317" end="8321" title="Sylt" label="Sylt"/>
<link wikidata="Q204743" start="8330" end="8338" title="Selfkant" label="Selfkant"/>
<link wikidata="Q266230" start="8348" end="8358" title="Oberstdorf" label="Oberstdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4077" start="8370" end="8377" title="Görlitz" label="Görlitz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8467" end="8481" title="Oder–Neisse line#Division of cities" label="modern borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q157682" start="8510" end="8538" title="East German uprising of 1953" label="East German uprising of 1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205934" start="8810" end="8834" title="Deutsches Rundfunkarchiv" label="Deutsches Rundfunkarchiv"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12246" wikidata="Q49766" url="?curid=12246" title="Alliance 90/The Greens">
<text>Alliance 90/The Greens (, ), often simply referred to as Greens (, ), is a green political party in Germany. It was formed in 1993 by the merger of the Greens (formed in West Germany in 1980) and Alliance 90 (formed in East Germany in 1990). The Greens had itself merged with the East German Green Party after German reunification in 1990.

Since November 2024, Franziska Brantner and Felix Banaszak have been co-leaders of the party. It currently holds 117 of the 733 seats in the Bundestag, having won 14.8% of votes cast in the 2021 federal election, and its parliamentary group is the third largest of six. Its parliamentary co-leaders are Britta Haßelmann and Katharina Dröge. The Greens have been part of the federal government twice: first as a junior partner to the Social Democrats (SPD) from 1998 to 2005, and then with the SPD and the Free Democratic Party (FDP) in the traffic light coalition from the 2021 election until that coalition&#x27;s collapse in 2024. In the incumbent Scholz cabinet, the Greens have five ministers, including Vice-Chancellor Robert Habeck and Foreign Minister Annalena Baerbock.

The party holds seats in most of Germany&#x27;s state legislatures, except Saarland, Thuringia and Brandenburg, and is a member of coalition governments in seven states. Winfried Kretschmann, Minister-President of Baden-Württemberg, is the only Green head of government in Germany. The Landtag of Baden-Württemberg is also the only state legislature in which Alliance 90/The Greens is the largest party; it is the second largest party in the legislatures of Berlin, Hamburg, and Schleswig-Holstein.

Alliance 90/The Greens is a founding member of the European Green Party and the Greens–European Free Alliance group in the European Parliament. It is currently the largest party in the G/EFA group, with 21 MEPs. In the 2019 European election, Alliance 90/The Greens was the second largest party in Germany, winning 20.5% of votes cast. The party had 126,451 members in December 2022, making it the fourth largest party in Germany by membership.

==History==

===Background===
The Green Party was initially founded in West Germany as &quot;Die Grünen&quot; (the Greens) in January 1980. It grew out of the anti-nuclear energy, environmental, peace, new left, and new social movements of the late 20th century.

&quot;Grüne Liste Umweltschutz&quot; (green list for environmental protection) was the name used for some branches in Lower Saxony and other states in the Federal Republic of Germany. These groups were founded in 1977 and took part in several elections. Most of them merged with The Greens in 1980.

The West Berlin state branch of The Greens was founded as &quot;Alternative Liste&quot;, or precisely, &quot;Alternative Liste für Demokratie und Umweltschutz&quot; (AL; alternative list for democracy and environmental protection) in 1978 and became the official West Berlin branch of The Greens in 1980. In 1993, it renamed to Alliance 90/The Greens Berlin after the merger with East Berlin&#x27;s Greens and Alliance 90.

The Hamburg state branch of the Green Party was called &quot;Grün-Alternative Liste Hamburg&quot; (GAL; green-alternative list) from its foundation in 1982 until 2012. In 1984, it became the official Hamburg branch of The Greens.

===12–13 January 1980: Foundation congress===
The political party The Greens () sprung out of the wave of New Social Movements that were active in the 1970s, including environmentalist, anti-war, and anti-nuclear movements which can trace their origin to the student protests of 1968. Officially founded as a German national party on 13 January 1980 in Karlsruhe, the party sought to give these movements political and parliamentary representation, as the pre-existing were not organised in a way to address their stated issues. Its membership included organisers from former attempts to achieve institutional representation such as and . Opposition to pollution, use of nuclear power, NATO military action, and certain aspects of industrialised society were principal campaign issues. The party also championed sexual liberation and some of their members supported the abolition of age of consent laws.

The formation of a party was purportedly first discussed by movement leaders in 1978. Important figures in the first years were – among others – Petra Kelly, Joschka Fischer, Gert Bastian, , Rudolf Bahro, Joseph Beuys, Antje Vollmer, , August Haußleiter, Luise Rinser, , Christian Ströbele, Jutta Ditfurth, Baldur Springmann and Werner Vogel.

In the foundational congress of 1980, the ideological tenets of the party were consolidated, proclaiming the famous Four Pillars of the Green Party:
* Social justice
* Ecological wisdom
* Grassroots democracy
* Nonviolence

===1980s: Parliamentary representation on the federal level===
In 1982, the conservative factions of the Greens broke away to form the Ecological Democratic Party (ÖDP). Those who remained in the Green party were more strongly pacifist and against restrictions on immigration and reproductive rights, while supporting the legalisation of cannabis use, placing a higher priority on working for LGBT rights, and tending to advocate what they described as &quot;anti-authoritarian&quot; concepts of education and child-rearing. They also tended to identify more closely with a culture of protest and civil disobedience, frequently clashing with police at demonstrations against nuclear weapons, nuclear energy, and the construction of a new runway () at Frankfurt Airport. Those who left the party at the time might have felt similarly about some of these issues, but did not identify with the forms of protest that Green party members took part in.

After some success at state-level elections, the party won 27 seats with of the vote in the Bundestag, the lower house of the German parliament, in the 1983 federal election. Among the important political issues at the time was the deployment of Pershing II IRBMs and nuclear-tipped cruise missiles by the U.S. and NATO on West German soil, generating strong opposition in the general population that found an outlet in mass demonstrations. The newly formed party was able to draw on this popular movement to recruit support. Partly due to the impact of the Chernobyl disaster in 1986, and to growing awareness of the threat of air pollution and acid rain to German forests (), the Greens increased their share of the vote to in the 1987 federal election. Around this time, Joschka Fischer emerged as the unofficial leader of the party, which he remained until resigning all leadership posts following the 2005 federal election.

The Greens were the target of attempts by the East German secret police to enlist the cooperation of members who were willing to align the party with the agenda of the German Democratic Republic. The party ranks included several politicians who were later discovered to have been Stasi agents, including Bundestag representative Dirk Schneider, European Parliament representative Brigitte Heinrich, and Red Army Faction defense lawyer Klaus Croissant. Greens politician and Bundestag representative Gert Bastian was also a founding member of , a pacifist group created and funded by the Stasi, the revelation of which may have contributed to the murder-suicide in which he killed his partner and Greens founder Petra Kelly. A study commissioned by the Greens determined that 15 to 20 members intimately cooperated with the Stasi and another 450 to 500 had been informants.

Until 1987, the Greens included a faction involved in pedophile activism, the short for (approx. &quot;working group &quot;Gays, Pederasts and Transsexuals&quot;&quot;). This faction campaigned for repealing § 176 of the German penal code, dealing with child sexual abuse. This group was controversial within the party itself, and was seen as partly responsible for the poor election result of 1985. This controversy re-surfaced in 2013 and chairwoman Claudia Roth stated she welcomed an independent scientific investigation on the extent of influence pedophile activists had on the party in the mid-1980s. In November 2014, the political scientist Franz Walter presented the final report about his research on a press conference.

===1990s: German reunification, electoral failure in the West, formation of Alliance 90/The Greens===

In the 1990 federal elections, taking place post-reunified Germany, the Greens in the West did not pass the 5% limit required to win seats in the Bundestag. It was only due to a temporary modification of German election law, applying the five-percent &quot;hurdle&quot; separately in East and West Germany, that the Greens acquired any parliamentary seats at all. This happened because in the new states of Germany, the Greens, in a joint effort with Alliance 90, a heterogeneous grouping of civil rights activists, were able to gain more than 5% of the vote. Some critics attribute this poor performance to the reluctance of the campaign to cater to the prevalent mood of nationalism, instead focusing on subjects such as global warming. A campaign poster at the time proudly stated, &quot;Everyone is talking about Germany; we&#x27;re talking about the weather!&quot;, paraphrasing a popular slogan of Deutsche Bundesbahn, the German national railway. The party also opposed imminent reunification that was in process, instead wanting to initiate debates on ecology and nuclear issues before reunification causing a drop in support in Western Germany. After the 1994 federal election; however, the merged party returned to the Bundestag, and the Greens received 7.3% of the vote nationwide and 49 seats.

===1998–2002: Greens as governing party, first term===
In the 1998 federal election, despite a slight fall in their percentage of the vote (6.7%), the Greens retained 47 seats and joined the federal government for the first time in &#x27;Red-Green&#x27; coalition government with the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD). Joschka Fischer became Vice-Chancellor of Germany and foreign minister in the new government, which had two other Green ministers (Andrea Fischer, later Renate Künast, and Jürgen Trittin).

Almost immediately the party was plunged into a crisis by the question of German participation in the NATO actions in Kosovo. Numerous anti-war party members resigned their party membership when the first post-war deployment of German troops in a military conflict abroad occurred under a Red-Green government, and the party began to experience a long string of defeats in local and state-level elections. Disappointment with the Green participation in government increased when anti-nuclear power activists realised that shutting down the nation&#x27;s nuclear power stations would not happen as quickly as they wished, and numerous pro-business SPD members of the federal cabinet opposed the environmentalist agenda of the Greens, calling for tacit compromises.

In 2001, the party experienced a further crisis as some Green Members of Parliament refused to back the government&#x27;s plan of sending military personnel to help with the 2001 invasion of Afghanistan. Chancellor Gerhard Schröder called a vote of confidence, tying it to his strategy on the war. Four Green MPs and one Social Democrat voted against the government, but Schröder was still able to command a majority.

On the other hand, the Greens achieved a major success as a governing party through the 2000 decision to phase out the use of nuclear energy. Minister of Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety Jürgen Trittin reached an agreement with energy companies on the gradual phasing out of the country&#x27;s nineteen nuclear power plants and a cessation of civil usage of nuclear power by 2020. This was authorised through the Nuclear Exit Law. Based on an estimate of 32 years as the normal period of operation for a nuclear power plant, the agreement defines precisely how much energy a power plant is allowed to produce before being shut down. This law has since been overturned.

===2002–2005: Greens as governing party, second term===
Despite the crises of the preceding electoral period, in the 2002 federal election, the Greens increased their total to 55 seats (in a smaller parliament) and 8.6%. This was partly due to the perception that the internal debate over the war in Afghanistan had been more honest and open than in other parties, and one of the MPs who had voted against the Afghanistan deployment, Hans-Christian Ströbele, was directly elected to the Bundestag as a district representative for the Friedrichshain-Kreuzberg – Prenzlauer Berg East constituency in Berlin, becoming the first Green to ever gain a first-past-the-post seat in Germany.

The Greens benefited from increased inroads among traditionally left-wing demographics which had benefited from Green-initiated legislation in the 1998–2002 term, such as environmentalists (Renewable Energies Act) and LGBT groups (Registered Partnership Law). Perhaps most important for determining the success of both the Greens and the SPD was the increasing threat of war in Iraq, which was highly unpopular with the German public, and helped gather votes for the parties which had taken a stand against participation in this war. Despite losses for the SPD, the Red-Green coalition government retained a very slight majority in the Bundestag (4 seats) and was renewed, with Joschka Fischer as foreign minister, Renate Künast as minister for consumer protection, nutrition and agriculture, and Jürgen Trittin as minister for the environment.

One internal issue in 2002 was the failed attempt to settle a long-standing discussion about the question of whether members of parliament should be allowed to become members of the party executive. Two party conventions declined to change the party statute. The necessary majority of two-thirds was missed by a small margin. As a result, former party chairpersons Fritz Kuhn and Claudia Roth (who had been elected to parliament that year) were no longer able to continue in their executive function and were replaced by former party secretary general Reinhard Bütikofer and former Bundestag member Angelika Beer. The party then held a member referendum on this question in the spring of 2003 which changed the party statute. Now members of parliament may be elected for two of the six seats of the party executive, as long as they are not ministers or caucus leaders. 57% of all party members voted in the member referendum, with 67% voting in favor of the change. The referendum was only the second in the history of Alliance 90/The Greens, the first having been held about the merger of the Greens and Alliance 90. In 2004, after Angelika Beer was elected to the European Parliament, Claudia Roth was elected to replace her as party chair.

The only party convention in 2003 was planned for November 2003, but about 20% of the local organisations forced the federal party to hold a special party convention in Cottbus early to discuss the party position regarding &quot;Agenda 2010&quot;, a major reform of the German welfare programmes planned by Chancellor Schröder.

The November 2003 party convention was held in Dresden and decided the election platform for the 2004 European Parliament elections. The German Green list for these elections was headed by Rebecca Harms (then leader of the Green party in Lower Saxony) and Daniel Cohn-Bendit, previously Member of the European Parliament for The Greens of France. The November 2003 convention is also noteworthy because it was the first convention of a German political party ever to use an electronic voting system.

The Greens gained a record 13 of Germany&#x27;s 99 seats in these elections, mainly due to the perceived competence of Green ministers in the federal government and the unpopularity of the Social Democratic Party.

In early 2005, the Greens were the target of the German Visa Affair 2005, instigated in the media by the Christian Democratic Union (CDU). At the end of April 2005, they celebrated the decommissioning of the Obrigheim nuclear power station. They also continue to support a bill for an Anti-Discrimination Law () in the Bundestag.

In May 2005, the only remaining state-level red-green coalition government lost the vote in the North Rhine-Westphalia state election, leaving only the federal government with participation of the Greens (apart from local governments). In the early 2005 federal election the party incurred very small losses and achieved 8.1% of the vote and 51 seats. However, due to larger losses of the SPD, the previous coalition no longer had a majority in the Bundestag.
===2005–2021: In opposition===

For almost two years after the federal election in 2005, the Greens were not part of any government at the state or federal level. In June 2007, the Greens in Bremen entered into a coalition with the Social Democratic Party (SPD) following the 2007 Bremen state election.

In April 2008, following the 2008 Hamburg state election, the Green-Alternative List (GAL) in Hamburg entered into a coalition with the Christian Democratic Union (CDU), the first state-level coalition in Germany. Although the GAL had to agree to the deepening of the Elbe River, the construction of a new coal-fired power station and two road projects they had opposed, they also received some significant concessions from the CDU. These included reforming state schools by increasing the number of primary school educational stages, the restoration of trams as public transportation in the city-state, and more pedestrian-friendly real estate development. On 29 November 2010, the coalition collapsed, resulting in an election that was won by SPD.

Following the Saarland state election of August 2009, The Greens held the balance of power after a close election where no two-party coalitions could create a stable majority government. After negotiations, the Saarland Greens rejected the option of a left-wing &#x27;red-red-green&#x27; coalition with the SPD and The Left () in order to form a centre-right state government with the CDU and Free Democratic Party (FDP), a historical first time that a Jamaica coalition has formed in German politics.

In June 2010, in the first state election following the victory of the CDU/CSU and FDP in the 2009 federal election, the &quot;black-yellow&quot; CDU-FDP coalition in North Rhine-Westphalia under Jürgen Rüttgers lost its majority. The Greens and the SPD came one seat short of a governing majority, but after multiple negotiations about coalitions of SPD and Greens with either the FDP or The Left, the SPD and Greens decided to form a minority government, which was possible because under the constitution of North Rhine-Westphalia a plurality of seats is sufficient to elect a minister-president. So a red-green government in a state where it was defeated under Peer Steinbrück in 2005 came into office again on 14 June 2010 with the election of Hannelore Kraft as minister-president (Cabinet Kraft I).

The Greens founded the first international chapter of a German political party in the U.S. on 13 April 2008 at the Goethe-Institut in Washington D.C. Its main goal is &quot;to provide a platform for politically active and green-oriented German citizens, in and beyond Washington D.C., to discuss and actively participate in German Green politics. [...] to foster professional and personal exchange, channeling the outcomes towards the political discourse in Germany.&quot;

In March 2011 (two weeks after the Fukushima nuclear disaster had begun), the Greens made large gains in Rhineland-Palatinate and in Baden-Württemberg. In Baden-Württemberg they became the senior partner in a governing coalition for the first time. Winfried Kretschmann is now the first Green to serve as Minister-President of a German State (Cabinet Kretschmann I and II). Polling data from August 2011 indicated that one in five Germans supported the Greens. From 4 October 2011 to 4 September 2016, the party was represented in all state parliaments.

Like the Social Democrats, the Greens backed Chancellor Angela Merkel on most bailout votes in the German parliament during her second term, saying their pro-European stances overrode party politics. Shortly before the elections, the party plummeted to a four-year low in the polls, undermining efforts by Peer Steinbrück&#x27;s Social Democrats to unseat Merkel. 
While being in opposition on the federal level since 2005, the Greens have established themselves as a powerful force in Germany&#x27;s political system. By 2016, the Greens had joined 11 out of 16 state governments in a variety of coalitions. Over the years, they have built up an informal structure called G-coordination to organize interests between the federal party office, the parliamentary group in the Bundestag, and the Greens governing on the state level.

The Greens remained the smallest of six parties in the Bundestag in the 2017 federal election, winning 8.9% of votes. After the election, they entered into talks for a Jamaica coalition with the CDU and FDP. Discussions collapsed after the FDP withdrew in November.

After the federal election and unsuccessful Jamaica negotiations, the party held elections for two new co-leaders; incumbents Özdemir and Peter did not stand for re-election. Robert Habeck and Annalena Baerbock were elected with 81% and 64% of votes, respectively. Habeck had served as deputy premier and environment minister in Schleswig-Holstein since 2012, while Baerbock had been a leading figure in the party&#x27;s Brandenburg branch since 2009. Their election was considered a break with tradition, as they were both members of the moderate wing.

The Greens saw a major surge in support during the Bavarian and Hessian state elections in October 2018, becoming the second largest party in both. They subsequently rose to second place behind the CDU/CSU in national polling, averaging between 17% and 20% over the next six months.

In the 2019 European Parliament election, the Greens achieved their best ever result in a national election, placing second with 20.5% of the vote and winning 21 seats. National polling released after the election showed a major boost for the party. The first poll after the election, conducted by Forsa, showed the Greens in first place on 27%. This was the first time the Greens had ever been in first place in a national opinion poll, and the first time in the history of the Federal Republic that any party other than the CDU/CSU or SPD had placed first in a national poll. This trend continued as polls from May to July showed the CDU/CSU and Greens trading first place, after which point the CDU/CSU pulled ahead once more. The Greens continued to poll in the low 20% range into early 2020.

The Greens recorded best-ever results in the Brandenburg (10.8%) and Saxony (8.6%) state elections in September 2019, and subsequently joined coalition governments in both states. They suffered an unexpected decline in the Thuringian election in October, only narrowing retaining their seats with 5.2%. In the February 2020 Hamburg state election, the Greens became the second largest party, winning 24.2% of votes cast.

In March 2021, the Greens improved their performance in Baden-Württemberg, where they remained the strongest party with 32.6% of votes, and Rhineland-Palatinate, where they moved into third place with 9.3%.

Due to their sustained position as the second most popular party in national polling ahead of the September 2021 federal election, the Greens chose to forgo the traditional dual lead-candidacy in favour of selecting a single Chancellor candidate. Co-leader Annalena Baerbock was announced as Chancellor candidate on 19 April and formally confirmed on 12 June with 98.5% approval.

The Greens surged in opinion polls in late April and May, briefly surpassing the CDU as the most popular party in the country, but their numbers slipped back after Baerbock was caught up in several controversies. Her personal popularity also fell below that of both Armin Laschet and Olaf Scholz, the Chancellor candidates for the CDU and SPD, respectively. The party&#x27;s fortunes did not reverse even after the July floods, which saw climate change return as the most important issue among voters. The situation worsened in August as the SPD surged into first place to the detriment of both the CDU and Greens.

=== 2021–present: Return to government ===
The Greens finished in third place in the 2021 federal election with 14.8% of votes. Though their best ever federal election result, it was considered a bitter disappointment in light of their polling numbers during the previous three years. They entered coalition talks with the FDP and SPD, eventually joining a traffic light coalition under Chancellor Olaf Scholz which took office on 8 December 2021. The Greens have five ministers in the Scholz cabinet, including Robert Habeck as Vice-Chancellor and Annalena Baerbock as foreign minister.

Since party statute mandates that party leaders may not hold government office, Baerbock and Habeck stepped down after entering cabinet. At a party conference in January 2022, Ricarda Lang and Omid Nouripour were elected to succeed them. At the time of her election, Lang was 28 years old, speaker for women&#x27;s issues, and a former leader of the Green Youth. 46-year-old Nouripour was foreign affairs spokesman and a member of the Bundestag since 2006. Of the new leaders, Lang is considered a representative of the party&#x27;s left-wing, while Nouripour represents the right-wing.

Lang and Nouripour announced their resignations as party leaders in September 2024 after heavy defeats in the Saxony, Thuringia and Brandenburg state elections that month, as well as the earlier European Parliament election. In all three states, governing coalitions involving the Greens were not returned, and the party was wiped out in the latter two states while only narrowly retaining representation in Saxony. In the European elections, the Greens fell to fourth (behind the CDU/CSU, AfD and SPD) and lost 9 seats in the European parliament, falling to 12 seats. The party had fallen out of five state governments (additionally Berlin and Hesse) since entering the federal governing coalition in 2021. Analysts pointed to its participation in the federal government requiring it to take stances that are contrary to its traditional clean-energy and pacifist ideals, as well as a stark collapse in support with young voters. 

Felix Banaszak and Franziska Brantner elected as co-leaders in November. Meanwhile, party chose current Vice Chancellor Robert Habeck as their Chancellor candidate for the 2025 federal election. 

==Ideology and platform==
The party&#x27;s main ideological trends are green politics and social liberalism. The party has also been described as left-libertarian and influenced by the postmaterialist left. The party&#x27;s political position is generally described to be centre-left, but there are also journalistic sources describing the party as centrist. The West German Greens played a crucial role in the development of green politics in Europe, with their original program outlining &quot;four principles: ecological, social, grassroots, and non-violent.&quot; Initially ideologically heterogenous, the party took up a position on the radical left in its early years, which were dominated by conflicts between the more left-wing &quot;Fundi&quot; (fundamentalist) and more moderate &quot;Realo&quot; (realist) factions. These conflicts became less significant as the party moved toward the political mainstream in the 1990s.

During the 2021 federal election, the WZB Berlin Social Science Center classified the party as the most centrist of Germany&#x27;s left-wing parties. However, Baerbock campaigned from the left of the SPD, stating that the party&#x27;s economic program is geared towards the &quot;common good&quot; while the SPD&#x27;s no longer is. The party has a more pragmatic approach to workers&#x27; rights than the SPD. On the other hand, the party clearly holds positions to the left of the SPD on issues such as fiscal discipline, particularly on the debt brake, the climate transition, and property expropriation in Berlin. They are focusing on environmentalist and socially progressive policies. Emphasis is placed on mitigating climate change, reducing carbon emissions, and fostering sustainability and environmentally-friendly practices. They support equality, social justice, and humanitarian responses to events such as the European migrant crisis. Their fiscal platform is flexible and seeks to balance social, economic, and environmental interests. The party is strongly pro-European, advocating European federalism, and promotes wider international cooperation, including strengthening existing alliances.

Starting from the leadership of Annalena Baerbock and Robert Habeck, commentators have observed the Greens taking a pragmatic, moderate approach to work with parties from across the political spectrum. Baerbock described their stances and style as a form of &quot;radical realism&quot; attempting to reconcile principles with practical politics. At the same time, the party has denounced populism and division, and placed rhetorical emphasis on optimism and cross-party cooperation. Accompanied by record high popularity and election results, this led some to suggest that the Greens were filling a gap in the political centre, which was left by the declining popularity of the CDU/CSU and SPD.

===Economic policies===
The party has economically left-liberal views.

===Foreign policy===
The Greens are regarded as taking a Atlanticist line on defense and pushing for a stronger common EU foreign policy, especially against Russia and China. Green Party co-leader Annalena Baerbock has proposed a post-pacifist foreign policy. She supports eastward expansion of NATO and has considered the number of UN resolutions critical of Israel as &quot;absurd compared to resolutions against other states.&quot; The party&#x27;s program included references to NATO as an &quot;indispensable&quot; part of European security. The Greens have promised to abolish the contested Nord Stream 2 pipeline to ship Russian natural gas to Germany. The party criticized the EU&#x27;s investment deal with China. It describes China as a &quot;systematic rival&quot;, though the party also favors cooperation with China to fight climate change. In 2016, the Greens criticised Germany&#x27;s defense plan with Saudi Arabia, which has been waging war in Yemen and has been accused of massive human rights violations.

The party remains divided over issues such as nuclear disarmament and U.S. nuclear weapons on German territory. Some Greens want Germany to sign the United Nations&#x27; Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. About the Israel-Hamas War, the Federal Minister of Food and Agriculture Cem Özdemir (former president of the party) criticized Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg for her presence and support of pro-Palestinian demonstrations in Berlin, calling on everyone to reconsider their opinions about her.

===Energy and nuclear power===

Ever since the party&#x27;s inception, The Greens have been concerned with the immediate halt of construction or operation of all nuclear power stations. As an alternative, they promote a shift to non-nuclear renewable energy and a comprehensive program of energy conservation.

In 1986, large parts of Germany were covered with radioactive contamination from the Chernobyl disaster and Germans went to great lengths to deal with the contamination. Germany&#x27;s anti-nuclear stance was strengthened. From the mid-1990s onwards, anti-nuclear protests were primarily directed against transports of radioactive waste in &quot;CASTOR&quot; containers.

After the Chernobyl disaster, the Greens became more radicalised and resisted compromise on the nuclear issue. During the 1990s, a re-orientation towards a moderate program occurred, with concern about global warming and ozone depletion taking a more prominent role. During the federal red-green government (1998–2005) many people became disappointed with what they saw as excessive compromise on key Greens policies.

===Environment and climate policy===
The central idea of green politics is sustainable development. The concept of environmental protection is the cornerstone of Alliance 90/The Greens policy. In particular, the economic, energy and transport policy claims are in close interaction with environmental considerations. The Greens acknowledge the natural environment as a high priority and animal protection should be enshrined as a national objective in constitutional law. An effective environmental policy would be based on a common environmental code, with the urgent integration of a climate change bill. During the red-green coalition (1998–2005) a policy of agricultural change was launched labeled as a paradigm shift in agricultural policy towards a more ecological friendly agriculture, which needs to continue.

The Greens have praised the European Green Deal, which aims to make the EU climate neutral by 2050. Climate change is at the center of all policy considerations. This includes environmental policy and safety and social aspects. The plans of the Alliance 90/The Greens provide a climate change bill laying down binding reductions to greenhouse gas emissions in Germany by 2020 restricting emissions to minus 40 percent compared to 1990.

=== European Union ===
Alliance 90/The Greens supports the eventual federalization of the European Union into a Federal European Republic (German: &quot;Föderale Europäische Republik&quot;), i.e. a single federal European sovereign state.

===Transport===
A similarly high priority is given to transport policy. The switch from a traveling allowance to a mobility allowance, which is paid regardless of income to all employees, replacing company car privileges. The truck toll will act as a climate protection instrument internalizing the external costs of transport. Railway should be promoted in order to achieve the desired environmental objectives and the comprehensive care of customers. The railway infrastructure is to remain permanently in the public sector, allowing a reduction in expenditure on road construction infrastructure. The Greens want to control privileges on kerosene and for international flights, introduce an air ticket levy.

Fossil fuels such as heavy oil or diesel shall be replaced by emission-neutral fuels and green propulsion systems in order to make shipping climate-neutral in the long term.

===Social policy===
For many years, the Green Party has advocated against the &quot;Ehegattensplitting&quot; policy, under which the incomes of married couples are split for taxation purposes. Furthermore, the Party advocates for a massive increase in federal spending for places in preschools, and for increased investment in education: an additional 1 billion Euros for vocational schools and 200 million Euros more BAföG (Bundesausbildungsförderungsgesetz in German, approximately translated to &quot;the Federal Law for the Advancement of Education&quot;) for adults.

In its 2013 platform, the Green Party successfully advocated for a minimum wage of 8.50 Euro per hour, which was implemented on 1 January 2015. It continues to press for higher minimum wages.

The Greens want the starting retirement age to remain 67, but with some qualificationsfor example, a provision for partial retirement.

The party supports and has supported various forms of rent regulation. During the 2021 election, the party called for rent hikes to be capped at 2.5% per year.

The Greens support progressive taxation and is critical of FDP efforts to cut taxes for top earners.

===Women and LGBTQIA+ rights===

The Green Party supports the implementation of quotas in executive boards, the policy of equal pay for equal work, and continuing the fight against domestic violence. According to its website, the Green Party &quot;fights for the acceptance and against the exclusion of homosexuals, bisexuals, intersex- and transgender people and others&quot;.

In order to recognize the political persecution that LGBT+ people face abroad, the Green Party wants to extend asylum to LGBTQIA+ people abroad. The policy change was sponsored primarily by Volker Beck, one of the Party&#x27;s most prominent gay members. Because of the extensive support the Green Party has given the LGBTQIA+ community since its conception, many LGBTQIA+ people vote for the Green Party even if their political ideology does not quite align otherwise.

===Drug policy===
The party supports the legalization and regulation of cannabis and was the sponsor of the 2015 proposed iteration of the German cannabis control bill.

Furthermore, the Greens support research on the drug and the use of marijuana for medicinal purposes.

==Electorate==

A 2000 study by the Infratest Dimap political research company has suggested the Green voter demographic includes those on higher incomes (e.g. above €2000/month) and the party&#x27;s support is less among households with lower incomes. The same polling research also concluded that the Greens received fewer votes from the unemployed and general working population, with business people favouring the party as well as the centre-right liberal Free Democratic Party. According to Infratest Dimap the Greens received more voters from the age group 34–42 than any other age group and that the young were generally more supportive of the party than the old. (Source: Intrafest Dimap political research company for the ARD.)

The Greens have a higher voter demographic in urban areas than rural areas, except for a small number of rural areas with pressing local environmental concerns, such as strip mining or radioactive waste deposits. The cities of Bonn, Cologne, Stuttgart, Berlin, Hamburg, Frankfurt and Munich have among the highest percentages of Green voters in the country. The towns of Aachen, Bonn, Darmstadt, Hanover, Mönchengladbach and Wuppertal have Green mayors. The party has a lower level of support in the states of the former German Democratic Republic (East Germany); nonetheless, the party is currently represented in every state Landtag except Brandenburg, Saarland, and Thuringia.

==Election results==

===Federal Parliament (&quot;Bundestag&quot;)===



===European Parliament===
===State Parliaments (&quot;Länder&quot;)===
===Results timeline===
===States (&quot;Länder&quot;)===


== Leadership (1993–present) ==
== See also ==
* Anti-nuclear movement
* Green party
* Green Party faction (Bundestag)
* Green Youth (Germany)
* List of German Green Party politicians
* List of political parties in Germany

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* Kolinsky, Eva (1989): &quot;The Greens in West Germany: Organisation and Policy Making&quot; Oxford: Berg.
* Nishida, Makoto (2005): &quot;Strömungen in den Grünen (1980–2003) : eine Analyse über informell-organisierte Gruppen innerhalb der Grünen&quot; Münster: Lit, , 
* Raschke, Joachim (1993): &quot;Die Grünen: Wie sie wurden, was sie sind.&quot; Köln: Bund-Verlag.
* Raschke, Joachim (2001): &quot;Die Zukunft der Grünen.&quot; Frankfurt am Main / New York: Campus.
* Stifel, Andreas (2018): Vom erfolgreichen Scheitern einer Bewegung – Bündnis 90/Die Grünen als politische Partei und soziokulturelles Phänomen. Wiesbaden: VS Springer.
* Wiesenthal, Helmut (2000): &quot;Profilkrise und Funktionswandel. Bündnis 90/Die Grünen auf dem Weg zu einem neuen Selbstverständnis&quot;, in &quot;Aus Politik und Zeitgeschichte&quot;, B5 2000, S. 22–29.
== External links ==
* European Green Party information on Bündnis 90/Die Grünen 
* &quot;German Greens and Pax Europa&quot; (English) The Nation article about Green foreign policy
* The Rise of the Green Party – slideshow by &quot;Der Spiegel&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q49766" start="0" end="22" title="Alliance 90/The Greens" label="Alliance 90/The Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q49766" start="57" end="63" title="Alliance 90/The Greens" label="Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661415" start="75" end="80" title="Green (politics)" label="green"/>
<link wikidata="Q325989" start="81" end="107" title="political party in Germany" label="political party in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="170" end="182" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q446007" start="196" end="207" title="Alliance 90" label="Alliance 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="219" end="231" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q316223" start="280" end="303" title="East German Green Party" label="East German Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="310" end="330" title="German reunification" label="German reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q76265" start="362" end="380" title="Franziska Brantner" label="Franziska Brantner"/>
<link wikidata="Q17591264" start="385" end="399" title="Felix Banaszak" label="Felix Banaszak"/>
<link wikidata="Q154797" start="482" end="491" title="Bundestag" label="Bundestag"/>
<link wikidata="Q27123005" start="531" end="552" title="2021 German federal election" label="2021 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q920726" start="644" end="660" title="Britta Haßelmann" label="Britta Haßelmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q15795521" start="665" end="680" title="Katharina Dröge" label="Katharina Dröge"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="774" end="790" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q13124" start="846" end="867" title="Free Democratic Party (Germany)" label="Free Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q474455" start="881" end="904" title="traffic light coalition" label="traffic light coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q109712556" start="991" end="1005" title="Scholz cabinet" label="Scholz cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q109943" start="1065" end="1078" title="Robert Habeck" label="Robert Habeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q564328" start="1100" end="1117" title="Annalena Baerbock" label="Annalena Baerbock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201" start="1195" end="1203" title="Saarland" label="Saarland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205" start="1205" end="1214" title="Thuringia" label="Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208" start="1219" end="1230" title="Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q61051" start="1290" end="1310" title="Winfried Kretschmann" label="Winfried Kretschmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462035" start="1312" end="1351" title="List of Ministers-President of Baden-Württemberg" label="Minister-President of Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q455697" start="1406" end="1434" title="Landtag of Baden-Württemberg" label="Landtag of Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="1578" end="1584" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="1586" end="1593" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="1599" end="1617" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q950179" start="1671" end="1691" title="European Green Party" label="European Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q751935" start="1700" end="1729" title="Greens–European Free Alliance" label="Greens–European Free Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="1743" end="1762" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="1826" end="1830" title="MEPs" label="MEPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q41622210" start="1839" end="1861" title="2019 European Parliament election in Germany" label="2019 European election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197" start="2448" end="2460" title="Lower Saxony" label="Lower Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="2634" end="2645" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020844" start="3058" end="3078" title="Alliance 90/The Greens Hamburg" label="Hamburg state branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979837" start="3391" end="3411" title="New social movements" label="New Social Movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189417" start="3453" end="3469" title="Environmental movement" label="environmentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q794691" start="3471" end="3479" title="Anti-war movement" label="anti-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q574580" start="3485" end="3497" title="Anti-nuclear movement" label="anti-nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q257758" start="3544" end="3568" title="protests of 1968" label="student protests of 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040" start="3638" end="3647" title="Karlsruhe" label="Karlsruhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="3956" end="3969" title="nuclear power" label="nuclear power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="3971" end="3975" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="4016" end="4038" title="Industrialisation" label="industrialised society"/>
<link wikidata="Q465467" start="4097" end="4114" title="Sexual revolution" label="sexual liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19890741" start="4168" end="4187" title="Age of consent reform" label="age of consent laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q61227" start="4335" end="4346" title="Petra Kelly" label="Petra Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q57344" start="4348" end="4363" title="Joschka Fischer" label="Joschka Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q69251" start="4365" end="4377" title="Gert Bastian" label="Gert Bastian"/>
<link wikidata="Q66288" start="4381" end="4393" title="Rudolf Bahro" label="Rudolf Bahro"/>
<link wikidata="Q153965" start="4395" end="4407" title="Joseph Beuys" label="Joseph Beuys"/>
<link wikidata="Q103336" start="4409" end="4422" title="Antje Vollmer" label="Antje Vollmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q761658" start="4426" end="4443" title="August Haußleiter" label="August Haußleiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q69178" start="4445" end="4457" title="Luise Rinser" label="Luise Rinser"/>
<link wikidata="Q71533" start="4461" end="4479" title="Christian Ströbele" label="Christian Ströbele"/>
<link wikidata="Q91181" start="4481" end="4495" title="Jutta Ditfurth" label="Jutta Ditfurth"/>
<link wikidata="Q804845" start="4497" end="4514" title="Baldur Springmann" label="Baldur Springmann"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4519" end="4531" title=":de:Werner Vogel (Politiker)" label="Werner Vogel"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="4685" end="4699" title="Social justice" label="Social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q295465" start="4702" end="4719" title="Ecological wisdom" label="Ecological wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q810220" start="4722" end="4742" title="Grassroots democracy" label="Grassroots democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76611" start="4745" end="4756" title="Nonviolence" label="Nonviolence"/>
<link wikidata="Q294989" start="4893" end="4920" title="Ecological Democratic Party" label="Ecological Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="4985" end="4993" title="Pacifism" label="pacifist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536343" start="5038" end="5057" title="reproductive rights" label="reproductive rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="5096" end="5104" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q698290" start="5151" end="5162" title="LGBT rights in Germany" label="LGBT rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q47217" start="5355" end="5373" title="civil disobedience" label="civil disobedience"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="5433" end="5448" title="nuclear weapons" label="nuclear weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q12739" start="5450" end="5464" title="Nuclear power" label="nuclear energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q46033" start="5509" end="5526" title="Frankfurt Airport" label="Frankfurt Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="5728" end="5739" title="States of Germany" label="state-level"/>
<link wikidata="Q702022" start="5858" end="5879" title="1983 West German federal election" label="1983 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q20203109" start="5952" end="5963" title="Pershing II" label="Pershing II"/>
<link wikidata="Q392893" start="5964" end="5968" title="Intermediate-range ballistic missile" label="IRBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q181860" start="5989" end="6003" title="cruise missile" label="cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="6021" end="6025" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q486" start="6264" end="6282" title="Chernobyl disaster" label="Chernobyl disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q40178" start="6352" end="6361" title="acid rain" label="acid rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q701794" start="6439" end="6460" title="1987 West German federal election" label="1987 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q57344" start="6480" end="6495" title="Joschka Fischer" label="Joschka Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q165999" start="6612" end="6633" title="2005 German federal election" label="2005 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="6804" end="6830" title="German Democratic Republic" label="German Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q153846" start="6916" end="6921" title="Stasi" label="Stasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q154797" start="6940" end="6949" title="Bundestag" label="Bundestag"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="6981" end="7000" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q95718" start="7016" end="7033" title="Brigitte Heinrich" label="Brigitte Heinrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q102734" start="7039" end="7055" title="Red Army Faction" label="Red Army Faction"/>
<link wikidata="Q74367" start="7071" end="7086" title="Klaus Croissant" label="Klaus Croissant"/>
<link wikidata="Q69251" start="7135" end="7147" title="Gert Bastian" label="Gert Bastian"/>
<link wikidata="Q61227" start="7347" end="7358" title="Petra Kelly" label="Petra Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q124571664" start="7564" end="7582" title="pedophile activism" label="pedophile activism"/>
<link wikidata="Q26553" start="7763" end="7781" title="child sexual abuse" label="child sexual abuse"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7910" end="7946" title=":de:Pädophilie-Debatte (Bündnis 90/Die Grünen)" label="This controversy re-surfaced in 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q75791" start="7962" end="7974" title="Claudia Roth" label="Claudia Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q704648" start="8352" end="8374" title="1990 German federal election" label="1990 federal elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="8394" end="8411" title="German reunification" label="reunified Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q675430" start="8738" end="8759" title="new states of Germany" label="new states of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q446007" start="8796" end="8807" title="Alliance 90" label="Alliance 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q191600" start="8837" end="8849" title="Civil and political rights" label="civil rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="9018" end="9029" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="9068" end="9082" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q687175" start="9249" end="9268" title="Deutsche Bundesbahn" label="Deutsche Bundesbahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q702017" start="9509" end="9530" title="1994 German federal election" label="1994 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q704641" start="9714" end="9735" title="1998 German federal election" label="1998 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q562307" start="9890" end="9899" title="Red–green alliance" label="Red-Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="9906" end="9926" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="9936" end="9970" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q57344" start="9978" end="9993" title="Joschka Fischer" label="Joschka Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q504272" start="10001" end="10027" title="Vice-Chancellor of Germany" label="Vice-Chancellor of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q568605" start="10032" end="10048" title="Foreign Minister of Germany" label="foreign minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q64528" start="10109" end="10123" title="Andrea Fischer" label="Andrea Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q65128" start="10131" end="10144" title="Renate Künast" label="Renate Künast"/>
<link wikidata="Q11762" start="10150" end="10164" title="Jürgen Trittin" label="Jürgen Trittin"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="10270" end="10282" title="Kosovo War" label="NATO actions"/>
<link wikidata="Q326668" start="11107" end="11135" title="Operation Enduring Freedom" label="2001 invasion of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="11137" end="11147" title="Chancellor of Germany" label="Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530" start="11148" end="11164" title="Gerhard Schröder" label="Gerhard Schröder"/>
<link wikidata="Q493344" start="11494" end="11557" title="Federal Ministry for Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety" label="Minister of Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11646" end="11694" title="List of nuclear reactors#Germany" label="the country&amp;#x27;s nineteen nuclear power plants"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11784" end="11800" title="Nuclear Exit Law" label="Nuclear Exit Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q697167" start="12158" end="12179" title="2002 German federal election" label="2002 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q71533" start="12475" end="12498" title="Hans-Christian Ströbele" label="Hans-Christian Ströbele"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007971" start="12575" end="12635" title="Berlin-Friedrichshain-Kreuzberg – Prenzlauer Berg East" label="Friedrichshain-Kreuzberg – Prenzlauer Berg East constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q205759" start="12687" end="12706" title="first-past-the-post" label="first-past-the-post"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12915" end="12937" title="Renewable Energies Act" label="Renewable Energies Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q41075" start="12956" end="12978" title="Registered Partnership" label="Registered Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q57344" start="13403" end="13418" title="Joschka Fischer" label="Joschka Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q65128" start="13440" end="13453" title="Renate Künast" label="Renate Künast"/>
<link wikidata="Q11762" start="13522" end="13536" title="Jürgen Trittin" label="Jürgen Trittin"/>
<link wikidata="Q78408" start="13936" end="13946" title="Fritz Kuhn" label="Fritz Kuhn"/>
<link wikidata="Q75791" start="13951" end="13963" title="Claudia Roth" label="Claudia Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q31236" start="14123" end="14141" title="Reinhard Bütikofer" label="Reinhard Bütikofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q77525" start="14170" end="14183" title="Angelika Beer" label="Angelika Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="14737" end="14756" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214" start="14984" end="14991" title="Cottbus" label="Cottbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q392563" start="15044" end="15055" title="Agenda 2010" label="Agenda 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="15191" end="15198" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="15246" end="15265" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q62366" start="15333" end="15346" title="Rebecca Harms" label="Rebecca Harms"/>
<link wikidata="Q76837" start="15400" end="15418" title="Daniel Cohn-Bendit" label="Daniel Cohn-Bendit"/>
<link wikidata="Q743390" start="15469" end="15489" title="The Greens (France)" label="The Greens of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q926161" start="15618" end="15635" title="electronic voting" label="electronic voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="15834" end="15857" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528081" start="15909" end="15932" title="German Visa Affair 2005" label="German Visa Affair 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q49762" start="15965" end="15991" title="Christian Democratic Union (Germany)" label="Christian Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q536084" start="16068" end="16099" title="Obrigheim nuclear power station" label="Obrigheim nuclear power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q221810" start="16145" end="16168" title="Anti-Discrimination Law" label="Anti-Discrimination Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q154797" start="16179" end="16188" title="Bundestag" label="Bundestag"/>
<link wikidata="Q562307" start="16235" end="16254" title="red-green coalition" label="red-green coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q686765" start="16287" end="16324" title="2005 North Rhine-Westphalia state election" label="North Rhine-Westphalia state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q165999" start="16440" end="16461" title="2005 German federal election" label="2005 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="16842" end="16848" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q486916" start="16927" end="16953" title="2007 Bremen state election" label="2007 Bremen state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q836394" start="16985" end="17012" title="2008 Hamburg state election" label="2008 Hamburg state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="17050" end="17057" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="17224" end="17228" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558431" start="17262" end="17286" title="coal-fired power station" label="coal-fired power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q18189" start="17471" end="17488" title="educational stage" label="educational stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="17548" end="17558" title="city-state" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q369730" start="17569" end="17588" title="Pedestrian zone" label="pedestrian-friendly"/>
<link wikidata="Q455288" start="17673" end="17684" title="2011 Hamburg state election" label="an election"/>
<link wikidata="Q827428" start="17721" end="17744" title="2009 Saarland state election" label="Saarland state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455328" start="17873" end="17892" title="majority government" label="majority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q49764" start="18022" end="18030" title="The Left (Germany)" label="The Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q13124" start="18100" end="18121" title="Free Democratic Party (Germany)" label="Free Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q680073" start="18160" end="18177" title="Jamaica coalition (politics)" label="Jamaica coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q708725" start="18281" end="18288" title="CDU/CSU" label="CDU/CSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q157869" start="18304" end="18325" title="2009 German federal election" label="2009 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198" start="18377" end="18399" title="North Rhine-Westphalia" label="North Rhine-Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60975" start="18406" end="18421" title="Jürgen Rüttgers" label="Jürgen Rüttgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="18646" end="18665" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q879993" start="18704" end="18742" title="constitution of North Rhine-Westphalia" label="constitution of North Rhine-Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099723" start="18789" end="18807" title="Minister-President" label="minister-president"/>
<link wikidata="Q49328" start="18874" end="18889" title="Peer Steinbrück" label="Peer Steinbrück"/>
<link wikidata="Q61938" start="18958" end="18973" title="Hannelore Kraft" label="Hannelore Kraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q202738" start="18997" end="19012" title="Cabinet Kraft I" label="Cabinet Kraft I"/>
<link wikidata="Q157033" start="19131" end="19146" title="Goethe-Institut" label="Goethe-Institut"/>
<link wikidata="Q171178" start="19525" end="19551" title="Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster" label="Fukushima nuclear disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q441350" start="19595" end="19615" title="2011 Rhineland-Palatinate state election" label="Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q509629" start="19623" end="19640" title="2011 Baden-Württemberg state election" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q61051" start="19739" end="19759" title="Winfried Kretschmann" label="Winfried Kretschmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099723" start="19795" end="19813" title="Minister-President" label="Minister-President"/>
<link wikidata="Q821125" start="19833" end="19854" title="Cabinet Kretschmann I" label="Cabinet Kretschmann I"/>
<link wikidata="Q23899143" start="19859" end="19861" title="Cabinet Kretschmann II" label="II"/>
<link wikidata="Q19912815" start="19974" end="19990" title="2016 Mecklenburg-Vorpommern state election" label="4 September 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q567" start="20101" end="20114" title="Angela Merkel" label="Angela Merkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49328" start="20351" end="20366" title="Peer Steinbrück" label="Peer Steinbrück"/>
<link wikidata="Q15062956" start="20949" end="20970" title="2017 German federal election" label="2017 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q680073" start="21045" end="21062" title="Jamaica coalition (politics)" label="Jamaica coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q109943" start="21319" end="21332" title="Robert Habeck" label="Robert Habeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q564328" start="21337" end="21354" title="Annalena Baerbock" label="Annalena Baerbock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="21473" end="21491" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q19833920" start="21750" end="21758" title="2018 Bavarian state election" label="Bavarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23558888" start="21763" end="21770" title="2018 Hessian state election" label="Hessian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41622210" start="21990" end="22023" title="2019 European Parliament election in Germany" label="2019 European Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q18288084" start="22826" end="22837" title="2019 Brandenburg state election" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q23899139" start="22850" end="22856" title="2019 Saxony state election" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q19288817" start="23004" end="23014" title="2019 Thuringian state election" label="Thuringian"/>
<link wikidata="Q40194748" start="23100" end="23127" title="2020 Hamburg state election" label="2020 Hamburg state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q31841238" start="23259" end="23276" title="2021 Baden-Württemberg state election" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q42296302" start="23343" end="23363" title="2021 Rhineland-Palatinate state election" label="Rhineland-Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27123005" start="23509" end="23540" title="2021 German federal election" label="September 2021 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q78205" start="24058" end="24071" title="Armin Laschet" label="Armin Laschet"/>
<link wikidata="Q61053" start="24076" end="24087" title="Olaf Scholz" label="Olaf Scholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q107529288" start="24207" end="24218" title="2021 European floods" label="July floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q27123005" start="24493" end="24514" title="2021 German federal election" label="2021 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q474455" start="24765" end="24788" title="traffic light coalition" label="traffic light coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q61053" start="24806" end="24817" title="Olaf Scholz" label="Olaf Scholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q109712556" start="24894" end="24908" title="Scholz cabinet" label="Scholz cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q42841188" start="25173" end="25185" title="Ricarda Lang" label="Ricarda Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q71635" start="25190" end="25204" title="Omid Nouripour" label="Omid Nouripour"/>
<link wikidata="Q255509" start="25347" end="25358" title="Green Youth (Germany)" label="Green Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q97102035" start="25695" end="25701" title="2024 Saxony state election" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q72721903" start="25703" end="25712" title="2024 Thuringian state election" label="Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q76114047" start="25717" end="25728" title="2024 Brandenburg state election" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q112585123" start="25780" end="25808" title="2024 European Parliament election in Germany" label="European Parliament election"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="26219" end="26225" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199" start="26230" end="26235" title="Hesse" label="Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q17591264" start="26517" end="26531" title="Felix Banaszak" label="Felix Banaszak"/>
<link wikidata="Q76265" start="26536" end="26554" title="Franziska Brantner" label="Franziska Brantner"/>
<link wikidata="Q504272" start="26621" end="26636" title="Vice-Chancellor of Germany" label="Vice Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q109943" start="26637" end="26650" title="Robert Habeck" label="Robert Habeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728256" start="26660" end="26680" title="Chancellor candidate" label="Chancellor candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q108761711" start="26689" end="26710" title="2025 German federal election" label="2025 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661415" start="26785" end="26799" title="green politics" label="green politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q201712" start="26804" end="26821" title="social liberalism" label="social liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q831192" start="26860" end="26876" title="left-libertarian" label="left-libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q427499" start="26899" end="26914" title="postmaterialism" label="postmaterialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587194" start="27063" end="27071" title="Centrism" label="centrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q475602" start="27685" end="27717" title="WZB Berlin Social Science Center" label="WZB Berlin Social Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250876" start="28191" end="28201" title="Debt brake (Germany)" label="debt brake"/>
<link wikidata="Q108711372" start="28231" end="28263" title="2021 Berlin referendum" label="property expropriation in Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="28316" end="28327" title="Progressivism" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="28371" end="28385" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="28396" end="28412" title="carbon emissions" label="carbon emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="28428" end="28442" title="sustainability" label="sustainability"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="28506" end="28520" title="social justice" label="social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q20857240" start="28571" end="28594" title="European migrant crisis" label="European migrant crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3781399" start="28720" end="28732" title="pro-European" label="pro-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q258664" start="28745" end="28764" title="European federalism" label="European federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q564328" start="28889" end="28906" title="Annalena Baerbock" label="Annalena Baerbock"/>
<link wikidata="Q109943" start="28911" end="28924" title="Robert Habeck" label="Robert Habeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="29245" end="29253" title="populism" label="populism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587194" start="29467" end="29483" title="political centre" label="political centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q201712" start="29604" end="29616" title="left-liberal" label="left-liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q388698" start="29682" end="29693" title="Atlanticist" label="Atlanticist"/>
<link wikidata="Q564328" start="29822" end="29839" title="Annalena Baerbock" label="Annalena Baerbock"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="29860" end="29868" title="Pacifism" label="pacifist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367724" start="29898" end="29924" title="Enlargement of NATO" label="eastward expansion of NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601738" start="29958" end="29972" title="List of United Nations resolutions concerning Israel" label="UN resolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="30108" end="30112" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q21644350" start="30222" end="30235" title="Nord Stream 2" label="Nord Stream 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q104604944" start="30320" end="30346" title="Comprehensive Agreement on Investment" label="investment deal with China"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="30543" end="30555" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682450" start="30572" end="30582" title="Saudi Arabian-led intervention in Yemen" label="waging war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549546" start="30624" end="30636" title="Human rights in Saudi Arabia" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200085" start="30696" end="30715" title="nuclear disarmament" label="nuclear disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552091" start="30720" end="30760" title="Germany and weapons of mass destruction" label="U.S. nuclear weapons on German territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130514" start="30820" end="30864" title="Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons" label="Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="30876" end="30892" title="Israel–Hamas war" label="Israel-Hamas War"/>
<link wikidata="Q699656" start="30898" end="30938" title="Federal Ministry of Food and Agriculture (Germany)" label="Federal Minister of Food and Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12839" start="30939" end="30950" title="Cem Özdemir" label="Cem Özdemir"/>
<link wikidata="Q56434717" start="31019" end="31033" title="Greta Thunberg" label="Greta Thunberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="31410" end="31426" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q380170" start="31458" end="31477" title="energy conservation" label="energy conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q817114" start="31530" end="31555" title="radioactive contamination" label="radioactive contamination"/>
<link wikidata="Q486" start="31565" end="31583" title="Chernobyl disaster" label="Chernobyl disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113991" start="31799" end="31816" title="High-level radioactive waste management" label="radioactive waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q650513" start="31820" end="31849" title="dry cask storage" label="&amp;quot;CASTOR&amp;quot; containers"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="32054" end="32068" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q183140" start="32073" end="32088" title="ozone depletion" label="ozone depletion"/>
<link wikidata="Q131201" start="32346" end="32369" title="sustainable development" label="sustainable development"/>
<link wikidata="Q79198143" start="33119" end="33138" title="European Green Deal" label="European Green Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734997" start="33166" end="33181" title="Carbon neutrality" label="climate neutral"/>
<link wikidata="Q602875" start="33596" end="33632" title="Federalisation of the European Union" label="federalization of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="33733" end="33740" title="Federalism" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="33750" end="33765" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q76904" start="34409" end="34417" title="kerosene" label="kerosene"/>
<link wikidata="Q17078081" start="35611" end="35626" title="Rent control" label="rent regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q509331" start="35737" end="35757" title="progressive taxation" label="progressive taxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="36252" end="36256" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q57322" start="36389" end="36400" title="Volker Beck (politician)" label="Volker Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="36742" end="36750" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19969621" start="36809" end="36837" title="German cannabis control bill" label="German cannabis control bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q49958" start="37205" end="37221" title="opinion poll" label="polling research"/>
<link wikidata="Q13124" start="37403" end="37424" title="Free Democratic Party (Germany)" label="Free Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49653" start="37674" end="37677" title="ARD (broadcaster)" label="ARD"/>
<link wikidata="Q756944" start="37850" end="37862" title="strip mining" label="strip mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q185252" start="37866" end="37883" title="radioactive waste" label="radioactive waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="37908" end="37912" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="37914" end="37921" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="37923" end="37932" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="37942" end="37949" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="37965" end="37971" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="38052" end="38058" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973" start="38066" end="38075" title="Darmstadt" label="Darmstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="38077" end="38084" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758" start="38086" end="38101" title="Mönchengladbach" label="Mönchengladbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107" start="38106" end="38115" title="Wuppertal" label="Wuppertal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="38202" end="38228" title="East Germany" label="German Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q320501" start="38308" end="38315" title="Landtag" label="Landtag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208" start="38323" end="38334" title="Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q260372" start="38336" end="38344" title="Landtag of Saarland" label="Saarland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205" start="38350" end="38359" title="Thuringia" label="Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q574580" start="38615" end="38636" title="Anti-nuclear movement" label="Anti-nuclear movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778417" start="38639" end="38650" title="Green party" label="Green party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007353" start="38653" end="38684" title="Green Party faction (Bundestag)" label="Green Party faction (Bundestag)"/>
<link wikidata="Q255509" start="38687" end="38708" title="Green Youth (Germany)" label="Green Youth (Germany)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571780" start="38711" end="38749" title="List of German Green Party politicians" label="List of German Green Party politicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q325989" start="38752" end="38788" title="List of political parties in Germany" label="List of political parties in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q131478" start="39928" end="39939" title="Der Spiegel" label="Der Spiegel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12248" wikidata="Q328800" url="?curid=12248" title="Gheorghe Zamfir">
<text>Gheorghe Zamfir (; born April 6, 1941) is a Romanian nai (pan flute) musician.

Zamfir is known for playing an expanded version of normally 20-pipe nai, with 22, 25, 28 or even 30 pipes, to increase its range, and obtaining as many as eight overtones (additional to the fundamental tone) from each pipe by changing his embouchure. He is known as &quot;The Master of the Pan Flute&quot;.

==Career==
Zamfir came to the public eye when he was approached by Swiss ethnomusicologist Marcel Cellier, who extensively researched Romanian folk music in the 1960s. The composer Vladimir Cosma brought Zamfir with his pan flute to Western European countries for the first time in 1972 as the soloist in Cosma&#x27;s original music for the movie &quot;Le grand blond avec une chaussure noire&quot;. The movie received several awards, including the &quot;Top Foreign Film&quot; from the National Board of Review in 1973. Zamfir continued to perform as a soloist in movie soundtracks by composers Francis Lai, Ennio Morricone and many others. Largely through television commercials where he was billed as &quot;Zamfir, Master of the Pan Flute&quot;, he introduced the folk instrument to a modern audience and revived it from obscurity.

In 1966, Zamfir was appointed conductor of the &quot;Ciocîrlia Orchestra&quot;, one of the most prestigious state ensembles of Romania, destined for concert tours abroad. This created the opportunity for composition and arranging. In 1969 he left Ciocîrlia and started his own &quot;taraf&quot; (small band) and in 1970 he had his first longer-term contract in Paris. Zamfir discovered the much greater freedom for artistic adventure. His taraf consisted of: Ion Drăgoi (violin), Ion Lăceanu (flutes), Dumitru Fărcaș (tarogato), Petre Vidrean (double bass) and Tony Iordache (cymbalum) all number one soloists in their country. This taraf made some excellent recordings (CD Zamfir a Paris). He changed the composition of the band soon after: Efta Botoca (violin), Marin Chisar (flutes), Dorin Ciobaru and Pavel Cebzan (clarinet and tarogato), Vasile Pandelescu (accordion), Petre Vidrean (bass) and Pantelimon Stînga (cymbalum). It is said that this change was made to increase the command of Zamfir and have more artistic freedom. A turning point was the recording of Zamfir&#x27;s composition &quot;Messe pour la Paix&quot; (Philips). His taraf joined a choir and a symphonic orchestra. This was evidence of the growing ambition. While the Philips recordings of that time were rather conservative, Zamfir preached revolution in the concert halls with daring performances. In 1977, he recorded &quot;The Lonely Shepherd&quot; with James Last. Zamfir put himself on the world map and since then his career became highly varied, hovering over classical repertoire, easy listening and pop music.

Between 1976 and 1983, Zamfir had six albums peak within the Australian top 100 albums charts, with &quot;The Flutes of Pan&quot;, his best, peaking at number 26 in 1980.

Zamfir&#x27;s big break in the English-speaking world came when the BBC religious television program, &quot;The Light of Experience&quot;, adopted his recording of &quot;Doina De Jale&quot;, a traditional Romanian funeral song, as its theme. Epic Records released the tune as a single in 1976, and it climbed to number four on the UK Singles chart. It would prove to be his only UK hit single, but it helped pave the way for a consistent stream of album sales in Britain. His song &quot;Summer Love&quot; reached number 9 in South Africa in November 1976. In 1983, he scored a No. 3 hit on the Canadian Adult Contemporary chart with &quot;Blue Navajo,&quot; &quot;Senatorial Samba&quot; in honor of his lifelong friend and confidant The Senator, and several of his albums (including 1982&#x27;s &quot;Romance&quot; and 1983&#x27;s &quot;Childhood Dreams&quot;) have charted in Canada as well. His 1985 album, &quot;Atlantis&quot;, contained tracks composed by Jacques Brel and Eric Satie, plus music from films and Zamfir&#x27;s version of &quot;Stranger on the Shore&quot;.

After nearly a decade-long absence, Zamfir returned to Canada in January 2006 for a seven-city tour with the Traffic Strings quintet. The program included a world premiere of Vivaldi&#x27;s Four Seasons for pan flute and string quintet arranged by Lucian Moraru, jazz standards, and well-known favorites.

In 2009, Zamfir was sampled by Animal Collective in the song &quot;Graze&quot; on their EP &quot;Fall Be Kind&quot;. In 2012, he performed at the opening ceremony of the 11th Conference of Parties to the Ramsar Convention at the Palace of the Parliament in Bucharest, Romania.

Zamfir played &quot;Silent Night&quot; at the opening of Concerto di Natale (The Christmas Concert) on 15 December 2018 at the Vatican Aula Jean Paul the II. Concerto di Natale is an international event where artists from all over the world meet for a special concert to raise as much money as possible for charity projects in Africa and poor regions of the world. He performed with Anastacia, the Italian singer Alessandra Amoroso, and the Italian flautist Andrea Griminelli. Zamfir and Andrea Griminelli appeared again to perform “The Lonely Shepherd”.

==Soundtracks==
His first appearance as soloist interpreter in a movie soundtrack was in Vladimir Cosma&#x27;s 1972 &quot;Le grand blond avec une chaussure noire&quot;, whose soundtrack became a worldwide hit.

Another of his notable contributions was to the soundtrack of the classic 1975 Australian film &quot;Picnic at Hanging Rock&quot;. His other film scores include &quot;La guerre du pétrole n&#x27;aura pas lieu&quot; (1975) and the Moroccan film &quot;Bodas de Sangre&quot; (1977).

He was asked by Ennio Morricone to perform the pieces &quot;Childhood Memories&quot; and &quot;Cockeye&#x27;s Song&quot; for the soundtrack of Sergio Leone&#x27;s 1984 gangster film &quot;Once Upon a Time in America&quot;. His performance can also be heard throughout the 1984 film &quot;The Karate Kid&quot; plus the sequels.

One of Zamfir&#x27;s most famous pieces is &quot;The Lonely Shepherd&quot;, which was written by James Last and recorded with the James Last Orchestra, and first included on Last&#x27;s 1977 album &quot;Russland Erinnerungen&quot; (Memories of Russia); it was also released as a single. &quot;The Lonely Shepherd&quot; was used as the theme for the 1979 Australian miniseries &quot;Golden Soak&quot;. It was also featured in Ishu Patel&#x27;s 1984 Oscar-nominated short film Paradise, Quentin Tarantino&#x27;s 2003 film &quot;Kill Bill: Volume 1&quot; and in Nikolas Grasso&#x27;s 2010 short film &quot;Doina&quot;.

His song &quot;Frunzuliță Lemn Adus Cântec De Nuntă&quot; (&quot;Fluttering Green Leaves Wedding Song&quot;) appears in the 1991 Studio Ghibli film &quot;Only Yesterday&quot;.

==Personal life==

Zamfir was born in Găeşti, Romania, on April 6, 1941. Although initially interested in becoming an accordionist, at the age of 14 he began his pan flute studies with Fănică Luca at the Special Musical School no. 1 in Bucharest. Later he attended the Ciprian Porumbescu Conservatory. He currently resides and teaches pan flute in Bucharest. His son, Emmanuel Teodor (who resides in Montreal, Canada), is also a drummer/musician.

==See also==
* List of music released by Romanian artists that has charted in major music markets

==Bibliography==
* (instructional book) 
* (autobiography)

==References==
==External links==
*Official site
*
*Henk Jansen: Zamfir and his artistic success</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q328800" start="0" end="15" title="Gheorghe Zamfir" label="Gheorghe Zamfir"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="44" end="52" title="Romanian people" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414230" start="53" end="56" title="Nai (pan flute)" label="nai"/>
<link wikidata="Q261967" start="241" end="250" title="overtones" label="overtones"/>
<link wikidata="Q175234" start="319" end="329" title="embouchure" label="embouchure"/>
<link wikidata="Q208365" start="461" end="478" title="ethnomusicologist" label="ethnomusicologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288787" start="479" end="493" title="Marcel Cellier" label="Marcel Cellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="531" end="541" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q507940" start="569" end="583" title="Vladimir Cosma" label="Vladimir Cosma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094519" start="741" end="780" title="The Tall Blond Man with One Black Shoe" label="Le grand blond avec une chaussure noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133614" start="875" end="899" title="National Board of Review" label="National Board of Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q223408" start="984" end="995" title="Francis Lai" label="Francis Lai"/>
<link wikidata="Q23848" start="997" end="1012" title="Ennio Morricone" label="Ennio Morricone"/>
<link wikidata="Q854995" start="1046" end="1067" title="television commercial" label="television commercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q4451909" start="1507" end="1512" title="taraf (musical band)" label="taraf"/>
<link wikidata="Q736874" start="1742" end="1750" title="tarogato" label="tarogato"/>
<link wikidata="Q8374" start="1800" end="1808" title="cymbalum" label="cymbalum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308641" start="2625" end="2644" title="The Lonely Shepherd" label="The Lonely Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q57213" start="2656" end="2666" title="James Last" label="James Last"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="2807" end="2816" title="pop music" label="pop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="3059" end="3062" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q216364" start="3233" end="3245" title="Epic Records" label="Epic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="3322" end="3338" title="UK Singles chart" label="UK Singles chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666" start="3951" end="3963" title="Jacques Brel" label="Jacques Brel"/>
<link wikidata="Q187192" start="3968" end="3978" title="Eric Satie" label="Eric Satie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621561" start="4037" end="4058" title="Stranger on the Shore" label="Stranger on the Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q12016" start="4242" end="4269" title="Vivaldi&amp;#x27;s Four Seasons" label="Vivaldi&amp;#x27;s Four Seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q596446" start="4393" end="4400" title="sampling (music)" label="sampled"/>
<link wikidata="Q547272" start="4404" end="4421" title="Animal Collective" label="Animal Collective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394445" start="4470" end="4482" title="Fall Be Kind" label="Fall Be Kind"/>
<link wikidata="Q170170" start="4577" end="4594" title="Ramsar Convention" label="Ramsar Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q164150" start="4602" end="4626" title="Palace of the Parliament" label="Palace of the Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="4630" end="4639" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q172152" start="4671" end="4683" title="Silent Night" label="Silent Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q507940" start="5296" end="5310" title="Vladimir Cosma" label="Vladimir Cosma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094519" start="5329" end="5368" title="Le grand blond avec une chaussure noire" label="Le grand blond avec une chaussure noire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421747" start="5519" end="5541" title="Picnic at Hanging Rock (film)" label="Picnic at Hanging Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6466182" start="5585" end="5626" title="La guerre du pétrole n&amp;#x27;aura pas lieu" label="La guerre du pétrole n&amp;#x27;aura pas lieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q23848" start="5715" end="5730" title="Ennio Morricone" label="Ennio Morricone"/>
<link wikidata="Q164562" start="5842" end="5854" title="Sergio Leone" label="Sergio Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q206388" start="5887" end="5914" title="Once Upon a Time in America" label="Once Upon a Time in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q846679" start="5987" end="6001" title="The Karate Kid" label="The Karate Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308641" start="6076" end="6095" title="The Lonely Shepherd" label="The Lonely Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q57213" start="6124" end="6134" title="James Last" label="James Last"/>
<link wikidata="Q57213" start="6157" end="6177" title="James Last Orchestra" label="James Last Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039431" start="6409" end="6420" title="Golden Soak" label="Golden Soak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772" start="6512" end="6529" title="Quentin Tarantino" label="Quentin Tarantino"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6553" end="6572" title="Kill Bill: Volume 1" label="Kill Bill: Volume 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288649" start="6630" end="6635" title="Doina (film)" label="Doina"/>
<link wikidata="Q182950" start="6773" end="6786" title="Studio Ghibli" label="Studio Ghibli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045889" start="6798" end="6812" title="Only Yesterday (1991 film)" label="Only Yesterday"/>
<link wikidata="Q125604" start="6859" end="6865" title="Găeşti" label="Găeşti"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="6867" end="6874" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121801" start="7006" end="7017" title="Fănică Luca" label="Fănică Luca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888128" start="7090" end="7121" title="National University of Music Bucharest" label="Ciprian Porumbescu Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="7169" end="7178" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q126595086" start="7284" end="7366" title="List of music released by Romanian artists that has charted in major music markets" label="List of music released by Romanian artists that has charted in major music markets"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12250" wikidata="Q350183" url="?curid=12250" title="Georg Henrik von Wright">
<text>Georg Henrik von Wright (; 14 June 1916 – 16 June 2003) was a Finnish philosopher.

==Biography==
G. H. von Wright was born in Helsinki on 14 June 1916 to Tor von Wright and his wife Ragni Elisabeth Alfthan.

On the retirement of Ludwig Wittgenstein as professor at the University of Cambridge in 1948, von Wright succeeded him. He published in English, Finnish, German, and Swedish, belonging to the Swedish-speaking minority of Finland. Von Wright was of both Finnish and 17th-century Scottish ancestry, and the family was raised to nobility in 1772.

In later years von Wright began to take an interest in political questions, having opposed the heavy bombing ordered by Lyndon B. Johnson during the Vietnam War. He attended the Praxis School-organised Korčula Summer School.

==Work==
Von Wright&#x27;s writings come under two broad categories. The first is analytic philosophy and philosophical logic in the Anglo-American vein. His 1951 texts &quot;An Essay in Modal Logic&quot; and &quot;Deontic Logic&quot; were landmarks in the postwar rise of formal modal logic and its deontic version. He was an authority on Wittgenstein, editing his later works. He was the leading figure in the Finnish philosophy of his time, specializing in philosophical logic, philosophical analysis, philosophy of action, philosophy of language, epistemology, and the close study of Charles Sanders Peirce.

The other vein in von Wright&#x27;s writings is moralist and pessimist. During the last twenty years of his life, under the influence of Oswald Spengler, Jürgen Habermas and the Frankfurt School&#x27;s reflections about modern rationality, he wrote prolifically. His best known article from this period is entitled &quot;The Myth of Progress&quot; (1993), and it questions whether our apparent material and technological progress can really be considered &quot;progress&quot; (see Myth of Progress).

==Awards==
In the last year of his life, he was awarded several honorary degrees, including one by the University of Bergen. He also was awarded the Swedish Academy Finland Prize in 1968.

== Publications ==
*&quot;&quot;, PhD thesis, 31 May 1941
*&quot;Den logiska empirismen&quot; (Logical Empiricism), in Swedish, 1945
*&quot;Über Wahrscheinlichkeit&quot; (On Chance), in German, 1945
*&quot;An Essay in Modal Logic&quot;, (Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics: Volume V), L.E.J. Brouwer, E.W. Beth, and A. Heyting (eds.), Amsterdam: North-Holland,1951
*&quot;A Treatise on Induction and Probability&quot;, 1951
*&quot;Deontic Logic&quot; &quot;Mind&quot;, 60: 1–15, 1951
*&quot;Tanke och förkunnelse&quot; (Thought and Preaching), in Swedish, 1955
*&quot;Logical Studies&quot;, 1957
*&quot;Logik, filosofi och språk&quot; (Logic, philosophy and language), in Swedish, 1957
*&quot;The Varieties of Goodness&quot;, 1963. (revised version of the second half of his 1959–60 Gifford Lectures, given at the University of St. Andrews)

* &quot;&quot;, 1963 (revised version of the first half of his Gifford lectures at St. Andrews).
*&quot;&quot;, 1963
*&quot;Essay om naturen, människan och den vetenskaplig-tekniska revolutionen&quot; (Essay on Nature, Man and the Scientific-Technological Revolution), in Swedish, 1963
*&quot;&quot;, 1968
*&quot;Time, Change and Contradiction&quot;, (The Twenty-Second Arthur Stanley Eddington Memorial Lecture Delivered at Cambridge University 1 November 1968) Cambridge University Press. 1969
*&quot;Tieteen filosofian kaksi perinnettä&quot; (The Two Traditions of the Philosophy of Science), in Finnish, 1970
*&quot;Explanation and Understanding&quot;, 1971
*&quot;Causality and Determinism&quot;, 1974
*&quot;Handlung, Norm und Intention&quot; (Action, Norm and Intention), in German, 1977
*&quot;Humanismen som livshållning&quot; (Humanism as an approach to Life), in Swedish, 1978
*&quot;Freedom and Determination&quot;, 1980
*&quot;&quot;, 1982
*&quot;Philosophical Papers I–III&quot;, 1983–1984
**v. I &quot;&quot;, v. II &quot;Philosophical Logic&quot;, v. III &quot;&quot;
*&quot;Of Human Freedom,&quot; 1985. (1984 Tanner Lectures at the University of Helsinki)
*&quot;Filosofisia tutkielmia&quot; (Philosophical Dissertations), in Finnish, 1985
*&quot;Vetenskapen och förnuftet&quot; (Science and Reason), in Swedish, 1986
*&quot;Minervan Pöllö&quot; (The Owl of Minerva), in Finnish, 1991
*&quot;Myten om framsteget&quot; (The Myth of Progress), in Swedish, 1993
*&quot;The Tree of Knowledge and Other Essays,&quot; Leiden, Brill&quot;.&quot; , 1993
*&quot;Att förstå sin samtid&quot; (To Understand one&#x27;s own Time), in Swedish, 1994
*&quot;Six Essays in Philosophical Logic&quot;. Acta Philosophica Fennica, Vol. 60, 1996
*&quot;Viimeisistä ajoista: Ajatusleikki&quot; (On the End Times: A Thought Experiment.), in Finnish, 1997
*&quot;Logiikka ja humanismi&quot; (&quot;Logic and Humanism&quot;), in Finnish, 1998
*, Dordrech, Kluwer, 1998
*&quot;Mitt liv som jag minns det&quot; (My Life as I Remember it), in Swedish, 2001

Von Wright edited posthumous publications by Wittgenstein, which were published by Blackwell (unless otherwise stated):
* 1961. &quot;Notebooks 1914-1916&quot;.
* 1967. &quot;Zettel&quot; (Translated into English as &quot;Culture and Value&quot;).
* 1969. &quot;On Certainty&quot;.
* 1971. &quot;ProtoTractatus—An Early Version of Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus&quot;. Cornell University Press.
* 1973. &quot;Letters to C. K. Ogden with Comments on the English Translation of the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus&quot;.
* 1974. 
* 1978 (1956). &quot;Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics&quot;.
* 1980. &quot;Remarks on the Philosophy of Psychology&quot;, Vols 1–2.
* 1980. &quot;Culture and Value&quot; (English translation of &quot;Zettel&quot;).
* 1982. &quot;Last Writings on the Philosophy of Psychology&quot;, Vols. 1–2, 1992.

Von Wright also edited extracts from the diary of David Pinsent, also published by Wiley-Blackwell:
* 1990. &quot; A Portrait of Wittgenstein as a Young Man: From the Diary of David Hume Pinsent 1912–1914&quot;. .

For more complete publication details see &quot;&quot; (in Schilpp, 1989) and &quot;The Georg Henrik von Wright-Bibliography&quot; (2005).

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Sources ==
* Von Wright Obituary. &quot;The Guardian&quot;, 4 July 2003.
* G. H. von Wright. &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica.&quot; (Archived by Wayback Machine.)

==Further reading==
* Artosi, Alberto (March 2005). &quot;Georg H. von Wright: In Memoriam&quot;. &quot;Ratio Juris&quot;. 18 (1): 120–123. 
* 
* Wallgren, Thomas H., ed. (2024). &quot;The Creation of Wittgenstein: Understanding the Roles of Rush Rhees, Elizabeth Anscombe and Georg Henrik von Wright&quot;. Bloomsbury Publishing.

==External links==
* &quot;G. H. von Wright&quot; obituary by Brian McGuinness in &quot;The Independent,&quot; 24 June 2003 (Archived by Wayback Machine)
* Georg Henrik Wright in the National Biography of Finland.
* Georg Henrik von Wright in &quot;375 humanists&quot;. Faculty of Arts, University of Helsinki, 13 May 2015.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q350183" start="0" end="23" title="Georg Henrik von Wright" label="Georg Henrik von Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="70" end="81" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="230" end="249" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Ludwig Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="270" end="293" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="345" end="352" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="354" end="361" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="363" end="369" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="375" end="382" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461092" start="401" end="417" title="Finland Swedish" label="Swedish-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q726673" start="418" end="426" title="Swedish-speaking population of Finland" label="minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="487" end="495" title="Scottish people" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4349149" start="535" end="543" title="Finnish nobility" label="nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="674" end="691" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="703" end="714" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280830" start="732" end="745" title="Praxis School" label="Praxis School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280830" start="756" end="777" title="Korčula Summer School" label="Korčula Summer School"/>
<link wikidata="Q183216" start="862" end="881" title="analytic philosophy" label="analytic philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q491412" start="886" end="905" title="philosophical logic" label="philosophical logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q302542" start="1080" end="1087" title="deontic logic" label="deontic"/>
<link wikidata="Q488152" start="1261" end="1283" title="philosophical analysis" label="philosophical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q175661" start="1285" end="1305" title="philosophy of action" label="philosophy of action"/>
<link wikidata="Q484761" start="1307" end="1329" title="philosophy of language" label="philosophy of language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="1331" end="1343" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="1368" end="1390" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Charles Sanders Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q48324" start="1441" end="1449" title="morality" label="moralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q484954" start="1454" end="1463" title="pessimism" label="pessimist"/>
<link wikidata="Q57112" start="1530" end="1545" title="Oswald Spengler" label="Oswald Spengler"/>
<link wikidata="Q76357" start="1547" end="1562" title="Jürgen Habermas" label="Jürgen Habermas"/>
<link wikidata="Q151843" start="1571" end="1587" title="Frankfurt School" label="Frankfurt School"/>
<link wikidata="Q938185" start="1620" end="1631" title="rationality" label="rationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351730" start="1854" end="1862" title="progress" label="progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351730" start="1874" end="1890" title="Myth of Progress" label="Myth of Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="1958" end="1973" title="honorary degree" label="honorary degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q204457" start="1997" end="2017" title="University of Bergen" label="University of Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438703" start="2043" end="2072" title="Swedish Academy Finland Prize" label="Swedish Academy Finland Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q155887" start="2385" end="2399" title="L.E.J. Brouwer" label="L.E.J. Brouwer"/>
<link wikidata="Q706898" start="2401" end="2410" title="E.W. Beth" label="E.W. Beth"/>
<link wikidata="Q641771" start="2416" end="2426" title="A. Heyting" label="A. Heyting"/>
<link wikidata="Q750883" start="2883" end="2899" title="Gifford Lectures" label="Gifford Lectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q216273" start="2914" end="2939" title="University of St. Andrews" label="University of St. Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q215022" start="3312" end="3336" title="Arthur Stanley Eddington" label="Arthur Stanley Eddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683647" start="4069" end="4084" title="Tanner Lectures" label="Tanner Lectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q28695" start="4092" end="4114" title="University of Helsinki" label="University of Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938839" start="4643" end="4668" title="Acta Philosophica Fennica" label="Acta Philosophica Fennica"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="5034" end="5046" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q767319" start="5072" end="5081" title="Wiley-Blackwell" label="Blackwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997531" start="5358" end="5382" title="Cornell University Press" label="Cornell University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q655717" start="5469" end="5499" title="Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus" label="Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176140" start="5875" end="5888" title="David Pinsent" label="David Pinsent"/>
<link wikidata="Q648266" start="6355" end="6370" title="Wayback Machine" label="Wayback Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090271" start="6616" end="6626" title="Rush Rhees" label="Rush Rhees"/>
<link wikidata="Q229646" start="6628" end="6646" title="Elizabeth Anscombe" label="Elizabeth Anscombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964714" start="6768" end="6784" title="Brian McGuinness" label="Brian McGuinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="6794" end="6809" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q648266" start="6843" end="6858" title="Wayback Machine" label="Wayback Machine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12253" wikidata="Q2464821" url="?curid=12253" title="Gaudy Night">
<text>Gaudy Night (1935) is a mystery novel by Dorothy L. Sayers, the tenth featuring Lord Peter Wimsey, and the third including Harriet Vane.

The dons of Harriet Vane&#x27;s &quot;alma mater&quot;, the all-female Shrewsbury College, Oxford (based on Sayers&#x27; own Somerville College), have invited her back to attend the annual Gaudy celebrations. However, the mood turns sour when someone begins a series of malicious acts including poison-pen messages, obscene graffiti, and wanton vandalism. Despite the dons&#x27; reluctance to share the secret with an outsider, Harriet convinces them to let her bring in Lord Peter Wimsey to assist the investigation – but his involvement is not without complications, both personal and professional.

==Plot==
Harriet Vane returns with trepidation to her &quot;alma mater&quot;, Shrewsbury College, Oxford to attend the Gaudy dinner. Expecting hostility because of her notoriety (she had stood trial for murder in an earlier novel, &quot;Strong Poison&quot;), she is surprised to be welcomed warmly by most of the dons, and rediscovers her old love of academic life. Harriet&#x27;s short stay is, however, marred by her discovery of a sheet of paper with an offensive drawing, and a poison pen message referring to her as a &quot;dirty murderess&quot;.

Some time later the Dean of Shrewsbury writes to ask for her help. There has been an outbreak of vandalism and anonymous letters, and fearing for the college&#x27;s reputation if this becomes public knowledge, the Dean wants someone to investigate confidentially. Harriet, herself a victim of poison-pen letters since her trial, reluctantly agrees, and returns to spend some months in residence, ostensibly to do research on Sheridan Le Fanu and to assist a don with her book. The timing of the first poison pen message during the gaudy, and the use of a Latin quotation from the &quot;Aeneid&quot; during one disturbance, focuses suspicion on the Senior Common Room dons, causing escalating tensions.

As Harriet wrestles with the case, trying to narrow down the list of suspects who might be responsible for poison-pen messages, obscene graffiti, wanton vandalism including the destruction of a set of scholarly proofs, and the crafting of vile effigies, she is forced to examine her ambivalent feelings about Wimsey, love and marriage, and her attraction to academia as an intellectual and emotional refuge. Wimsey eventually arrives in Oxford to help, and she gains a new perspective from those who know him, including his nephew, an undergraduate at the university.

The attacks build to a crisis. There is an attempt to drive a vulnerable student to suicide and a physical assault on Harriet that almost kills her. The perpetrator is finally unmasked as Annie Wilson, one of the college scouts, revealed to be the widow of a disgraced University of York academic. Her husband&#x27;s academic fraud had been exposed by an examiner, destroying his career and driving him to suicide; his suicide note used the Latin quote eventually used by Wilson. The examiner later moved to Shrewsbury College, and the widow&#x27;s campaign has been her revenge against the examiner in particular and more generally against intellectual women who move outside what she sees as their proper domestic sphere.

At the end of the book, Wimsey admits his own faults in his attempts at courtship, and Harriet comes to terms with her own feelings, finally accepting Wimsey&#x27;s proposal of marriage.

==Principal characters==

*Harriet Vane – protagonist, a mystery writer
*Lord Peter Wimsey – protagonist, an aristocratic amateur detective
*Letitia Martin – Dean of Shrewsbury College
*Helen de Vine – new Research Fellow at Shrewsbury College
*Miss Lydgate – Harriet&#x27;s former tutor
*Dr Baring – Warden of Shrewsbury College
*Miss Hillyard – history don at Shrewsbury College
*Phoebe Tucker – Harriet&#x27;s old college friend
*Viscount Saint-George – Lord Peter&#x27;s nephew, an undergraduate at Christ Church, Oxford
*Reggie Pomfret – undergraduate at Queen&#x27;s College
*Miss Burrows – College librarian
*Annie Wilson – scout at Shrewsbury College
*Padgett – Head Porter at Shrewsbury College
*Bunter – Lord Peter&#x27;s manservant

==Title==

A &quot;gaudy&quot;, at the University of Oxford, is a college feast, typically a reunion for its alumni. The term &quot;gaudy night&quot; appears in Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Antony and Cleopatra&quot;: &quot;Let&#x27;s have one other gaudy night: call to me / All my sad captains; fill our bowls once more / Let&#x27;s mock the midnight bell&quot;.

==Reception==
Writing in 1936, George Orwell disagreed with the opinion of an &quot;Observer&quot; critic who felt that &quot;Gaudy Night&quot; had put Miss Sayers &quot;definitely among the great writers&quot;. Orwell concluded, to the contrary, that &quot;her slickness in writing has blinded many readers to the fact that her stories, considered as detective stories, are very bad ones. They lack the minimum of probability that even a detective story ought to have, and the crime is always committed in a way that is incredibly tortuous and quite uninteresting&quot;.

In a letter to his son Christopher from May 1944, J. R. R. Tolkien wrote: &quot;I could not stand Gaudy Night. I followed P. Wimsey from his attractive beginnings so far, by which time I conceived a loathing for him (and his creatrix) not surpassed by any other character in literature known to me, unless by his Harriet. The honeymoon one (Busman&#x27;s H[oneymoon].?) was worse. I was sick.&quot;

Jacques Barzun stated that &quot;&quot;Gaudy Night&quot; is a remarkable achievement. Harriet Vane and Saint-George, the undergraduate nephew of Lord Peter, help give variety, and the college setting justifies good intellectual debate. The motive is magnificently orated on by the culprit in a scene that is a striking set-piece. And though the Shrewsbury dons are sometimes hard to distinguish one from another, the College architecture is very good&quot;.

==Themes==

Although no murder occurs in &quot;Gaudy Night&quot;, it includes a great deal of suspense and psychological thrills. The narrative is interwoven with a love story and an examination of women&#x27;s struggles to enlarge their roles and achieve some independence within the social climate of 1930s England, and the novel has been described as &quot;the first feminist mystery novel&quot;.

The novel deals with a number of philosophical themes, including the right relation between love and independence, and between principles and personal loyalties. Susan Haack has an essay on &quot;Gaudy Night&quot; as a philosophical novel.

The issue of women&#x27;s right to academic education is central to the book&#x27;s plot. Sayers had herself been one of the first women to obtain an Oxford University degree, having been awarded first-class honours in the mediaeval literature examinations of 1915. She attended Somerville College, the basis for the fictional Shrewsbury College of the plot.

==Adaptations==
The book was adapted as a three-part series for BBC television in 1987, starring Edward Petherbridge as Wimsey and Harriet Walter as Harriet.

In 2005 a dramatisation of the novel was released on CD by the BBC Radio Collection, with Joanna David as Harriet and Ian Carmichael as Wimsey. In 2010 the dramatisation was broadcast on BBC Radio 7.

==See also==

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6585139" start="24" end="37" title="mystery novel" label="mystery novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q106740" start="41" end="58" title="Dorothy L. Sayers" label="Dorothy L. Sayers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538721" start="80" end="97" title="Lord Peter Wimsey" label="Lord Peter Wimsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104990" start="123" end="135" title="Harriet Vane" label="Harriet Vane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166008" start="142" end="146" title="university don" label="dons"/>
<link wikidata="Q174376" start="176" end="186" title="alma mater" label="alma mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619538" start="209" end="235" title="List of fictional Oxford colleges" label="Shrewsbury College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q774489" start="263" end="281" title="Somerville College, Oxford" label="Somerville College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527620" start="327" end="332" title="Gaudy" label="Gaudy"/>
<link wikidata="Q254435" start="433" end="452" title="poison pen letter" label="poison-pen messages"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="462" end="470" title="graffiti" label="graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q174376" start="800" end="810" title="alma mater" label="alma mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619538" start="818" end="844" title="List of fictional Oxford colleges" label="Shrewsbury College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527620" start="859" end="864" title="Gaudy" label="Gaudy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544560" start="977" end="990" title="Strong Poison" label="Strong Poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q723682" start="1313" end="1317" title="dean (education)" label="Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q326467" start="1718" end="1734" title="Sheridan Le Fanu" label="Sheridan Le Fanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="1879" end="1885" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q254435" start="2103" end="2122" title="poison pen letter" label="poison-pen messages"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="2132" end="2140" title="graffiti" label="graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q834191" start="2197" end="2213" title="proofreading" label="scholarly proofs"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899864" start="2240" end="2248" title="effigy" label="effigies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879018" start="2786" end="2791" title="bedder" label="scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q967165" start="2834" end="2852" title="University of York" label="University of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451781" start="3272" end="3287" title="Separate spheres" label="domestic sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104990" start="3505" end="3517" title="Harriet Vane" label="Harriet Vane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538721" start="3551" end="3568" title="Lord Peter Wimsey" label="Lord Peter Wimsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969127" start="3779" end="3785" title="Warden (college)" label="Warden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166008" start="3833" end="3836" title="University don" label="don"/>
<link wikidata="Q745967" start="3981" end="4002" title="Christ Church, Oxford" label="Christ Church, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q73094" start="4038" end="4058" title="The Queen&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879018" start="4109" end="4114" title="bedder" label="scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820874" start="4183" end="4189" title="Mervyn Bunter" label="Bunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527620" start="4241" end="4246" title="gaudy" label="gaudy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="4261" end="4281" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581649" start="4288" end="4295" title="Colleges of the University of Oxford" label="college"/>
<link wikidata="Q508719" start="4331" end="4337" title="alumni" label="alumni"/>
<link wikidata="Q606830" start="4408" end="4428" title="Antony and Cleopatra" label="Antony and Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335" start="4615" end="4628" title="George Orwell" label="George Orwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="4662" end="4682" title="The Observer" label="&amp;quot;Observer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q82032" start="5172" end="5191" title="Christopher Tolkien" label="his son Christopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="5207" end="5223" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q712946" start="5557" end="5571" title="Jacques Barzun" label="Jacques Barzun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173010" start="6579" end="6590" title="Susan Haack" label="Susan Haack"/>
<link wikidata="Q20737414" start="6636" end="6655" title="philosophical novel" label="philosophical novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q774489" start="6937" end="6955" title="Somerville College, Oxford" label="Somerville College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156298" start="7060" end="7077" title="A Dorothy L. Sayers Mystery" label="three-part series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344838" start="7115" end="7134" title="Edward Petherbridge" label="Edward Petherbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q271177" start="7149" end="7163" title="Harriet Walter" label="Harriet Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q97903913" start="7187" end="7213" title="Lord Peter Wimsey (radio series)" label="dramatisation of the novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834788" start="7240" end="7260" title="BBC Radio Collection" label="BBC Radio Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q447160" start="7267" end="7279" title="Joanna David" label="Joanna David"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655483" start="7295" end="7309" title="Ian Carmichael" label="Ian Carmichael"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12255" wikidata="Q9739" url="?curid=12255" title="G">
<text>G, or g, is the seventh letter of the Latin alphabet, used in the modern English alphabet, the alphabets of other western European languages, and others worldwide. Its name in English is &quot;gee&quot; (pronounced ), plural &quot;gees&quot;.

The lowercase version can be written in two forms: the single-storey (sometimes &quot;opentail&quot;) and the double-storey (sometimes &quot;looptail&quot;) . The former is commonly used in handwriting and fonts based on it, especially fonts intended to be read by children.

==History==
The evolution of the Latin alphabet&#x27;s G can be traced back to the Latin alphabet&#x27;s predecessor, the Greek alphabet. The voiced velar stop was represented by the third letter of the Greek alphabet, gamma (Γ), which was later adopted by the Etruscan language. Latin then borrowed this &quot;rounded form&quot; of gamma, C, to represent the same sound in words such as &quot;recei&quot;, which was likely an early dative form of &quot;rex&quot;, meaning &quot;king&quot;, as found in an &quot;early Latin inscription.&quot; Over time, however, the letter C shifted to represent the voiceless velar stop, leading to the displacement of the letter K. Scholars believe that this change can be attributed to the influence of the Etruscan language on Latin. 

Afterwards, the letter &#x27;G&#x27; was introduced in the Old Latin period as a variant of &#x27;C&#x27; to distinguish voiced from voiceless , and G was used to represent a voiced velar stop from this point on and C &quot;stood for the unvoiced velar only&quot;.

The recorded originator of &#x27;G&#x27; is freedman Spurius Carvilius Ruga, who added letter G to the teaching of the Roman alphabet during the 3rd century BC: he was the first Roman to open a fee-paying school, around 230 BC. At this time, &#x27;K&#x27; had fallen out of favor, and &#x27;C&#x27;, which had formerly represented both and before open vowels, had come to express in all environments.

Ruga&#x27;s positioning of &#x27;G&#x27; shows that alphabetic order related to the letters&#x27; values as Greek numerals was a concern even in the 3rd century BC. According to some records, the original seventh letter, &#x27;Z&#x27;, had been purged from the Latin alphabet somewhat earlier in the 3rd century BC by the Roman censor Appius Claudius, who found it distasteful and foreign. Sampson (1985) suggests that: &quot;Evidently the order of the alphabet was felt to be such a concrete thing that a new letter could be added in the middle only if a &#x27;space&#x27; was created by the dropping of an old letter.&quot; 

George Hempl proposed in 1899 that there never was such a &quot;space&quot; in the alphabet and that in fact &#x27;G&#x27; was a direct descendant of zeta. Zeta took shapes like ⊏ in some of the Old Italic scripts; the development of the monumental form &#x27;G&#x27; from this shape would be exactly parallel to the development of &#x27;C&#x27; from gamma. He suggests that the pronunciation &gt; was due to contamination from the also similar-looking &#x27;K&#x27;.

Eventually, both velar consonants and developed palatalized allophones before front vowels; consequently in today&#x27;s Romance languages, and have different sound values depending on context (known as hard and soft C and hard and soft G). Because of French influence, English language orthography shares this feature.

===Typographic variants===

The modern lowercase has two typographic variants: the single-storey (sometimes &quot;opentail&quot;) and the double-storey (sometimes &quot;looptail&quot;) . The single-storey form derives from the majuscule (uppercase) form by raising the serif that distinguishes it from &#x27;c&#x27; to the top of the loop (thus closing the loop), and extending the vertical stroke downward and to the left. The double-storey form had developed similarly, except that some ornate forms then extended the tail back to the right, and to the left again, forming a closed bowl or loop. In the double-storey version, a small top stroke in the upper-right, often terminating in an orb shape, is called an &quot;ear&quot;. The loop-tail form is the original one, as seen in 9th century Carolingian script; evolving over centuries of monastic copying, the open-tail variant came to predominate and it was this that Gutenberg adopted when creating the first Blackletter typefaces until that in turn was replaced by Humanist minuscule, which reasserted the closed-tail form.

Generally, the two forms are complementary and interchangeable; the form displayed is a typeface selection choice. In Unicode, the two appearances are generally treated as glyph variants with no difference. Most serif typefaces use the looptail form (for example, ) and most sans-serif typefaces use the opentail form (for example, ) but the code point in both cases is U+0067. For applications where the single-storey variant must be distinguished (such as strict IPA in a typeface where the usual g character is double-storey), the character is available, as well as an upper case version, . 

Occasionally the difference has been exploited to provide contrast. In the International Phonetic Alphabet, opentail has always represented a voiced velar plosive, while looptail represented a voiced velar fricative from 1895 to 1900. In 1948, the Council of the International Phonetic Association recognized and as typographic equivalents, and this decision was reaffirmed in 1993. While the 1949 &quot;Principles of the International Phonetic Association&quot; recommended the use of for a velar plosive and for an advanced one for languages where it is preferable to distinguish the two, such as Russian, this practice never caught on. The 1999 &quot;Handbook of the International Phonetic Association&quot;, the successor to the &quot;Principles&quot;, abandoned the recommendation and acknowledged both shapes as acceptable variants.

In 2018, a study found that native English speakers have little conscious awareness of the looptail form The authors write: &quot;Despite being questioned repeatedly, and despite being informed directly that G has two lowercase print forms, nearly half of the participants failed to reveal any knowledge of the looptail &#x27;g&#x27;, and only 1 of the 38 participants was able to write looptail &#x27;g&#x27; correctly&quot;.

==Use in writing systems==

===English===
In English, the letter appears either alone or in some digraphs. Alone, it represents
* a voiced velar plosive ( or &quot;hard&quot; ), as in &quot;goose&quot;, &quot;gargoyle&quot;, and &quot;game&quot;;
* a voiced palato-alveolar affricate ( or &quot;soft&quot; ), predominates before , or , as in &quot;giant&quot;, &quot;ginger&quot;, and &quot;geology&quot;; or
* a voiced palato-alveolar sibilant () in post-medieval loanwords from French, such as &quot;rouge&quot;, &quot;beige&quot;, &quot;genre&quot; (often), and &quot;margarine&quot; (rarely)

 is predominantly soft before (including the digraphs and ), , or , and hard otherwise. It is hard in those derivations from &quot; (gynḗ)&quot; meaning woman where initial-worded as such. Soft is also used in many words that came into English from medieval church/academic use, French, Spanish, Italian or Portuguese – these tend to, in other ways in English, closely align to their Ancient Latin and Greek roots (such as &quot;&quot;, &quot;logic&quot; or &quot;magic&quot;).
There remain widely used a few English words of non-Romance origin where is hard followed by or (&quot;get&quot;, &quot;give&quot;, &quot;gift&quot;, &quot;gig&quot;, &quot;girl&quot;, &quot;giggle&quot;), and very few in which is soft though followed by such as &quot;gaol&quot;, which since the 20th century is almost always written as &quot;jail&quot;.

The double consonant has the value (hard ) as in &quot;nugget&quot;, with very few exceptions: in &quot;exaggerate&quot; and &quot;veggies&quot; and dialectally in &quot;suggest&quot;.

The digraph has the value (soft ), as in &quot;badger&quot;. Non-digraph can also occur, in compounds like &quot;floodgate&quot; and &quot;headgear&quot;.

The digraph may represent:
* a velar nasal () as in &quot;length&quot;, &quot;singer&quot;
* the latter followed by hard () as in &quot;jungle&quot;, &quot;finger&quot;, &quot;longest&quot;
Non-digraph also occurs, with possible values
* as in &quot;engulf&quot;, &quot;ungainly&quot;
* as in &quot;sponge&quot;, &quot;angel&quot;
* as in &quot;melange&quot;

The digraph (in many cases a replacement for the obsolete letter yogh, which took various values including , , and ) may represent:
* as in &quot;ghost&quot;, &quot;aghast&quot;, &quot;burgher&quot;, &quot;spaghetti&quot;
* as in &quot;cough&quot;, &quot;laugh&quot;, &quot;roughage&quot;
* ∅ (no sound) as in &quot;through&quot;, &quot;neighbor&quot;, &quot;night&quot; 
* in &quot;ugh&quot;
* (rarely) in &quot;hiccough&quot;
* (rarely) in &quot;&quot;
Non-digraph also occurs, in compounds like &quot;foghorn&quot;, &quot;pigheaded&quot;.

The digraph may represent:
* as in &quot;gnostic&quot;, &quot;deign&quot;, &quot;foreigner&quot;, &quot;signage&quot;
* in loanwords like &quot;champignon&quot;, &quot;lasagna&quot;
Non-digraph also occurs, as in &quot;signature&quot;, &quot;agnostic&quot;.

The trigraph has the value as in &quot;gingham&quot; or &quot;dinghy&quot;. Non-trigraph also occurs, in compounds like &quot;stronghold&quot; and &quot;dunghill&quot;.

G is the tenth least frequently used letter in the English language (after Y, P, B, V, K, J, X, Q, and Z), with a frequency of about 2.02% in words.

===Other languages===
Most Romance languages and some Nordic languages also have two main pronunciations for , hard and soft. While the soft value of varies in different Romance languages ( in French and Portuguese, in Catalan, in Italian and Romanian, and in most dialects of Spanish), in all except Romanian and Italian, soft has the same pronunciation as the .

In Italian and Romanian, is used to represent before front vowels where would otherwise represent a soft value. In Italian and French, is used to represent the palatal nasal , a sound somewhat similar to the in English &quot;canyon&quot;. In Italian, the trigraph , when appearing before a vowel or as the article and pronoun &quot;&quot;, represents the palatal lateral approximant . Other languages typically use to represent , regardless of position.

Amongst European languages, Czech, Dutch, Estonian and Finnish are exceptions, as they do not have in their native words. In Dutch, represents a voiced velar fricative instead, a sound that does not occur in modern English, but there is a dialectal variation: many Netherlandic dialects use a voiceless fricative ( or ) instead, and in southern dialects it may be palatal . Nevertheless, word-finally, it is always voiceless in all dialects, including the standard Dutch of Belgium and the Netherlands. On the other hand, some dialects (like Amelands) may have a phonemic .

Faroese uses to represent , in addition to , and also uses it to indicate a glide.

In Māori, is used in the digraph which represents the velar nasal and is pronounced like the in &quot;singer&quot;.

The Samoan and Fijian languages use the letter by itself for .

In older Czech and Slovak orthographies, was used to represent , while was written as ( with caron).

The Azerbaijani Latin alphabet uses exclusively for the &quot;soft&quot; sound, namely . The sound is written as . This leads to unusual spellings of loanwords: &quot;qram&quot; &#x27;gram&#x27;, &quot;qrup&quot; &#x27;group&#x27;, &quot;qaraj&quot; &#x27;garage&#x27;, &quot;qallium&quot; &#x27;gallium&#x27;.

===Other systems===
In the International Phonetic Alphabet, represents the voiced velar plosive. The small caps represents the voiced uvular plosive.

==Other uses==

* Unit prefix G, meaning 1,000,000,000 times.

==Related characters==
===Ancestors, descendants and siblings===
* 𐤂 : Semitic letter Gimel, from which the following symbols originally derive
* C c : Latin letter C, from which G derives
* : Greek letter Gamma, from which C derives in turn
* ɡ : Latin letter script small G
* ᶢ : Modifier letter small script g is used for phonetic transcription
* 𝼁 : Latin small letter reversed script g, an extension to IPA for disordered speech (extIPA)
* ᵷ : Turned g
* 𝼂 : Latin letter small capital turned g, an extension to IPA for disordered speech (extIPA)
* Г г : Cyrillic letter Ge
* Ȝ ȝ : Latin letter Yogh
* Ɣ ɣ : Latin letter Gamma
* Ᵹ ᵹ : Insular g
* ᫌ : Combining insular g, used in the Ormulum
* Ꝿ ꝿ : Turned insular g
* Ꟑ ꟑ : Closed insular g, used in the Ormulum
* ɢ : Latin letter small capital G, used in the International Phonetic Alphabet to represent a voiced uvular stop
* 𐞒 : Modifier letter small capital G, used as a superscript IPA letter
* ʛ : Latin letter small capital G with hook, used in the International Phonetic Alphabet to represent a voiced uvular implosive
* 𐞔 : Modifier letter small capital G with hook, used as a superscript IPA letter
* 𐞓 : Modifier letter small g with hook, used as a superscript IPA letter
* : Modifier letters are used in the Uralic Phonetic Alphabet
* ꬶ : Used for the Teuthonista phonetic transcription system
* G with diacritics: Ǵ ǵ Ǥ ǥ Ĝ ĝ Ǧ ǧ Ğ ğ Ģ ģ Ɠ ɠ Ġ ġ Ḡ ḡ Ꞡ ꞡ ᶃ
*ց : Armenian alphabet Tso

===Ligatures and abbreviations===
* - Paraguayan guaraní
* - the kilogram symbol as a single character in the CJK Compatibility block

==Other representations==
===Computing ===
===Other===

==See also==
* Carolingian G
* Hard and soft G

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* 
* Lewis and Short &quot;Latin Dictionary&quot;: G</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9739" start="0" end="1" title="G" label="G"/>
<link wikidata="Q9739" start="6" end="7" title="G" label="g"/>
<link wikidata="Q9788" start="24" end="30" title="Letter (alphabet)" label="letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="38" end="52" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q754673" start="66" end="89" title="English alphabet" label="modern English alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q48366" start="122" end="140" title="Languages of Europe" label="European languages"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="187" end="202" title="English alphabet#Letter names" label="&amp;quot;gee&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188561" start="248" end="257" title="Letter case" label="lowercase"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="642" end="656" title="Greek alphabet" label="Greek alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q14387" start="739" end="748" title="Gamma" label="gamma (Γ)"/>
<link wikidata="Q35726" start="781" end="798" title="Etruscan language" label="Etruscan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q15842283" start="974" end="977" title="Rex (title)" label="rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q463543" start="1121" end="1141" title="voiceless velar stop" label="voiceless velar stop"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1353" end="1369" title="History of the Latin alphabet#Old Latin period" label="Old Latin period"/>
<link wikidata="Q9820" start="1392" end="1393" title="C" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q507127" start="1469" end="1486" title="voiced velar stop" label="voiced velar stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q841571" start="1604" end="1612" title="freedman" label="freedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q511107" start="1613" end="1635" title="Spurius Carvilius Ruga" label="Spurius Carvilius Ruga"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="1679" end="1693" title="Roman alphabet" label="Roman alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="1784" end="1786" title="Before Christ" label="BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q9922" start="1808" end="1809" title="K" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q10925" start="2014" end="2030" title="alphabetic order" label="alphabetic order"/>
<link wikidata="Q108645" start="2070" end="2084" title="Greek numerals" label="Greek numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q189851" start="2284" end="2296" title="Roman censor" label="Roman censor"/>
<link wikidata="Q297783" start="2297" end="2312" title="Appius Claudius Caecus" label="Appius Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q14394" start="2740" end="2744" title="zeta" label="zeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891256" start="2785" end="2802" title="Old Italic script" label="Old Italic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q533425" start="2828" end="2838" title="Roman square capitals" label="monumental"/>
<link wikidata="Q14387" start="2941" end="2946" title="gamma" label="gamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q19408" start="3076" end="3091" title="velar consonant" label="velar consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808790" start="3107" end="3118" title="Palatalization (phonetics)" label="palatalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q146863" start="3119" end="3128" title="allophone" label="allophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="3180" end="3197" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649060" start="3262" end="3277" title="hard and soft C" label="hard and soft C"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655490" start="3282" end="3297" title="hard and soft G" label="hard and soft G"/>
<link wikidata="Q970597" start="3311" end="3317" title="French orthography" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491268" start="3329" end="3357" title="English orthography" label="English language orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188561" start="3419" end="3428" title="lowercase" label="lowercase"/>
<link wikidata="Q243449" start="3649" end="3654" title="serif" label="serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452931" start="3964" end="3968" title="Bowl (typography)" label="bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q785729" start="4175" end="4193" title="Carolingian script" label="Carolingian script"/>
<link wikidata="Q655185" start="4222" end="4238" title="Scriptorium" label="monastic copying"/>
<link wikidata="Q8958" start="4303" end="4312" title="Johannes Gutenberg" label="Gutenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q213686" start="4345" end="4356" title="Blackletter" label="Blackletter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953117" start="4402" end="4420" title="Humanist minuscule" label="Humanist minuscule"/>
<link wikidata="Q17451" start="4550" end="4558" title="typeface" label="typeface"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="4580" end="4587" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q243449" start="4674" end="4679" title="serif" label="serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q864011" start="4737" end="4747" title="sans-serif" label="sans-serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105784" start="4804" end="4814" title="code point" label="code point"/>
<link wikidata="Q21204" start="4927" end="4930" title="International Phonetic Alphabet" label="IPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q21204" start="5133" end="5164" title="International Phonetic Alphabet" label="International Phonetic Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q507127" start="5200" end="5220" title="voiced velar plosive" label="voiced velar plosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q654670" start="5251" end="5273" title="voiced velar fricative" label="voiced velar fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q846513" start="5321" end="5355" title="International Phonetic Association" label="International Phonetic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q191494" start="6423" end="6431" title="Digraph (orthography)" label="digraphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q507127" start="6458" end="6478" title="voiced velar plosive" label="voiced velar plosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q778145" start="6577" end="6609" title="voiced palato-alveolar affricate" label="voiced palato-alveolar affricate"/>
<link wikidata="Q654660" start="6739" end="6770" title="voiced palato-alveolar sibilant" label="voiced palato-alveolar sibilant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4287" start="6897" end="6906" title="margarine" label="margarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="7366" end="7371" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="7387" end="7392" title="Magic (supernatural)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="7670" end="7674" title="gaol" label="gaol"/>
<link wikidata="Q463515" start="8131" end="8142" title="velar nasal" label="velar nasal"/>
<link wikidata="Q423449" start="8525" end="8529" title="yogh" label="yogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q520562" start="9441" end="9475" title="Letter frequency" label="tenth least frequently used letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9973" start="9507" end="9508" title="Y" label="Y"/>
<link wikidata="Q9946" start="9510" end="9511" title="P" label="P"/>
<link wikidata="Q9705" start="9513" end="9514" title="B" label="B"/>
<link wikidata="Q9963" start="9516" end="9517" title="V" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q9922" start="9519" end="9520" title="K" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q9773" start="9522" end="9523" title="J" label="J"/>
<link wikidata="Q9968" start="9525" end="9526" title="X" label="X"/>
<link wikidata="Q9950" start="9528" end="9529" title="Q" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q9751" start="9535" end="9536" title="Z" label="Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="9609" end="9626" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q106085" start="9636" end="9652" title="Nordic languages" label="Nordic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="9775" end="9781" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="9786" end="9796" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="9801" end="9808" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="9813" end="9820" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="9825" end="9833" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="9859" end="9866" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q463495" start="10107" end="10120" title="palatal nasal" label="palatal nasal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341170" start="10202" end="10210" title="Trigraph (orthography)" label="trigraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q855287" start="10302" end="10329" title="palatal lateral approximant" label="palatal lateral approximant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="10430" end="10435" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="10437" end="10442" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q9072" start="10444" end="10452" title="Estonian language" label="Estonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="10457" end="10464" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="10527" end="10532" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q654670" start="10547" end="10569" title="voiced velar fricative" label="voiced velar fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815195" start="10944" end="10952" title="Amelands" label="Amelands"/>
<link wikidata="Q25258" start="10977" end="10984" title="Faroese language" label="Faroese"/>
<link wikidata="Q757410" start="11053" end="11058" title="semivowel" label="glide"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="11064" end="11069" title="Māori language" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q463515" start="11115" end="11126" title="velar nasal" label="velar nasal"/>
<link wikidata="Q34011" start="11182" end="11188" title="Samoan language" label="Samoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33295" start="11193" end="11199" title="Fijian language" label="Fijian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="11251" end="11256" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="11261" end="11267" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q26948" start="11335" end="11340" title="caron" label="caron"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292" start="11348" end="11359" title="Azerbaijani language" label="Azerbaijani"/>
<link wikidata="Q21204" start="11683" end="11714" title="International Phonetic Alphabet" label="International Phonetic Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q507127" start="11731" end="11751" title="voiced velar plosive" label="voiced velar plosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163271" start="11757" end="11767" title="small caps" label="small caps"/>
<link wikidata="Q290979" start="11783" end="11804" title="voiced uvular plosive" label="voiced uvular plosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q15132612" start="11825" end="11836" title="Unit prefix" label="Unit prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q26752" start="11941" end="11948" title="Phoenician alphabet" label="Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17525296" start="11956" end="11961" title="Gimel" label="Gimel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9820" start="12035" end="12036" title="C" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="12063" end="12068" title="Greek alphabet" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q14387" start="12076" end="12081" title="Gamma" label="Gamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q507127" start="12131" end="12145" title="ɡ" label="script small G"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488974" start="12148" end="12149" title="ᶢ" label="ᶢ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421964" start="12265" end="12281" title="Extensions to the International Phonetic Alphabet" label="extension to IPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855857" start="12319" end="12327" title="Turned g" label="Turned g"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421964" start="12374" end="12390" title="Extensions to the International Phonetic Alphabet" label="extension to IPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="12430" end="12438" title="Cyrillic" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16335" start="12446" end="12448" title="Ge (Cyrillic)" label="Ge"/>
<link wikidata="Q423449" start="12470" end="12474" title="Ȝ" label="Yogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q374797" start="12496" end="12501" title="Latin gamma" label="Gamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537511" start="12510" end="12519" title="Insular g" label="Insular g"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534421" start="12559" end="12566" title="Ormulum" label="Ormulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534421" start="12630" end="12637" title="Ormulum" label="Ormulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q290979" start="12733" end="12751" title="voiced uvular stop" label="voiced uvular stop"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12801" end="12823" title="International Phonetic Alphabet#Superscript IPA" label="superscript IPA letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744685" start="12929" end="12952" title="voiced uvular implosive" label="voiced uvular implosive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13012" end="13034" title="International Phonetic Alphabet#Superscript IPA" label="superscript IPA letter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13086" end="13108" title="International Phonetic Alphabet#Superscript IPA" label="superscript IPA letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287368" start="13146" end="13170" title="Uralic Phonetic Alphabet" label="Uralic Phonetic Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q915378" start="13190" end="13201" title="Teuthonista" label="Teuthonista"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="13241" end="13250" title="diacritic" label="diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445029" start="13253" end="13256" title="Ǵ" label="Ǵ ǵ"/>
<link wikidata="Q396773" start="13257" end="13260" title="G with stroke" label="Ǥ ǥ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465174" start="13261" end="13264" title="Ĝ" label="Ĝ ĝ"/>
<link wikidata="Q396780" start="13265" end="13268" title="Ǧ" label="Ǧ ǧ"/>
<link wikidata="Q15297602" start="13269" end="13272" title="Ğ" label="Ğ ğ"/>
<link wikidata="Q245421" start="13273" end="13276" title="Cedilla" label="Ģ ģ"/>
<link wikidata="Q394647" start="13277" end="13280" title="Ɠ" label="Ɠ ɠ"/>
<link wikidata="Q342823" start="13281" end="13284" title="Ġ" label="Ġ ġ"/>
<link wikidata="Q627627" start="13285" end="13288" title="Ḡ" label="Ḡ ḡ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595044" start="13289" end="13292" title="Ꞡ" label="Ꞡ ꞡ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047429" start="13293" end="13294" title="ᶃ" label="ᶃ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570494" start="13318" end="13321" title="Co (Armenian letter)" label="Tso"/>
<link wikidata="Q207514" start="13361" end="13379" title="Paraguayan guaraní" label="Paraguayan guaraní"/>
<link wikidata="Q11570" start="13388" end="13396" title="kilogram" label="kilogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493853" start="13433" end="13450" title="CJK Compatibility" label="CJK Compatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756379" start="13529" end="13542" title="Carolingian G" label="Carolingian G"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655490" start="13545" end="13560" title="Hard and soft G" label="Hard and soft G"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12257" wikidata="Q14387" url="?curid=12257" title="Gamma">
<text>Gamma (; uppercase , lowercase ; ) is the third letter of the Greek alphabet. In the system of Greek numerals it has a value of 3. In Ancient Greek, the letter gamma represented a voiced velar stop . In Modern Greek, this letter normally represents a voiced velar fricative , except before either of the two front vowels (/e/, /i/), where it represents a voiced palatal fricative ; while /g/ in foreign words is instead commonly transcribed as γκ).

In the International Phonetic Alphabet and other modern Latin-alphabet based phonetic notations, it represents the voiced velar fricative.

==History==

The Greek letter Gamma Γ is a grapheme derived from the Phoenician letter (&quot;gīml&quot;) which was rotated from the right-to-left script of Canaanite to accommodate the Greek language&#x27;s writing system of left-to-right. The Canaanite grapheme represented the /g/ phoneme in the Canaanite language, and as such is cognate with &quot;gimel&quot; ג of the Hebrew alphabet.

Based on its name, the letter has been interpreted as an abstract representation of a camel&#x27;s neck, but this has been criticized as contrived, and it is more likely that the letter is derived from an Egyptian hieroglyph representing a club or throwing stick.
In Archaic Greece, the shape of gamma was closer to a classical lambda (Λ), while lambda retained the Phoenician L-shape ().

Letters that arose from the Greek gamma include Etruscan (Old Italic) 𐌂, Roman C and G, Runic &quot;kaunan&quot; , Gothic &quot;geuua&quot; , the Coptic Ⲅ, and the Cyrillic letters Г and Ґ.

==Greek phoneme==
The Ancient Greek /g/ phoneme was the voiced velar stop, continuing the reconstructed proto-Indo-European &quot;*g&quot;, &quot;*ǵ&quot;.

The modern Greek phoneme represented by gamma is realized either as a voiced palatal fricative () before a front vowel (/e/, /i/), or as a voiced velar fricative in all other environments. Both in Ancient and in Modern Greek, before other velar consonants (κ, χ, ξ – that is, &quot;k, kh, ks&quot;), gamma represents a velar nasal . A double gamma γγ (e.g., άγγελος, &quot;angel&quot;) represents the sequence (phonetically varying ) or .

==Phonetic transcription==
Lowercase Greek gamma is used in the Americanist phonetic notation and Uralic Phonetic Alphabet to indicate voiced consonants.

The gamma was also added to the Latin alphabet, as Latin gamma, in the following forms: majuscule Ɣ, minuscule ɣ, and superscript modifier letter ˠ.

In the International Phonetic Alphabet the minuscule letter is used to represent a voiced velar fricative and the superscript modifier letter is used to represent velarization. It is not to be confused with the character , which looks like a lowercase Latin gamma that lies above the baseline rather than crossing, and which represents the close-mid back unrounded vowel. In certain nonstandard variations of the IPA, the uppercase form is used.

It is as a full-fledged majuscule and minuscule letter in the alphabets of some of languages of Africa such as Dagbani, Dinka, Kabye, and Ewe, and Berber languages using the Berber Latin alphabet.

It is sometimes also used in the romanization of Pashto.

==Mathematics and science==

===Lowercase===
The lowercase letter formula_1 is used as a symbol for:
*Chromatic number of in graph theory
*Gamma radiation in nuclear physics
*Shear strain in physics
*Surface tension in physics
*The photon, the elementary particle of light and other electromagnetic radiation
*The 434 nm spectral line in the Balmer series
*Surface energy in materials science
*The Lorentz factor in the theory of relativity
*In mathematics, the lower incomplete gamma function
*The heat capacity ratio in thermodynamics
*The activity coefficient in thermodynamics
*The gyromagnetic ratio in electromagnetism
*Gamma waves in neuroscience
*Gamma motor neurons in neuroscience
*A non-SI metric unit of measure of mass equal to one microgram (1 μg). This always-rare use is deprecated.
*A non-SI unit of measure of magnetic flux density, sometimes used in geophysics, equal to 10−5 gauss (G), or 1 nanotesla (nT).
*The power by which the luminance of an image is increased in gamma correction
*In civil and mechanical engineering:
**Specific weight
**The shear rate of a fluid is represented by a lowercase gamma with a dot above it: formula_2
**Austenite (also known as γ-iron), a metallic non-magnetic allotrope or solid solution of iron.
*The gamma carbon, the third carbon attached to a functional group in organic chemistry and biochemistry; see Alpha and beta carbon
*Hermite constant
*The Euler’s Constant also known as Euler–Mascheroni constant ≈ 0.57721566490153286
*Stieltjes constants
*Chvátal–Sankoff constants

The lowercase Latin gamma ɣ can also be used in contexts (such as chemical or molecule nomenclature) where gamma must not be confused with the letter y, which can occur in some computer typefaces.

===Uppercase===
The uppercase letter formula_3 is used as a symbol for:
*In mathematics, the gamma function (usually written as formula_3-function) is an extension of the factorial to complex numbers
*In mathematics, the upper incomplete gamma function
*The Christoffel symbols in differential geometry
*In probability theory and statistics, the gamma distribution is a two-parameter family of continuous probability distributions.
*In solid-state physics, the center of the Brillouin zone
*Circulation in fluid mechanics
*As reflection coefficient in physics and electrical engineering
*The tape alphabet of a Turing machine
*The Feferman–Schütte ordinal formula_5
*Congruence subgroups of the modular group of other arithmetic groups
*One of the Greeks in mathematical finance

==Unicode==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==See also==

* Г, г - Ge (Cyrillic)
* G, g - Latin
* Gamma correction
* List of storms named Gamma

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14387" start="0" end="5" title="Gamma" label="Gamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="62" end="76" title="Greek alphabet" label="Greek alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q108645" start="95" end="109" title="Greek numerals" label="Greek numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="134" end="147" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q507127" start="180" end="197" title="voiced velar stop" label="voiced velar stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q36510" start="203" end="215" title="Modern Greek" label="Modern Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q654670" start="251" end="273" title="voiced velar fricative" label="voiced velar fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505949" start="308" end="319" title="front vowel" label="front vowel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="355" end="379" title="Voiced palatal fricative#Palatal" label="voiced palatal fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q21204" start="457" end="488" title="International Phonetic Alphabet" label="International Phonetic Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="527" end="545" title="phonetic transcription#Alphabetic" label="phonetic notations"/>
<link wikidata="Q26752" start="659" end="676" title="Phoenician alphabet" label="Phoenician letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333457" start="723" end="743" title="right-to-left script" label="right-to-left script"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545446" start="845" end="853" title="grapheme" label="grapheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q747547" start="889" end="907" title="Canaanite language" label="Canaanite language"/>
<link wikidata="Q17525296" start="943" end="948" title="gimel" label="gimel"/>
<link wikidata="Q33513" start="964" end="979" title="Hebrew alphabet" label="Hebrew alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375" start="1068" end="1073" title="camel" label="camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q659691" start="1230" end="1244" title="throwing stick" label="throwing stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q271834" start="1249" end="1263" title="Archaic Greece" label="Archaic Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q10897" start="1310" end="1316" title="lambda" label="lambda"/>
<link wikidata="Q9927" start="1359" end="1360" title="L" label="L"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1420" end="1441" title="Old Italic script#Etruscan alphabet" label="Etruscan (Old Italic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="1445" end="1450" title="Latin alphabet" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9820" start="1451" end="1452" title="C" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q9739" start="1457" end="1458" title="G" label="G"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005583" start="1460" end="1465" title="Elder Futhark" label="Runic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399039" start="1472" end="1478" title="kaunan" label="kaunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q467784" start="1487" end="1493" title="Gothic alphabet" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q321083" start="1518" end="1524" title="Coptic alphabet" label="Coptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="1536" end="1544" title="Cyrillic script" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16335" start="1553" end="1554" title="Ge (Cyrillic)" label="Г"/>
<link wikidata="Q16358" start="1559" end="1560" title="Ge with upturn" label="Ґ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030211" start="1667" end="1686" title="Proto-Indo-European phonology" label="proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q578601" start="1790" end="1814" title="voiced palatal fricative" label="voiced palatal fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505949" start="1827" end="1838" title="front vowel" label="front vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q654670" start="1859" end="1881" title="voiced velar fricative" label="voiced velar fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q19408" start="1959" end="1974" title="velar consonant" label="velar consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q463515" start="2039" end="2050" title="velar nasal" label="velar nasal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075747" start="2224" end="2253" title="Americanist phonetic notation" label="Americanist phonetic notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287368" start="2258" end="2282" title="Uralic Phonetic Alphabet" label="Uralic Phonetic Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q374797" start="2366" end="2377" title="Latin gamma" label="Latin gamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q21204" start="2472" end="2503" title="International Phonetic Alphabet" label="International Phonetic Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q654670" start="2548" end="2570" title="voiced velar fricative" label="voiced velar fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q953016" start="2628" end="2640" title="velarization" label="velarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262182" start="2749" end="2757" title="baseline (typography)" label="baseline"/>
<link wikidata="Q909114" start="2805" end="2835" title="close-mid back unrounded vowel" label="close-mid back unrounded vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862127" start="2848" end="2881" title="Obsolete and nonstandard symbols in the International Phonetic Alphabet" label="nonstandard variations of the IPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q207930" start="2995" end="3014" title="languages of Africa" label="languages of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q32238" start="3023" end="3030" title="Dagbani language" label="Dagbani"/>
<link wikidata="Q56466" start="3032" end="3037" title="Dinka language" label="Dinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q35475" start="3039" end="3044" title="Kabye language" label="Kabye"/>
<link wikidata="Q30005" start="3050" end="3053" title="Ewe language" label="Ewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q25448" start="3059" end="3075" title="Berber languages" label="Berber languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532709" start="3086" end="3107" title="Berber Latin alphabet" label="Berber Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q58680" start="3159" end="3165" title="Pashto" label="Pashto"/>
<link wikidata="Q504843" start="3270" end="3286" title="Chromatic number" label="Chromatic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="3293" end="3305" title="graph theory" label="graph theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="3307" end="3322" title="Gamma ray" label="Gamma radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q81197" start="3326" end="3341" title="nuclear physics" label="nuclear physics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3343" end="3355" title="Strain (mechanics)#Shear strain" label="Shear strain"/>
<link wikidata="Q170749" start="3368" end="3383" title="Surface tension" label="Surface tension"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="3400" end="3406" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="3451" end="3476" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="3489" end="3502" title="spectral line" label="spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q653711" start="3510" end="3523" title="Balmer series" label="Balmer series"/>
<link wikidata="Q901959" start="3525" end="3539" title="Surface energy" label="Surface energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q228736" start="3543" end="3560" title="materials science" label="materials science"/>
<link wikidata="Q599404" start="3566" end="3580" title="Lorentz factor" label="Lorentz factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43514" start="3588" end="3608" title="theory of relativity" label="theory of relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319246" start="3630" end="3661" title="Incomplete gamma function" label="lower incomplete gamma function"/>
<link wikidata="Q503869" start="3667" end="3686" title="heat capacity ratio" label="heat capacity ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="3690" end="3704" title="thermodynamics" label="thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q745224" start="3710" end="3730" title="activity coefficient" label="activity coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="3734" end="3748" title="thermodynamics" label="thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q634552" start="3754" end="3772" title="gyromagnetic ratio" label="gyromagnetic ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="3776" end="3792" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2623017" start="3794" end="3804" title="Gamma wave" label="Gamma wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="3809" end="3821" title="neuroscience" label="neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866857" start="3823" end="3841" title="Gamma motor neuron" label="Gamma motor neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="3846" end="3858" title="neuroscience" label="neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="3866" end="3868" title="International System of Units" label="SI"/>
<link wikidata="Q232405" start="3869" end="3875" title="metric system" label="metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q47574" start="3876" end="3891" title="units of measurement" label="unit of measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="3895" end="3899" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645498" start="3913" end="3922" title="microgram" label="microgram"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="3974" end="3976" title="International System of Units" label="SI"/>
<link wikidata="Q47574" start="3977" end="3992" title="units of measurement" label="unit of measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="3996" end="4017" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic flux density"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="4037" end="4047" title="geophysics" label="geophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q177493" start="4063" end="4068" title="Gauss (unit)" label="gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q154357" start="4079" end="4083" title="nano-" label="nano"/>
<link wikidata="Q163343" start="4083" end="4088" title="tesla (unit)" label="tesla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144257" start="4157" end="4173" title="gamma correction" label="gamma correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q749542" start="4214" end="4229" title="Specific weight" label="Specific weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q461293" start="4236" end="4246" title="shear rate" label="shear rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q487286" start="4327" end="4336" title="Austenite" label="Austenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q170409" start="4472" end="4488" title="functional group" label="functional group"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351" start="4492" end="4509" title="organic chemistry" label="organic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094" start="4514" end="4526" title="biochemistry" label="biochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q910020" start="4532" end="4553" title="Alpha and beta carbon" label="Alpha and beta carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754097" start="4555" end="4571" title="Hermite constant" label="Hermite constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q273023" start="4577" end="4633" title="Euler–Mascheroni constant" label="Euler’s Constant also known as Euler–Mascheroni constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816316" start="4657" end="4676" title="Stieltjes constants" label="Stieltjes constants"/>
<link wikidata="Q19203119" start="4678" end="4703" title="Chvátal–Sankoff constants" label="Chvátal–Sankoff constants"/>
<link wikidata="Q9973" start="4855" end="4856" title="y" label="y"/>
<link wikidata="Q190573" start="4996" end="5010" title="gamma function" label="gamma function"/>
<link wikidata="Q120976" start="5074" end="5083" title="factorial" label="factorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="5087" end="5101" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319246" start="5124" end="5155" title="Incomplete gamma function" label="upper incomplete gamma function"/>
<link wikidata="Q847816" start="5161" end="5180" title="Christoffel symbols" label="Christoffel symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q117806" start="5249" end="5267" title="gamma distribution" label="gamma distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q715396" start="5339" end="5358" title="solid-state physics" label="solid-state physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q917246" start="5378" end="5392" title="Brillouin zone" label="Brillouin zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q205880" start="5394" end="5405" title="circulation (fluid dynamics)" label="Circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q172145" start="5409" end="5424" title="fluid mechanics" label="fluid mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852282" start="5429" end="5451" title="reflection coefficient" label="reflection coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q163310" start="5514" end="5528" title="Turing machine" label="Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264170" start="5534" end="5558" title="Feferman–Schütte ordinal" label="Feferman–Schütte ordinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161000" start="5570" end="5589" title="Congruence subgroup" label="Congruence subgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321169" start="5651" end="5681" title="Greeks (finance)" label="Greeks in mathematical finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q16335" start="5746" end="5766" title="Ge (Cyrillic)" label="Г, г - Ge (Cyrillic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9739" start="5769" end="5781" title="G" label="G, g - Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144257" start="5784" end="5800" title="Gamma correction" label="Gamma correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q104859614" start="5803" end="5829" title="List of storms named Gamma" label="List of storms named Gamma"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12265" wikidata="Q165135" url="?curid=12265" title="Goitre">
<text>A goitre, or goiter, is a swelling in the neck resulting from an enlarged thyroid gland. A goitre can be associated with a thyroid that is not functioning properly.

Worldwide, over 90% of goitre cases are caused by iodine deficiency. The term is from the Latin &quot;gutturia&quot;, meaning throat. Most goitres are not cancerous (benign), though they may be potentially harmful.

==Signs and symptoms==
A goitre can present as a palpable or visible enlargement of the thyroid gland at the base of the neck. A goitre, if associated with hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism, may be present with symptoms of the underlying disorder. For hyperthyroidism, the most common symptoms are associated with adrenergic stimulation: tachycardia (increased heart rate), palpitations, , tremor, increased blood pressure and heat intolerance. Clinical manifestations are often related to hypermetabolism (increased metabolism), excessive thyroid hormone, an increase in oxygen consumption, metabolic changes in protein metabolism, immunologic stimulation of diffuse goitre, and ocular changes (exophthalmos). Hypothyroid people commonly have poor appetite, cold intolerance, constipation, lethargy and may undergo weight gain. However, these symptoms are often non-specific and make diagnosis difficult.

According to the WHO classification of goitre by palpation, the severity of goitre is currently graded as grade 0, grade 1, grade 2.

==Causes==
Worldwide, the most common cause for goitre is iodine deficiency, commonly seen in countries that scarcely use iodized salt. Selenium deficiency is also considered a contributing factor. In countries that use iodized salt, Hashimoto&#x27;s thyroiditis is the most common cause. Goitre can also result from cyanide poisoning, which is particularly common in tropical countries where people eat the cyanide-rich cassava root as the staple food.
* Sarcoidosis
* Amyloidosis
* Hydatidiform mole
* Cysts
* Acromegaly
* Pendred syndrome

==Diagnosis==

Goitre may be diagnosed via a thyroid function test in an individual suspected of having it.

===Types===
A goitre may be classified either as nodular or diffuse. Nodular goitres are either of one nodule (uninodular) or of multiple nodules (multinodular). Multinodular goiter (MNG) is the most common disorder of the thyroid gland.

;Growth pattern:
* Uninodular goitre: one thyroid nodule; can be either inactive, or active (toxic) – autonomously producing thyroid hormone.
* Multinodular goitre: multiple nodules; can likewise be inactive or toxic, the latter is called toxic multinodular goitre and associated with hyperthyroidism. These nodules grow up at varying rates and secrete thyroid hormone autonomously, thereby suppressing TSH-dependent growth and function in the rest of gland. Inactive nodules in the same goitre can be malignant. Thyroid cancer is identified in 13.7% of the patients operated for multinodular goitre.
* Diffuse goitre: the whole thyroid appearing to be enlarged due to hyperplasia.

;Size:
* Class I: the goitre in normal posture of the head cannot be seen; it is only found by palpation.
* Class II: the goitre is palpable and can be easily seen.
* Class III: the goitre is very large and is retrosternal (partially or totally lying below the sternum), pressure results in compression marks.

==Treatment==
Goitre is treated according to the cause. If the thyroid gland is producing an excess of thyroid hormones (T3 and T4), radioactive iodine is given to the patient to shrink the gland. If goitre is caused by iodine deficiency, small doses of iodide in the form of Lugol&#x27;s iodine or KI solution are given. If the goitre is associated with an underactive thyroid, thyroid supplements are used as treatment. Sometimes a partial or complete thyroidectomy is required.

== Medical and scientific developments ==
The discovery of iodine&#x27;s importance in thyroid function and its role in preventing goiter marked a significant medical breakthrough. The introduction of iodized salt in the early 20th century became a key public health initiative, effectively reducing the prevalence of goiter in previously affected regions. This measure was one of the earliest and most successful examples of mass preventive health campaigns. 

==Epidemiology==

Goitre is more common among women, but this includes the many types of goitre caused by autoimmune problems, and not only those caused by simple lack of iodine.

Iodine mainly accumulates in the sea and in the topsoil. Before iodine enrichment programs, goiters were common in areas with repeated flooding or glacial activities, which erodes the topsoil. It is endemic in populations where the intake of iodine is less than 10 μg per day.

Examples of such regions include the alpine regions of Southern Europe (such as Switzerland), the Himalayans, the Great Lakes basin, etc. As reported in 1923, all the domestic animals have goiter in some of the glacial valleys of Southern Alaska. It was so severe in Pemberton Meadows that it was difficult to raise young animals there.

==History==
Chinese physicians of the Tang dynasty (618–907) were the first to successfully treat patients with goitre by using the iodine-rich thyroid gland of animals such as sheep and pigs—in raw, pill, or powdered form. This was outlined in Zhen Quan&#x27;s (d. 643 AD) book, as well as several others. One Chinese book, &quot;The Pharmacopoeia of the Heavenly Husbandman&quot;, asserted that iodine-rich sargassum was used to treat goitre patients by the 1st century BC, but this book was written much later.

In the 12th century, Zayn al-Din al-Jurjani, a Persian physician, provided the first description of Graves&#x27; disease after noting the association of goitre and a displacement of the eye known as exophthalmos in his &quot;Thesaurus of the Shah of Khwarazm&quot;, the major medical dictionary of its time. The disease was later named after Irish doctor Robert James Graves, who described a case of goitre with exophthalmos in 1835. The German Karl Adolph von Basedow also independently reported the same constellation of symptoms in 1840, while earlier reports of the disease were also published by the Italians Giuseppe Flajani and Antonio Giuseppe Testa, in 1802 and 1810 respectively, and by the English physician Caleb Hillier Parry (a friend of Edward Jenner) in the late 18th century.

Paracelsus (1493–1541) was the first person to propose a relationship between goitre and minerals (particularly lead) in drinking water. Iodine was later discovered by Bernard Courtois in 1811 from seaweed ash.

Goitre was previously common in many areas that were deficient in iodine in the soil. For example, in the English Midlands, the condition was known as Derbyshire Neck. In the United States, goitre was found in the Appalachian, Great Lakes, Midwest, and Intermountain regions. The condition is now practically absent in affluent nations, where table salt is supplemented with iodine. However, it is still prevalent in India, China, Central Asia, and Central Africa.

Goitre had been prevalent in the alpine countries for a long time. Switzerland reduced the condition by introducing iodized salt in 1922. The Bavarian tracht in the Miesbach and Salzburg regions, which appeared in the 19th century, includes a choker, dubbed &quot;Kropfband&quot; (struma band) which was used to hide either the goitre or the remnants of goitre surgery.

In various regions around the world, particularly in mountainous areas, the prevalence of goiter was linked to iodine deficiency in the diet. For example, the Alps, the Himalayas, and the Andes had high rates of goiter due to the iodine-poor soil. In these regions, iodine deficiency led to widespread hormonal imbalances, particularly affecting thyroid function. 

==Society and culture==
In the 1920s wearing bottles of iodine around the neck was believed to prevent goitre.

===Notable cases===
* Former U.S. President George H. W. Bush and his wife Barbara Bush were both diagnosed with Graves&#x27; disease and goitres, within two years of each other. The disease caused hyperthyroidism and cardiac dysrhythmia. Scientists said that, absent an environmental cause, the odds of both a husband and wife having Graves&#x27; disease might be 1 in 100,000 or as low as 1 in 3,000,000.

===Heraldry===
The coat of arms and crest of Die Kröpfner, of Tyrol, showed a man &quot;afflicted with a large goitre&quot;, an apparent pun on the German for the word (&quot;Kropf&quot;).

=== Social Impacts ===
In some historical contexts, goiters were so prevalent that they became normalized within the culture. For instance, in certain Alpine regions, large goiters were sometimes considered a sign of beauty. Conversely, in other areas, individuals with goiters faced social stigma, which could lead to marginalization and discrimination.

== Summarization ==
Goiter, resulting primarily from iodine deficiency, has historically been a widespread condition with significant health and social implications. Advances in nutrition and public health have greatly reduced its prevalence, but understanding its historical context helps in appreciating the development of endocrinology and public health measures.

== See also ==
* David Marine conducted substantial research on the treatment of goitre with iodine.
* Endemic goitre
* Struma ovarii—a kind of teratoma
* Thyroid hormone receptor

== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q165135" start="2" end="8" title="Goitre" label="goitre"/>
<link wikidata="Q165135" start="13" end="19" title="Goitre" label="goiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9633" start="42" end="46" title="neck" label="neck"/>
<link wikidata="Q16399" start="74" end="87" title="thyroid" label="thyroid gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18377123" start="216" end="233" title="iodine deficiency" label="iodine deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="256" end="261" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16364" start="292" end="298" title="throat" label="throat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="321" end="327" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417240" start="332" end="338" title="Benign tumor" label="benign"/>
<link wikidata="Q16399" start="470" end="483" title="Thyroid" label="thyroid gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16501" start="538" end="552" title="hypothyroidism" label="hypothyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16499" start="556" end="571" title="hyperthyroidism" label="hyperthyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684738" start="696" end="706" title="adrenergic" label="adrenergic"/>
<link wikidata="Q209583" start="720" end="731" title="tachycardia" label="tachycardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123260" start="756" end="768" title="palpitations" label="palpitations"/>
<link wikidata="Q223907" start="772" end="778" title="tremor" label="tremor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="780" end="804" title="Hypertension" label="increased blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q17120641" start="809" end="825" title="heat intolerance" label="heat intolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958306" start="872" end="887" title="hypermetabolism" label="hypermetabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q422106" start="922" end="937" title="Thyroid hormones" label="thyroid hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q684383" start="1078" end="1090" title="exophthalmos" label="exophthalmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q16949811" start="1141" end="1157" title="cold intolerance" label="cold intolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q178436" start="1159" end="1171" title="constipation" label="constipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15637420" start="1173" end="1181" title="lethargy" label="lethargy"/>
<link wikidata="Q112965645" start="1245" end="1257" title="non-specific" label="non-specific"/>
<link wikidata="Q18377123" start="1481" end="1498" title="iodine deficiency" label="iodine deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q902318" start="1545" end="1557" title="iodized salt" label="iodized salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322302" start="1559" end="1578" title="Selenium deficiency" label="Selenium deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11094" start="1657" end="1685" title="Hashimoto&amp;#x27;s thyroiditis" label="Hashimoto&amp;#x27;s thyroiditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q883082" start="1740" end="1757" title="cyanide poisoning" label="cyanide poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="1844" end="1851" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q193894" start="1879" end="1890" title="Sarcoidosis" label="Sarcoidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q816798" start="1893" end="1904" title="Amyloidosis" label="Amyloidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q881855" start="1907" end="1924" title="Hydatidiform mole" label="Hydatidiform mole"/>
<link wikidata="Q193211" start="1927" end="1931" title="Cyst" label="Cyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q189580" start="1935" end="1945" title="Acromegaly" label="Acromegaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707822" start="1948" end="1964" title="Pendred syndrome" label="Pendred syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q712838" start="2011" end="2032" title="thyroid function test" label="thyroid function test"/>
<link wikidata="Q53829" start="2356" end="2370" title="thyroid nodule" label="thyroid nodule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977746" start="2553" end="2578" title="toxic multinodular goitre" label="toxic multinodular goitre"/>
<link wikidata="Q16499" start="2599" end="2614" title="hyperthyroidism" label="hyperthyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q826522" start="2827" end="2841" title="Thyroid cancer" label="Thyroid cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q835051" start="2983" end="2994" title="hyperplasia" label="hyperplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q795090" start="3092" end="3101" title="palpation" label="palpation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8481" start="3258" end="3265" title="sternum" label="sternum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16399" start="3371" end="3384" title="thyroid gland" label="thyroid gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q422106" start="3411" end="3427" title="thyroid hormones" label="thyroid hormones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208453" start="3441" end="3459" title="radioactive iodine" label="radioactive iodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18377123" start="3528" end="3545" title="iodine deficiency" label="iodine deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801340" start="3562" end="3568" title="iodide" label="iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q409860" start="3584" end="3603" title="Lugol&amp;#x27;s iodine" label="Lugol&amp;#x27;s iodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q121874" start="3607" end="3618" title="potassium iodine" label="KI solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16399" start="3678" end="3685" title="thyroid" label="thyroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351681" start="3762" end="3775" title="thyroidectomy" label="thyroidectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247456" start="4480" end="4487" title="topsoil" label="topsoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599423" start="4824" end="4841" title="Great Lakes Basin" label="Great Lakes basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14874737" start="4977" end="4994" title="Pemberton Meadows" label="Pemberton Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="5086" end="5098" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q865061" start="5457" end="5466" title="sargassum" label="sargassum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908840" start="5584" end="5606" title="Zayn al-Din al-Jurjani" label="Zayn al-Din al-Jurjani"/>
<link wikidata="Q624029" start="5610" end="5627" title="Islamic medicine" label="Persian physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q16483" start="5663" end="5683" title="Graves&amp;#x27; disease" label="Graves&amp;#x27; disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q684383" start="5762" end="5774" title="exophthalmos" label="exophthalmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q779446" start="5918" end="5937" title="Robert James Graves" label="Robert James Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q77241" start="6008" end="6031" title="Karl Adolph von Basedow" label="Karl Adolph von Basedow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026540" start="6282" end="6301" title="Caleb Hillier Parry" label="Caleb Hillier Parry"/>
<link wikidata="Q40852" start="6315" end="6328" title="Edward Jenner" label="Edward Jenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q83428" start="6357" end="6367" title="Paracelsus" label="Paracelsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103" start="6494" end="6500" title="Iodine" label="Iodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q468330" start="6525" end="6541" title="Bernard Courtois" label="Bernard Courtois"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="6649" end="6653" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q850235" start="6675" end="6691" title="English Midlands" label="English Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="6744" end="6757" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673740" start="6783" end="6793" title="Appalachia" label="Appalachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="6796" end="6807" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="6809" end="6816" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047590" start="6822" end="6835" title="Intermountain West" label="Intermountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314" start="6912" end="6922" title="Sodium chloride" label="table salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q902318" start="6926" end="6950" title="Iodized salt" label="supplemented with iodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="6986" end="6991" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="7000" end="7012" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27433" start="7018" end="7032" title="Central Africa" label="Central Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q902318" start="7151" end="7163" title="iodized salt" label="iodized salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q18752255" start="7186" end="7192" title="tracht" label="tracht"/>
<link wikidata="Q10523" start="7200" end="7208" title="Miesbach (district)" label="Miesbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q43325" start="7213" end="7221" title="Salzburg (state)" label="Salzburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424519" start="7278" end="7284" title="choker" label="choker"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="7928" end="7945" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q190628" start="7959" end="7971" title="Barbara Bush (First Lady)" label="Barbara Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q16483" start="7997" end="8017" title="Graves&amp;#x27; disease" label="Graves&amp;#x27; disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q16499" start="8082" end="8097" title="hyperthyroidism" label="hyperthyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189331" start="8102" end="8121" title="cardiac dysrhythmia" label="cardiac dysrhythmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42880" start="8354" end="8359" title="Tyrol (state)" label="Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="8440" end="8446" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237127" start="9223" end="9235" title="David Marine" label="David Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103" start="9299" end="9305" title="iodine" label="iodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455531" start="9309" end="9323" title="Endemic goitre" label="Endemic goitre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357409" start="9326" end="9339" title="Struma ovarii" label="Struma ovarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q200741" start="9350" end="9358" title="teratoma" label="teratoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539644" start="9361" end="9385" title="Thyroid hormone receptor" label="Thyroid hormone receptor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12266" wikidata="Q7162" url="?curid=12266" title="Genetics">
<text>Genetics is the study of genes, genetic variation, and heredity in organisms. It is an important branch in biology because heredity is vital to organisms&#x27; evolution. Gregor Mendel, a Moravian Augustinian friar working in the 19th century in Brno, was the first to study genetics scientifically. Mendel studied &quot;trait inheritance&quot;, patterns in the way traits are handed down from parents to offspring over time. He observed that organisms (pea plants) inherit traits by way of discrete &quot;units of inheritance&quot;. This term, still used today, is a somewhat ambiguous definition of what is referred to as a gene.

Trait inheritance and molecular inheritance mechanisms of genes are still primary principles of genetics in the 21st century, but modern genetics has expanded to study the function and behavior of genes. Gene structure and function, variation, and distribution are studied within the context of the cell, the organism (e.g. dominance), and within the context of a population. Genetics has given rise to a number of subfields, including molecular genetics, epigenetics, and population genetics. Organisms studied within the broad field span the domains of life (archaea, bacteria, and eukarya).

Genetic processes work in combination with an organism&#x27;s environment and experiences to influence development and behavior, often referred to as nature versus nurture. The intracellular or extracellular environment of a living cell or organism may increase or decrease gene transcription. A classic example is two seeds of genetically identical corn, one placed in a temperate climate and one in an arid climate (lacking sufficient waterfall or rain). While the average height the two corn stalks could grow to is genetically determined, the one in the arid climate only grows to half the height of the one in the temperate climate due to lack of water and nutrients in its environment.

== Etymology ==

The word &quot;genetics&quot; stems from the ancient Greek &#x27; meaning &quot;genitive&quot;/&quot;generative&quot;, which in turn derives from &#x27; meaning &quot;origin&quot;.

== History ==
The observation that living things inherit traits from their parents has been used since prehistoric times to improve crop plants and animals through selective breeding. The modern science of genetics, seeking to understand this process, began with the work of the Augustinian friar Gregor Mendel in the mid-19th century.

Prior to Mendel, Imre Festetics, a Hungarian noble, who lived in Kőszeg before Mendel, was the first who used the word &quot;genetic&quot; in hereditarian context, and is considered the first geneticist. He described several rules of biological inheritance in his work &quot;The genetic laws of nature&quot; (Die genetischen Gesetze der Natur, 1819). His second law is the same as that which Mendel published. In his third law, he developed the basic principles of mutation (he can be considered a forerunner of Hugo de Vries). Festetics argued that changes observed in the generation of farm animals, plants, and humans are the result of scientific laws. Festetics empirically deduced that organisms inherit their characteristics, not acquire them. He recognized recessive traits and inherent variation by postulating that traits of past generations could reappear later, and organisms could produce progeny with different attributes. These observations represent an important prelude to Mendel&#x27;s theory of particulate inheritance insofar as it features a transition of heredity from its status as myth to that of a scientific discipline, by providing a fundamental theoretical basis for genetics in the twentieth century.

Other theories of inheritance preceded Mendel&#x27;s work. A popular theory during the 19th century, and implied by Charles Darwin&#x27;s 1859 &quot;On the Origin of Species&quot;, was blending inheritance: the idea that individuals inherit a smooth blend of traits from their parents. Mendel&#x27;s work provided examples where traits were definitely not blended after hybridization, showing that traits are produced by combinations of distinct genes rather than a continuous blend. Blending of traits in the progeny is now explained by the action of multiple genes with quantitative effects. Another theory that had some support at that time was the inheritance of acquired characteristics: the belief that individuals inherit traits strengthened by their parents. This theory (commonly associated with Jean-Baptiste Lamarck) is now known to be wrong—the experiences of individuals do not affect the genes they pass to their children. Other theories included Darwin&#x27;s pangenesis (which had both acquired and inherited aspects) and Francis Galton&#x27;s reformulation of pangenesis as both particulate and inherited.

=== Mendelian genetics ===


Modern genetics started with Mendel&#x27;s studies of the nature of inheritance in plants. In his paper &quot;Versuche über Pflanzenhybriden&quot; (&quot;Experiments on Plant Hybridization&quot;), presented in 1865 to the &quot;Naturforschender Verein&quot; (Society for Research in Nature) in Brno, Mendel traced the inheritance patterns of certain traits in pea plants and described them mathematically. Although this pattern of inheritance could only be observed for a few traits, Mendel&#x27;s work suggested that heredity was particulate, not acquired, and that the inheritance patterns of many traits could be explained through simple rules and ratios.

The importance of Mendel&#x27;s work did not gain wide understanding until 1900, after his death, when Hugo de Vries and other scientists rediscovered his research. William Bateson, a proponent of Mendel&#x27;s work, coined the word &quot;genetics&quot; in 1905. The adjective &quot;genetic&quot;, derived from the Greek word &quot;genesis&quot;—γένεσις, &quot;origin&quot;, predates the noun and was first used in a biological sense in 1860. Bateson both acted as a mentor and was aided significantly by the work of other scientists from Newnham College at Cambridge, specifically the work of Becky Saunders, Nora Darwin Barlow, and Muriel Wheldale Onslow. Bateson popularized the usage of the word &quot;genetics&quot; to describe the study of inheritance in his inaugural address to the Third International Conference on Plant Hybridization in London in 1906.

After the rediscovery of Mendel&#x27;s work, scientists tried to determine which molecules in the cell were responsible for inheritance. In 1900, Nettie Stevens began studying the mealworm. Over the next 11 years, she discovered that females only had the X chromosome and males had both X and Y chromosomes. She was able to conclude that sex is a chromosomal factor and is determined by the male. In 1911, Thomas Hunt Morgan argued that genes are on chromosomes, based on observations of a sex-linked white eye mutation in fruit flies. In 1913, his student Alfred Sturtevant used the phenomenon of genetic linkage to show that genes are arranged linearly on the chromosome.

=== Molecular genetics ===

Although genes were known to exist on chromosomes, chromosomes are composed of both protein and DNA, and scientists did not know which of the two is responsible for inheritance. In 1928, Frederick Griffith discovered the phenomenon of transformation: dead bacteria could transfer genetic material to &quot;transform&quot; other still-living bacteria. Sixteen years later, in 1944, the Avery–MacLeod–McCarty experiment identified DNA as the molecule responsible for transformation. The role of the nucleus as the repository of genetic information in eukaryotes had been established by Hämmerling in 1943 in his work on the single celled alga &quot;Acetabularia&quot;. The Hershey–Chase experiment in 1952 confirmed that DNA (rather than protein) is the genetic material of the viruses that infect bacteria, providing further evidence that DNA is the molecule responsible for inheritance.

James Watson and Francis Crick determined the structure of DNA in 1953, using the X-ray crystallography work of Rosalind Franklin and Maurice Wilkins that indicated DNA has a helical structure (i.e., shaped like a corkscrew). Their double-helix model had two strands of DNA with the nucleotides pointing inward, each matching a complementary nucleotide on the other strand to form what look like rungs on a twisted ladder. This structure showed that genetic information exists in the sequence of nucleotides on each strand of DNA. The structure also suggested a simple method for replication: if the strands are separated, new partner strands can be reconstructed for each based on the sequence of the old strand. This property is what gives DNA its semi-conservative nature where one strand of new DNA is from an original parent strand.

Although the structure of DNA showed how inheritance works, it was still not known how DNA influences the behavior of cells. In the following years, scientists tried to understand how DNA controls the process of protein production. It was discovered that the cell uses DNA as a template to create matching messenger RNA, molecules with nucleotides very similar to DNA. The nucleotide sequence of a messenger RNA is used to create an amino acid sequence in protein; this translation between nucleotide sequences and amino acid sequences is known as the genetic code.

With the newfound molecular understanding of inheritance came an explosion of research. A notable theory arose from Tomoko Ohta in 1973 with her amendment to the neutral theory of molecular evolution through publishing the nearly neutral theory of molecular evolution. In this theory, Ohta stressed the importance of natural selection and the environment to the rate at which genetic evolution occurs. One important development was chain-termination DNA sequencing in 1977 by Frederick Sanger. This technology allows scientists to read the nucleotide sequence of a DNA molecule. In 1983, Kary Banks Mullis developed the polymerase chain reaction, providing a quick way to isolate and amplify a specific section of DNA from a mixture. The efforts of the Human Genome Project, Department of Energy, NIH, and parallel private efforts by Celera Genomics led to the sequencing of the human genome in 2003.

== Features of inheritance ==

=== Discrete inheritance and Mendel&#x27;s laws ===
At its most fundamental level, inheritance in organisms occurs by passing discrete heritable units, called genes, from parents to offspring. This property was first observed by Gregor Mendel, who studied the segregation of heritable traits in pea plants, showing for example that flowers on a single plant were either purple or white—but never an intermediate between the two colors. The discrete versions of the same gene controlling the inherited appearance (phenotypes) are called alleles.

In the case of the pea, which is a diploid species, each individual plant has two copies of each gene, one copy inherited from each parent. Many species, including humans, have this pattern of inheritance. Diploid organisms with two copies of the same allele of a given gene are called homozygous at that gene locus, while organisms with two different alleles of a given gene are called heterozygous. The set of alleles for a given organism is called its genotype, while the observable traits of the organism are called its phenotype. When organisms are heterozygous at a gene, often one allele is called dominant as its qualities dominate the phenotype of the organism, while the other allele is called recessive as its qualities recede and are not observed. Some alleles do not have complete dominance and instead have incomplete dominance by expressing an intermediate phenotype, or codominance by expressing both alleles at once.

When a pair of organisms reproduce sexually, their offspring randomly inherit one of the two alleles from each parent. These observations of discrete inheritance and the segregation of alleles are collectively known as Mendel&#x27;s first law or the Law of Segregation. However, the probability of getting one gene over the other can change due to dominant, recessive, homozygous, or heterozygous genes. For example, Mendel found that if you cross heterozygous organisms your odds of getting the dominant trait is 3:1. Real geneticist study and calculate probabilities by using theoretical probabilities, empirical probabilities, the product rule, the sum rule, and more.

=== Notation and diagrams ===
Geneticists use diagrams and symbols to describe inheritance. A gene is represented by one or a few letters. Often a &quot;+&quot; symbol is used to mark the usual, non-mutant allele for a gene.

In fertilization and breeding experiments (and especially when discussing Mendel&#x27;s laws) the parents are referred to as the &quot;P&quot; generation and the offspring as the &quot;F1&quot; (first filial) generation. When the F1 offspring mate with each other, the offspring are called the &quot;F2&quot; (second filial) generation. One of the common diagrams used to predict the result of cross-breeding is the Punnett square.

When studying human genetic diseases, geneticists often use pedigree charts to represent the inheritance of traits. These charts map the inheritance of a trait in a family tree.

=== Multiple gene interactions ===
Organisms have thousands of genes, and in sexually reproducing organisms these genes generally assort independently of each other. This means that the inheritance of an allele for yellow or green pea color is unrelated to the inheritance of alleles for white or purple flowers. This phenomenon, known as &quot;Mendel&#x27;s second law&quot; or the &quot;law of independent assortment,&quot; means that the alleles of different genes get shuffled between parents to form offspring with many different combinations. Different genes often interact to influence the same trait. In the Blue-eyed Mary (&quot;Omphalodes verna&quot;), for example, there exists a gene with alleles that determine the color of flowers: blue or magenta. Another gene, however, controls whether the flowers have color at all or are white. When a plant has two copies of this white allele, its flowers are white—regardless of whether the first gene has blue or magenta alleles. This interaction between genes is called epistasis, with the second gene epistatic to the first.

Many traits are not discrete features (e.g. purple or white flowers) but are instead continuous features (e.g. human height and skin color). These complex traits are products of many genes. The influence of these genes is mediated, to varying degrees, by the environment an organism has experienced. The degree to which an organism&#x27;s genes contribute to a complex trait is called heritability. Measurement of the heritability of a trait is relative—in a more variable environment, the environment has a bigger influence on the total variation of the trait. For example, human height is a trait with complex causes. It has a heritability of 89% in the United States. In Nigeria, however, where people experience a more variable access to good nutrition and health care, height has a heritability of only 62%.

== Molecular basis for inheritance ==

=== DNA and chromosomes ===
The molecular basis for genes is deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). DNA is composed of deoxyribose (sugar molecule), a phosphate group, and a base (amine group). There are four types of bases: adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), and thymine (T). The phosphates make phosphodiester bonds with the sugars to make long phosphate-sugar backbones. Bases specifically pair together (T&amp;A, C&amp;G) between two backbones and make like rungs on a ladder. The bases, phosphates, and sugars together make a nucleotide that connects to make long chains of DNA. Genetic information exists in the sequence of these nucleotides, and genes exist as stretches of sequence along the DNA chain. These chains coil into a double a-helix structure and wrap around proteins called Histones which provide the structural support. DNA wrapped around these histones are called chromosomes. Viruses sometimes use the similar molecule RNA instead of DNA as their genetic material.

DNA normally exists as a double-stranded molecule, coiled into the shape of a double helix. Each nucleotide in DNA preferentially pairs with its partner nucleotide on the opposite strand: A pairs with T, and C pairs with G. Thus, in its two-stranded form, each strand effectively contains all necessary information, redundant with its partner strand. This structure of DNA is the physical basis for inheritance: DNA replication duplicates the genetic information by splitting the strands and using each strand as a template for synthesis of a new partner strand.
Genes are arranged linearly along long chains of DNA base-pair sequences. In bacteria, each cell usually contains a single circular genophore, while eukaryotic organisms (such as plants and animals) have their DNA arranged in multiple linear chromosomes. These DNA strands are often extremely long; the largest human chromosome, for example, is about 247 million base pairs in length. The DNA of a chromosome is associated with structural proteins that organize, compact, and control access to the DNA, forming a material called chromatin; in eukaryotes, chromatin is usually composed of nucleosomes, segments of DNA wound around cores of histone proteins. The full set of hereditary material in an organism (usually the combined DNA sequences of all chromosomes) is called the genome.

DNA is most often found in the nucleus of cells, but Ruth Sager helped in the discovery of nonchromosomal genes found outside of the nucleus. In plants, these are often found in the chloroplasts and in other organisms, in the mitochondria. These nonchromosomal genes can still be passed on by either partner in sexual reproduction and they control a variety of hereditary characteristics that replicate and remain active throughout generations.

While haploid organisms have only one copy of each chromosome, most animals and many plants are diploid, containing two of each chromosome and thus two copies of every gene. The two alleles for a gene are located on identical loci of the two homologous chromosomes, each allele inherited from a different parent.

Many species have so-called sex chromosomes that determine the sex of each organism. In humans and many other animals, the Y chromosome contains the gene that triggers the development of the specifically male characteristics. In evolution, this chromosome has lost most of its content and also most of its genes, while the X chromosome is similar to the other chromosomes and contains many genes. This being said, Mary Frances Lyon discovered that there is X-chromosome inactivation during reproduction to avoid passing on twice as many genes to the offspring. Lyon&#x27;s discovery led to the discovery of X-linked diseases.

=== Reproduction ===


When cells divide, their full genome is copied and each daughter cell inherits one copy. This process, called mitosis, is the simplest form of reproduction and is the basis for asexual reproduction. Asexual reproduction can also occur in multicellular organisms, producing offspring that inherit their genome from a single parent. Offspring that are genetically identical to their parents are called clones.

Eukaryotic organisms often use sexual reproduction to generate offspring that contain a mixture of genetic material inherited from two different parents. The process of sexual reproduction alternates between forms that contain single copies of the genome (haploid) and double copies (diploid). Haploid cells fuse and combine genetic material to create a diploid cell with paired chromosomes. Diploid organisms form haploids by dividing, without replicating their DNA, to create daughter cells that randomly inherit one of each pair of chromosomes. Most animals and many plants are diploid for most of their lifespan, with the haploid form reduced to single cell gametes such as sperm or eggs.

Although they do not use the haploid/diploid method of sexual reproduction, bacteria have many methods of acquiring new genetic information. Some bacteria can undergo conjugation, transferring a small circular piece of DNA to another bacterium. Bacteria can also take up raw DNA fragments found in the environment and integrate them into their genomes, a phenomenon known as transformation. These processes result in horizontal gene transfer, transmitting fragments of genetic information between organisms that would be otherwise unrelated. Natural bacterial transformation occurs in many bacterial species, and can be regarded as a sexual process for transferring DNA from one cell to another cell (usually of the same species). Transformation requires the action of numerous bacterial gene products, and its primary adaptive function appears to be repair of DNA damages in the recipient cell.

=== Recombination and genetic linkage ===


The diploid nature of chromosomes allows for genes on different chromosomes to assort independently or be separated from their homologous pair during sexual reproduction wherein haploid gametes are formed. In this way new combinations of genes can occur in the offspring of a mating pair. Genes on the same chromosome would theoretically never recombine. However, they do, via the cellular process of chromosomal crossover. During crossover, chromosomes exchange stretches of DNA, effectively shuffling the gene alleles between the chromosomes. This process of chromosomal crossover generally occurs during meiosis, a series of cell divisions that creates haploid cells. Meiotic recombination, particularly in microbial eukaryotes, appears to serve the adaptive function of repair of DNA damages.

The first cytological demonstration of crossing over was performed by Harriet Creighton and Barbara McClintock in 1931. Their research and experiments on corn provided cytological evidence for the genetic theory that linked genes on paired chromosomes do in fact exchange places from one homolog to the other.

The probability of chromosomal crossover occurring between two given points on the chromosome is related to the distance between the points. For an arbitrarily long distance, the probability of crossover is high enough that the inheritance of the genes is effectively uncorrelated. For genes that are closer together, however, the lower probability of crossover means that the genes demonstrate genetic linkage; alleles for the two genes tend to be inherited together. The amounts of linkage between a series of genes can be combined to form a linear linkage map that roughly describes the arrangement of the genes along the chromosome.

== Gene expression ==

=== Genetic code ===


Genes express their functional effect through the production of proteins, which are molecules responsible for most functions in the cell. Proteins are made up of one or more polypeptide chains, each composed of a sequence of amino acids. The DNA sequence of a gene is used to produce a specific amino acid sequence. This process begins with the production of an RNA molecule with a sequence matching the gene&#x27;s DNA sequence, a process called transcription.

This messenger RNA molecule then serves to produce a corresponding amino acid sequence through a process called translation. Each group of three nucleotides in the sequence, called a codon, corresponds either to one of the twenty possible amino acids in a protein or an instruction to end the amino acid sequence; this correspondence is called the genetic code. The flow of information is unidirectional: information is transferred from nucleotide sequences into the amino acid sequence of proteins, but it never transfers from protein back into the sequence of DNA—a phenomenon Francis Crick called the central dogma of molecular biology.

The specific sequence of amino acids results in a unique three-dimensional structure for that protein, and the three-dimensional structures of proteins are related to their functions. Some are simple structural molecules, like the fibers formed by the protein collagen. Proteins can bind to other proteins and simple molecules, sometimes acting as enzymes by facilitating chemical reactions within the bound molecules (without changing the structure of the protein itself). Protein structure is dynamic; the protein hemoglobin bends into slightly different forms as it facilitates the capture, transport, and release of oxygen molecules within mammalian blood.

A single nucleotide difference within DNA can cause a change in the amino acid sequence of a protein. Because protein structures are the result of their amino acid sequences, some changes can dramatically change the properties of a protein by destabilizing the structure or changing the surface of the protein in a way that changes its interaction with other proteins and molecules. For example, sickle-cell anemia is a human genetic disease that results from a single base difference within the coding region for the β-globin section of hemoglobin, causing a single amino acid change that changes hemoglobin&#x27;s physical properties.
Sickle-cell versions of hemoglobin stick to themselves, stacking to form fibers that distort the shape of red blood cells carrying the protein. These sickle-shaped cells no longer flow smoothly through blood vessels, having a tendency to clog or degrade, causing the medical problems associated with this disease.

Some DNA sequences are transcribed into RNA but are not translated into protein products—such RNA molecules are called non-coding RNA. In some cases, these products fold into structures which are involved in critical cell functions (e.g. ribosomal RNA and transfer RNA). RNA can also have regulatory effects through hybridization interactions with other RNA molecules (such as microRNA).

=== Nature and nurture ===


Although genes contain all the information an organism uses to function, the environment plays an important role in determining the ultimate phenotypes an organism displays. The phrase &quot;nature and nurture&quot; refers to this complementary relationship. The phenotype of an organism depends on the interaction of genes and the environment. An interesting example is the coat coloration of the Siamese cat. In this case, the body temperature of the cat plays the role of the environment. The cat&#x27;s genes code for dark hair, thus the hair-producing cells in the cat make cellular proteins resulting in dark hair. But these dark hair-producing proteins are sensitive to temperature (i.e. have a mutation causing temperature-sensitivity) and denature in higher-temperature environments, failing to produce dark-hair pigment in areas where the cat has a higher body temperature. In a low-temperature environment, however, the protein&#x27;s structure is stable and produces dark-hair pigment normally. The protein remains functional in areas of skin that are colder—such as its legs, ears, tail, and faceso the cat has dark hair at its extremities.

Environment plays a major role in effects of the human genetic disease phenylketonuria. The mutation that causes phenylketonuria disrupts the ability of the body to break down the amino acid phenylalanine, causing a toxic build-up of an intermediate molecule that, in turn, causes severe symptoms of progressive intellectual disability and seizures. However, if someone with the phenylketonuria mutation follows a strict diet that avoids this amino acid, they remain normal and healthy.

A common method for determining how genes and environment (&quot;nature and nurture&quot;) contribute to a phenotype involves studying identical and fraternal twins, or other siblings of multiple births. Identical siblings are genetically the same since they come from the same zygote. Meanwhile, fraternal twins are as genetically different from one another as normal siblings. By comparing how often a certain disorder occurs in a pair of identical twins to how often it occurs in a pair of fraternal twins, scientists can determine whether that disorder is caused by genetic or postnatal environmental factors. One famous example involved the study of the Genain quadruplets, who were identical quadruplets all diagnosed with schizophrenia.

=== Gene regulation ===
The genome of a given organism contains thousands of genes, but not all these genes need to be active at any given moment. A gene is expressed when it is being transcribed into mRNA and there exist many cellular methods of controlling the expression of genes such that proteins are produced only when needed by the cell. Transcription factors are regulatory proteins that bind to DNA, either promoting or inhibiting the transcription of a gene. Within the genome of &quot;Escherichia coli&quot; bacteria, for example, there exists a series of genes necessary for the synthesis of the amino acid tryptophan. However, when tryptophan is already available to the cell, these genes for tryptophan synthesis are no longer needed. The presence of tryptophan directly affects the activity of the genes—tryptophan molecules bind to the tryptophan repressor (a transcription factor), changing the repressor&#x27;s structure such that the repressor binds to the genes. The tryptophan repressor blocks the transcription and expression of the genes, thereby creating negative feedback regulation of the tryptophan synthesis process.

Differences in gene expression are especially clear within multicellular organisms, where cells all contain the same genome but have very different structures and behaviors due to the expression of different sets of genes. All the cells in a multicellular organism derive from a single cell, differentiating into variant cell types in response to external and intercellular signals and gradually establishing different patterns of gene expression to create different behaviors. As no single gene is responsible for the development of structures within multicellular organisms, these patterns arise from the complex interactions between many cells.

Within eukaryotes, there exist structural features of chromatin that influence the transcription of genes, often in the form of modifications to DNA and chromatin that are stably inherited by daughter cells. These features are called &quot;epigenetic&quot; because they exist &quot;on top&quot; of the DNA sequence and retain inheritance from one cell generation to the next. Because of epigenetic features, different cell types grown within the same medium can retain very different properties. Although epigenetic features are generally dynamic over the course of development, some, like the phenomenon of paramutation, have multigenerational inheritance and exist as rare exceptions to the general rule of DNA as the basis for inheritance.
== Genetic change ==

=== Mutations ===


During the process of DNA replication, errors occasionally occur in the polymerization of the second strand. These errors, called mutations, can affect the phenotype of an organism, especially if they occur within the protein coding sequence of a gene. Error rates are usually very low—1 error in every 10–100 million bases—due to the &quot;proofreading&quot; ability of DNA polymerases. Processes that increase the rate of changes in DNA are called mutagenic: mutagenic chemicals promote errors in DNA replication, often by interfering with the structure of base-pairing, while UV radiation induces mutations by causing damage to the DNA structure. Chemical damage to DNA occurs naturally as well and cells use DNA repair mechanisms to repair mismatches and breaks. The repair does not, however, always restore the original sequence. A particularly important source of DNA damages appears to be reactive oxygen species produced by cellular aerobic respiration, and these can lead to mutations.

In organisms that use chromosomal crossover to exchange DNA and recombine genes, errors in alignment during meiosis can also cause mutations. Errors in crossover are especially likely when similar sequences cause partner chromosomes to adopt a mistaken alignment; this makes some regions in genomes more prone to mutating in this way. These errors create large structural changes in DNA sequence—duplications, inversions, deletions of entire regions—or the accidental exchange of whole parts of sequences between different chromosomes, chromosomal translocation.

=== Natural selection and evolution ===


Mutations alter an organism&#x27;s genotype and occasionally this causes different phenotypes to appear. Most mutations have little effect on an organism&#x27;s phenotype, health, or reproductive fitness. Mutations that do have an effect are usually detrimental, but occasionally some can be beneficial. Studies in the fly &quot;Drosophila melanogaster&quot; suggest that if a mutation changes a protein produced by a gene, about 70 percent of these mutations are harmful with the remainder being either neutral or weakly beneficial.

Population genetics studies the distribution of genetic differences within populations and how these distributions change over time. Changes in the frequency of an allele in a population are mainly influenced by natural selection, where a given allele provides a selective or reproductive advantage to the organism, as well as other factors such as mutation, genetic drift, genetic hitchhiking, artificial selection and migration.

Over many generations, the genomes of organisms can change significantly, resulting in evolution. In the process called adaptation, selection for beneficial mutations can cause a species to evolve into forms better able to survive in their environment. New species are formed through the process of speciation, often caused by geographical separations that prevent populations from exchanging genes with each other.

By comparing the homology between different species&#x27; genomes, it is possible to calculate the evolutionary distance between them and when they may have diverged. Genetic comparisons are generally considered a more accurate method of characterizing the relatedness between species than the comparison of phenotypic characteristics. The evolutionary distances between species can be used to form evolutionary trees; these trees represent the common descent and divergence of species over time, although they do not show the transfer of genetic material between unrelated species (known as horizontal gene transfer and most common in bacteria).

== Research and technology ==
=== Model organisms ===

Although geneticists originally studied inheritance in a wide variety of organisms, the range of species studied has narrowed. One reason is that when significant research already exists for a given organism, new researchers are more likely to choose it for further study, and so eventually a few model organisms became the basis for most genetics research. Common research topics in model organism genetics include the study of gene regulation and the involvement of genes in development and cancer. Organisms were chosen, in part, for convenience—short generation times and easy genetic manipulation made some organisms popular genetics research tools. Widely used model organisms include the gut bacterium &quot;Escherichia coli&quot;, the plant &quot;Arabidopsis thaliana&quot;, baker&#x27;s yeast (&quot;Saccharomyces cerevisiae&quot;), the nematode &quot;Caenorhabditis elegans&quot;, the common fruit fly (&quot;Drosophila melanogaster&quot;), the zebrafish (&quot;Danio rerio&quot;), and the common house mouse (&quot;Mus musculus&quot;).

=== Medicine ===

Medical genetics seeks to understand how genetic variation relates to human health and disease. When searching for an unknown gene that may be involved in a disease, researchers commonly use genetic linkage and genetic pedigree charts to find the location on the genome associated with the disease. At the population level, researchers take advantage of Mendelian randomization to look for locations in the genome that are associated with diseases, a method especially useful for multigenic traits not clearly defined by a single gene. Once a candidate gene is found, further research is often done on the corresponding (or homologous) genes of model organisms. In addition to studying genetic diseases, the increased availability of genotyping methods has led to the field of pharmacogenetics: the study of how genotype can affect drug responses.

Individuals differ in their inherited tendency to develop cancer, and cancer is a genetic disease. The process of cancer development in the body is a combination of events. Mutations occasionally occur within cells in the body as they divide. Although these mutations will not be inherited by any offspring, they can affect the behavior of cells, sometimes causing them to grow and divide more frequently. There are biological mechanisms that attempt to stop this process; signals are given to inappropriately dividing cells that should trigger cell death, but sometimes additional mutations occur that cause cells to ignore these messages. An internal process of natural selection occurs within the body and eventually mutations accumulate within cells to promote their own growth, creating a cancerous tumor that grows and invades various tissues of the body. Normally, a cell divides only in response to signals called growth factors and stops growing once in contact with surrounding cells and in response to growth-inhibitory signals. It usually then divides a limited number of times and dies, staying within the epithelium where it is unable to migrate to other organs. To become a cancer cell, a cell has to accumulate mutations in a number of genes (three to seven). A cancer cell can divide without growth factor and ignores inhibitory signals. Also, it is immortal and can grow indefinitely, even after it makes contact with neighboring cells. It may escape from the epithelium and ultimately from the primary tumor. Then, the escaped cell can cross the endothelium of a blood vessel and get transported by the bloodstream to colonize a new organ, forming deadly metastasis. Although there are some genetic predispositions in a small fraction of cancers, the major fraction is due to a set of new genetic mutations that originally appear and accumulate in one or a small number of cells that will divide to form the tumor and are not transmitted to the progeny (somatic mutations). The most frequent mutations are a loss of function of p53 protein, a tumor suppressor, or in the p53 pathway, and gain of function mutations in the Ras proteins, or in other oncogenes.

=== Research methods ===

DNA can be manipulated in the laboratory. Restriction enzymes are commonly used enzymes that cut DNA at specific sequences, producing predictable fragments of DNA. DNA fragments can be visualized through use of gel electrophoresis, which separates fragments according to their length.

The use of ligation enzymes allows DNA fragments to be connected. By binding (&quot;ligating&quot;) fragments of DNA together from different sources, researchers can create recombinant DNA, the DNA often associated with genetically modified organisms. Recombinant DNA is commonly used in the context of plasmids: short circular DNA molecules with a few genes on them. In the process known as molecular cloning, researchers can amplify the DNA fragments by inserting plasmids into bacteria and then culturing them on plates of agar (to isolate clones of bacteria cells). &quot;Cloning&quot; can also refer to the various means of creating cloned (&quot;clonal&quot;) organisms.

DNA can also be amplified using a procedure called the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). By using specific short sequences of DNA, PCR can isolate and exponentially amplify a targeted region of DNA. Because it can amplify from extremely small amounts of DNA, PCR is also often used to detect the presence of specific DNA sequences.

=== DNA sequencing and genomics ===

DNA sequencing, one of the most fundamental technologies developed to study genetics, allows researchers to determine the sequence of nucleotides in DNA fragments. The technique of chain-termination sequencing, developed in 1977 by a team led by Frederick Sanger, is still routinely used to sequence DNA fragments. Using this technology, researchers have been able to study the molecular sequences associated with many human diseases.

As sequencing has become less expensive, researchers have sequenced the genomes of many organisms using a process called genome assembly, which uses computational tools to stitch together sequences from many different fragments. These technologies were used to sequence the human genome in the Human Genome Project completed in 2003. New high-throughput sequencing technologies are dramatically lowering the cost of DNA sequencing, with many researchers hoping to bring the cost of resequencing a human genome down to a thousand dollars.

Next-generation sequencing (or high-throughput sequencing) came about due to the ever-increasing demand for low-cost sequencing. These sequencing technologies allow the production of potentially millions of sequences concurrently. The large amount of sequence data available has created the subfield of genomics, research that uses computational tools to search for and analyze patterns in the full genomes of organisms. Genomics can also be considered a subfield of bioinformatics, which uses computational approaches to analyze large sets of biological data. A common problem to these fields of research is how to manage and share data that deals with human subject and personally identifiable information.

== Society and culture ==
On 19 March 2015, a group of leading biologists urged a worldwide ban on clinical use of methods, particularly the use of CRISPR and zinc finger, to edit the human genome in a way that can be inherited. In April 2015, Chinese researchers reported results of basic research to edit the DNA of non-viable human embryos using CRISPR.

== See also ==

* Bacterial genome size
* Cryoconservation of animal genetic resources
* Eugenics
* Embryology
* Genetic disorder
* Genetic diversity
* Genetic engineering
* Genetic enhancement
* Glossary of genetics (M−Z)
* Index of genetics articles
* Medical genetics
* Molecular tools for gene study
* Neuroepigenetics
* Outline of genetics
* Timeline of the history of genetics
* Plant genetic resources
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="0" end="8" title="Genetics" label="Genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="25" end="29" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q349856" start="32" end="49" title="genetic variation" label="genetic variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="55" end="63" title="heredity" label="heredity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="67" end="75" title="organism" label="organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="107" end="114" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="160" end="169" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q37970" start="171" end="184" title="Gregor Mendel" label="Gregor Mendel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="188" end="195" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q214528" start="197" end="208" title="Augustinians" label="Augustinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q14960" start="246" end="250" title="Brno" label="Brno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211967" start="633" end="638" title="Phenotypic trait" label="Trait"/>
<link wikidata="Q210506" start="655" end="664" title="Molecular genetics" label="molecular"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="932" end="936" title="Cell (biology)" label="cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="957" end="966" title="Dominance (genetics)" label="dominance"/>
<link wikidata="Q210506" start="1069" end="1087" title="molecular genetics" label="molecular genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q26939" start="1089" end="1100" title="epigenetics" label="epigenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q31151" start="1106" end="1125" title="population genetics" label="population genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872" start="1194" end="1201" title="archaea" label="archaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="1203" end="1211" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="1217" end="1224" title="eukarya" label="eukarya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204375" start="1347" end="1355" title="behavioural genetics" label="behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773859" start="1378" end="1399" title="nature versus nurture" label="nature versus nurture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571762" start="1405" end="1418" title="intracellular" label="intracellular"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571762" start="1422" end="1435" title="extracellular" label="extracellular"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="1600" end="1617" title="temperate climate" label="temperate climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q190946" start="1632" end="1644" title="arid climate" label="arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1983" end="1996" title="ancient Greek" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211967" start="2177" end="2183" title="Phenotypic trait" label="traits"/>
<link wikidata="Q995745" start="2284" end="2302" title="selective breeding" label="selective breeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q214528" start="2399" end="2410" title="Augustinians" label="Augustinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q37970" start="2417" end="2430" title="Gregor Mendel" label="Gregor Mendel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000929" start="2474" end="2488" title="Imre Festetics" label="Imre Festetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="2492" end="2501" title="Hungary" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q160192" start="2969" end="2982" title="Hugo de Vries" label="Hugo de Vries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="3803" end="3817" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20124" start="3836" end="3860" title="On the Origin of Species" label="On the Origin of Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q883807" start="3872" end="3892" title="blending inheritance" label="blending inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q550479" start="4259" end="4279" title="Quantitative genetics" label="quantitative effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q208800" start="4339" end="4378" title="inheritance of acquired characteristics" label="inheritance of acquired characteristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q82122" start="4492" end="4513" title="Jean-Baptiste Lamarck" label="Jean-Baptiste Lamarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362505" start="4662" end="4672" title="pangenesis" label="pangenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q191026" start="4725" end="4739" title="Francis Galton" label="Francis Galton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421194" start="4994" end="5028" title="Experiments on Plant Hybridization" label="Experiments on Plant Hybridization"/>
<link wikidata="Q14960" start="5134" end="5138" title="Brno" label="Brno"/>
<link wikidata="Q160192" start="5603" end="5616" title="Hugo de Vries" label="Hugo de Vries"/>
<link wikidata="Q297302" start="5665" end="5680" title="William Bateson" label="William Bateson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989780" start="6094" end="6108" title="Edith Rebecca Saunders" label="Becky Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7050058" start="6110" end="6128" title="Nora Darwin Barlow" label="Nora Darwin Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6938690" start="6134" end="6156" title="Muriel Wheldale Onslow" label="Muriel Wheldale Onslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="6347" end="6353" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q177681" start="6770" end="6788" title="Thomas Hunt Morgan" label="Thomas Hunt Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="6814" end="6824" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122841" start="6865" end="6874" title="White (mutation)" label="white eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q130888" start="6887" end="6898" title="Drosophila melanogaster" label="fruit flies"/>
<link wikidata="Q535384" start="6921" end="6938" title="Alfred Sturtevant" label="Alfred Sturtevant"/>
<link wikidata="Q843863" start="6962" end="6977" title="genetic linkage" label="genetic linkage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="7151" end="7158" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q151141" start="7245" end="7252" title="Griffith&amp;#x27;s experiment" label="In 1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q348191" start="7254" end="7272" title="Frederick Griffith" label="Frederick Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q461499" start="7302" end="7316" title="Transformation (genetics)" label="transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q123619" start="7347" end="7363" title="genetic material" label="genetic material"/>
<link wikidata="Q782907" start="7452" end="7484" title="Avery–MacLeod–McCarty experiment" label="Avery–MacLeod–McCarty experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q70168" start="7651" end="7661" title="Joachim Hämmerling" label="Hämmerling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425126" start="7714" end="7726" title="Acetabularia" label="Acetabularia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152561" start="7738" end="7762" title="Hershey–Chase experiment" label="Hershey–Chase experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q83333" start="7955" end="7967" title="James Watson" label="James Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q123280" start="7972" end="7985" title="Francis Crick" label="Francis Crick"/>
<link wikidata="Q826582" start="8037" end="8058" title="X-ray crystallography" label="X-ray crystallography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7474" start="8067" end="8084" title="Rosalind Franklin" label="Rosalind Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184659" start="8089" end="8104" title="Maurice Wilkins" label="Maurice Wilkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q201717" start="8130" end="8137" title="Helix" label="helical"/>
<link wikidata="Q130996" start="8535" end="8546" title="DNA replication" label="replication"/>
<link wikidata="Q211935" start="9006" end="9024" title="Protein biosynthesis" label="protein production"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="9100" end="9113" title="messenger RNA" label="messenger RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="9130" end="9140" title="nucleotide" label="nucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="9227" end="9237" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="9346" end="9358" title="genetic code" label="genetic code"/>
<link wikidata="Q275103" start="9477" end="9488" title="Tomoko Ohta" label="Tomoko Ohta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055017" start="9523" end="9560" title="neutral theory of molecular evolution" label="neutral theory of molecular evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883680" start="9584" end="9628" title="nearly neutral theory of molecular evolution" label="nearly neutral theory of molecular evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="9745" end="9754" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q380546" start="9811" end="9825" title="DNA sequencing" label="DNA sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q151564" start="9837" end="9853" title="Frederick Sanger" label="Frederick Sanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q157224" start="9949" end="9966" title="Kary Banks Mullis" label="Kary Banks Mullis"/>
<link wikidata="Q176996" start="9981" end="10006" title="polymerase chain reaction" label="polymerase chain reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q192446" start="10114" end="10134" title="Human Genome Project" label="Human Genome Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q643341" start="10195" end="10210" title="Celera Genomics" label="Celera Genomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q720988" start="10240" end="10252" title="human genome" label="human genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="10453" end="10457" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q25237" start="10589" end="10592" title="pea" label="pea"/>
<link wikidata="Q80726" start="10830" end="10836" title="allele" label="allele"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="10875" end="10882" title="diploid" label="diploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q13048280" start="11126" end="11136" title="homozygous" label="homozygous"/>
<link wikidata="Q106227" start="11145" end="11155" title="Locus (genetics)" label="gene locus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13048280" start="11227" end="11239" title="heterozygous" label="heterozygous"/>
<link wikidata="Q106016" start="11295" end="11303" title="genotype" label="genotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q104053" start="11364" end="11373" title="phenotype" label="phenotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="11445" end="11453" title="Dominant allele" label="dominant"/>
<link wikidata="Q131896729" start="11544" end="11553" title="Recessive allele" label="recessive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11661" end="11681" title="Dominance relationship#Incomplete dominance" label="incomplete dominance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11726" end="11737" title="Dominance relationship#Co-dominance" label="codominance"/>
<link wikidata="Q182353" start="11800" end="11818" title="Sexual reproduction" label="reproduce sexually"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11994" end="12017" title="Mendelian inheritance#Law of Segregation" label="Mendel&amp;#x27;s first law"/>
<link wikidata="Q128723" start="12643" end="12660" title="Wild type" label="non-mutant allele"/>
<link wikidata="Q912644" start="13090" end="13104" title="Punnett square" label="Punnett square"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242583" start="13167" end="13181" title="pedigree chart" label="pedigree chart"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13631" end="13655" title="Mendelian inheritance#Law of Independent Assortment (The &amp;quot;Second Law&amp;quot;)" label="Mendel&amp;#x27;s second law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697240" start="13902" end="13916" title="Omphalodes verna" label="Blue-eyed Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q751748" start="14312" end="14321" title="epistasis" label="epistasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q853516" start="14497" end="14507" title="Human skin color" label="skin color"/>
<link wikidata="Q55608248" start="14516" end="14530" title="complex traits" label="complex traits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503548" start="14754" end="14766" title="heritability" label="heritability"/>
<link wikidata="Q31207" start="15130" end="15141" title="health care" label="health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="15254" end="15263" title="Molecule" label="molecular"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="15283" end="15304" title="deoxyribonucleic acid" label="deoxyribonucleic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q192454" start="15331" end="15342" title="deoxyribose" label="deoxyribose"/>
<link wikidata="Q15277" start="15437" end="15444" title="adenine" label="adenine"/>
<link wikidata="Q178425" start="15450" end="15458" title="cytosine" label="cytosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q169313" start="15464" end="15471" title="guanine" label="guanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q171973" start="15481" end="15488" title="thymine" label="thymine"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="15748" end="15758" title="nucleotide" label="nucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q36293" start="16010" end="16017" title="Histone" label="Histone"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="16115" end="16120" title="Virus" label="Virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11053" start="16158" end="16161" title="RNA" label="RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q60535862" start="16283" end="16295" title="double helix" label="double helix"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="16845" end="16853" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q459485" start="16900" end="16909" title="Nucleoid" label="genophore"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="16917" end="16927" title="Eukaryote" label="eukaryotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q145911" start="17131" end="17140" title="base pair" label="base pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q180951" start="17297" end="17306" title="chromatin" label="chromatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q271794" start="17356" end="17366" title="nucleosome" label="nucleosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q36293" start="17407" end="17414" title="histone" label="histone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="17546" end="17552" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="18007" end="18014" title="haploid" label="haploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="18097" end="18104" title="diploid" label="diploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q106227" start="18227" end="18231" title="Locus (genetics)" label="loci"/>
<link wikidata="Q849622" start="18243" end="18265" title="homologous chromosomes" label="homologous chromosomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q667636" start="18343" end="18357" title="sex chromosome" label="sex chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q202771" start="18438" end="18450" title="Y chromosome" label="Y chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q61333" start="18638" end="18650" title="X chromosome" label="X chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q188909" start="19021" end="19034" title="Cell division" label="daughter cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q14763008" start="19075" end="19082" title="mitosis" label="mitosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q120877" start="19365" end="19371" title="Cloning" label="clones"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="19374" end="19384" title="Eukaryote" label="Eukaryotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="19630" end="19637" title="haploid" label="haploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="19658" end="19665" title="diploid" label="diploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q211050" start="20036" end="20042" title="gamete" label="gamete"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145" start="20052" end="20057" title="sperm" label="sperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321695" start="20061" end="20065" title="Ovum" label="eggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="20144" end="20152" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q273193" start="20235" end="20246" title="Bacterial conjugation" label="conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q461499" start="20443" end="20457" title="Transformation (genetics)" label="transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83185" start="20485" end="20509" title="horizontal gene transfer" label="horizontal gene transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q461499" start="20610" end="20642" title="Transformation (genetics)" label="Natural bacterial transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="20658" end="20666" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q182353" start="20702" end="20716" title="sexual reproduction" label="sexual process"/>
<link wikidata="Q424689" start="20856" end="20868" title="gene product" label="gene product"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="20919" end="20925" title="DNA repair" label="repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205747" start="20929" end="20940" title="DNA damage (naturally occurring)" label="DNA damages"/>
<link wikidata="Q185055" start="21088" end="21108" title="independent assortment" label="assort independently"/>
<link wikidata="Q244145" start="21410" end="21431" title="chromosomal crossover" label="chromosomal crossover"/>
<link wikidata="Q16424695" start="21616" end="21623" title="meiosis" label="meiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102467" start="21680" end="21701" title="Origin and function of meiosis" label="Meiotic recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="21729" end="21738" title="eukaryote" label="eukaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q199654" start="21899" end="21917" title="Barbara McClintock" label="Barbara McClintock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22669" end="22680" title="Genetic linkage#Linkage map" label="linkage map"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972" start="22808" end="22815" title="Gene expression" label="express"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="23027" end="23037" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q899763" start="23097" end="23116" title="Protein primary structure" label="amino acid sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="23249" end="23262" title="Transcription (genetics)" label="transcription"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="23270" end="23283" title="messenger RNA" label="messenger RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q185917" start="23377" end="23388" title="translation (biology)" label="translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="23448" end="23453" title="codon" label="codon"/>
<link wikidata="Q28354" start="23535" end="23577" title="stop codon" label="instruction to end the amino acid sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="23613" end="23625" title="genetic code" label="genetic code"/>
<link wikidata="Q123280" start="23844" end="23857" title="Francis Crick" label="Francis Crick"/>
<link wikidata="Q47072" start="23869" end="23903" title="central dogma of molecular biology" label="central dogma of molecular biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q847556" start="23943" end="23950" title="protein folding" label="results"/>
<link wikidata="Q26868" start="24166" end="24174" title="collagen" label="collagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="24254" end="24260" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="24278" end="24295" title="chemical reaction" label="chemical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q43041" start="24422" end="24432" title="hemoglobin" label="hemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q501128" start="24570" end="24598" title="Single-nucleotide polymorphism" label="single nucleotide difference"/>
<link wikidata="Q185034" start="24964" end="24982" title="sickle-cell anemia" label="sickle-cell anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="24994" end="25009" title="Genetic disorder" label="genetic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780824" start="25064" end="25077" title="coding region" label="coding region"/>
<link wikidata="Q37187" start="25311" end="25325" title="red blood cell" label="red blood cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q988343" start="25407" end="25419" title="blood vessel" label="blood vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q427087" start="25639" end="25653" title="non-coding RNA" label="non-coding RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q215980" start="25758" end="25771" title="ribosomal RNA" label="ribosomal RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="25776" end="25788" title="transfer RNA" label="transfer RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q310899" start="25897" end="25905" title="microRNA" label="microRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773859" start="26129" end="26147" title="nature and nurture" label="nature and nurture"/>
<link wikidata="Q42604" start="26336" end="26347" title="Siamese (cat)" label="Siamese cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q273186" start="26686" end="26694" title="Denaturation (biochemistry)" label="denature"/>
<link wikidata="Q194041" start="27164" end="27179" title="phenylketonuria" label="phenylketonuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q170545" start="27284" end="27297" title="phenylalanine" label="phenylalanine"/>
<link wikidata="Q244775" start="27707" end="27745" title="twin study" label="studying identical and fraternal twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q25671" start="27768" end="27782" title="multiple birth" label="multiple birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530871" start="28240" end="28258" title="Genain quadruplets" label="Genain quadruplets"/>
<link wikidata="Q25671" start="28269" end="28290" title="Multiple birth" label="identical quadruplets"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="28310" end="28323" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q407384" start="28671" end="28691" title="Transcription factor" label="Transcription factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="28822" end="28838" title="Escherichia coli" label="Escherichia coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q181003" start="28945" end="28955" title="tryptophan" label="tryptophan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848807" start="29178" end="29198" title="Trp repressor" label="tryptophan repressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q62527" start="29405" end="29422" title="negative feedback" label="negative feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q36458" start="29531" end="29553" title="multicellular organism" label="multicellular organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q210973" start="29832" end="29853" title="Cell signaling" label="intercellular signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q193603" start="29991" end="30002" title="Ontogeny" label="development"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="30128" end="30137" title="eukaryote" label="eukaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q180951" start="30175" end="30184" title="chromatin" label="chromatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26939" start="30361" end="30371" title="epigenetic" label="epigenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189082" start="30550" end="30555" title="cell culture" label="grown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787627" start="30729" end="30741" title="paramutation" label="paramutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q206286" start="31277" end="31291" title="DNA polymerase" label="DNA polymerase"/>
<link wikidata="Q221696" start="31356" end="31365" title="mutagenic" label="mutagenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="31485" end="31497" title="UV radiation" label="UV radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q210538" start="31618" end="31628" title="DNA repair" label="DNA repair"/>
<link wikidata="Q424361" start="31802" end="31825" title="reactive oxygen species" label="reactive oxygen species"/>
<link wikidata="Q912751" start="31838" end="31866" title="cellular respiration" label="cellular aerobic respiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q244145" start="31924" end="31945" title="chromosomal crossover" label="chromosomal crossover"/>
<link wikidata="Q746284" start="32298" end="32310" title="Gene duplication" label="duplications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070877" start="32312" end="32322" title="Chromosomal inversion" label="inversions"/>
<link wikidata="Q656732" start="32324" end="32333" title="Gene deletion" label="deletions"/>
<link wikidata="Q916504" start="32438" end="32463" title="chromosomal translocation" label="chromosomal translocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q331710" start="32704" end="32711" title="fitness (biology)" label="fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q130888" start="32837" end="32860" title="Drosophila melanogaster" label="Drosophila melanogaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q31151" start="33043" end="33062" title="Population genetics" label="Population genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q387981" start="33191" end="33213" title="Allele frequency" label="frequency of an allele"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="33255" end="33272" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="33392" end="33400" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q486420" start="33402" end="33415" title="genetic drift" label="genetic drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872472" start="33417" end="33436" title="genetic hitchhiking" label="genetic hitchhiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q995745" start="33438" end="33458" title="artificial selection" label="artificial selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q143089" start="33463" end="33472" title="Gene flow" label="migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q483921" start="33595" end="33605" title="adaptation" label="adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q39350" start="33774" end="33784" title="speciation" label="speciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q414601" start="33909" end="33917" title="Sequence homology" label="homology"/>
<link wikidata="Q827541" start="34030" end="34057" title="Molecular clock" label="when they may have diverged"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="34291" end="34308" title="evolutionary tree" label="evolutionary tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q333018" start="34337" end="34351" title="common descent" label="common descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q83185" start="34484" end="34508" title="horizontal gene transfer" label="horizontal gene transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q213907" start="34892" end="34906" title="model organism" label="model organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q411391" start="35024" end="35039" title="gene regulation" label="gene regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q815547" start="35072" end="35083" title="morphogenesis" label="development"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="35088" end="35094" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q159236" start="35176" end="35196" title="genetic engineering" label="genetic manipulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="35310" end="35326" title="Escherichia coli" label="Escherichia coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q158695" start="35350" end="35370" title="Arabidopsis thaliana" label="Arabidopsis thaliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q719725" start="35404" end="35428" title="Saccharomyces cerevisiae" label="Saccharomyces cerevisiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q91703" start="35456" end="35478" title="Caenorhabditis elegans" label="Caenorhabditis elegans"/>
<link wikidata="Q130888" start="35514" end="35537" title="Drosophila melanogaster" label="Drosophila melanogaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q169444" start="35567" end="35578" title="Danio rerio" label="Danio rerio"/>
<link wikidata="Q83310" start="35621" end="35633" title="Mus musculus" label="Mus musculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071953" start="35661" end="35677" title="Medical genetics" label="Medical genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242583" start="35880" end="35894" title="pedigree chart" label="pedigree chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816584" start="36015" end="36038" title="Mendelian randomization" label="Mendelian randomization"/>
<link wikidata="Q853421" start="36141" end="36158" title="Quantitative trait locus" label="multigenic traits"/>
<link wikidata="Q224180" start="36285" end="36295" title="Homology (biology)" label="homologous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152227" start="36438" end="36454" title="pharmacogenetics" label="pharmacogenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="36568" end="36574" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14599311" start="37055" end="37065" title="Apoptosis" label="cell death"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="37174" end="37191" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q15917291" start="37314" end="37319" title="Tumour heterogeneity" label="tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q408378" start="37432" end="37445" title="growth factor" label="growth factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151077" start="37451" end="37503" title="Contact inhibition" label="stops growing once in contact with surrounding cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q41301" start="37629" end="37639" title="epithelium" label="epithelium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110267" start="38023" end="38036" title="primary tumor" label="primary tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q181876" start="38184" end="38194" title="metastasis" label="metastasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215243" start="38483" end="38499" title="somatic mutation" label="somatic mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q283350" start="38557" end="38568" title="p53 protein" label="p53 protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q422445" start="38572" end="38588" title="tumor suppressor" label="tumor suppressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q424396" start="38651" end="38663" title="Ras proteins" label="Ras proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q207609" start="38677" end="38685" title="oncogene" label="oncogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q219715" start="38757" end="38776" title="Restriction enzymes" label="Restriction enzymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q48255" start="38926" end="38945" title="gel electrophoresis" label="gel electrophoresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q408483" start="39012" end="39028" title="DNA ligase" label="ligation enzymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q285697" start="39174" end="39189" title="recombinant DNA" label="recombinant DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q182726" start="39221" end="39250" title="genetically modified organism" label="genetically modified organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q172778" start="39304" end="39311" title="plasmid" label="plasmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q408351" start="39393" end="39410" title="molecular cloning" label="molecular cloning"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39544" end="39568" title="Cloning#Unicellular organisms" label="clones of bacteria cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q176996" start="39734" end="39759" title="polymerase chain reaction" label="polymerase chain reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q181940" start="40229" end="40257" title="Sanger sequencing" label="chain-termination sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q151564" start="40294" end="40310" title="Frederick Sanger" label="Frederick Sanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273828" start="40542" end="40563" title="Genome project" label="sequenced the genomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q740578" start="40605" end="40620" title="genome assembly" label="genome assembly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40822" end="40848" title="DNA sequencing#New sequencing methods" label="high-throughput sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784807" start="41023" end="41049" title="Next-generation sequencing" label="Next-generation sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q222046" start="41326" end="41334" title="genomics" label="genomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q128570" start="41490" end="41504" title="bioinformatics" label="bioinformatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q104858571" start="41567" end="41582" title="biological data" label="biological data"/>
<link wikidata="Q3702971" start="41695" end="41730" title="personally identifiable information" label="personally identifiable information"/>
<link wikidata="Q412563" start="41881" end="41887" title="CRISPR" label="CRISPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q204785" start="41892" end="41903" title="zinc finger" label="zinc finger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41997" end="42005" title="CRISPR#Society and culture" label="reported"/>
<link wikidata="Q964754" start="42017" end="42031" title="basic research" label="basic research"/>
<link wikidata="Q33196" start="42062" end="42075" title="human embryos" label="human embryos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839988" start="42109" end="42130" title="Bacterial genome size" label="Bacterial genome size"/>
<link wikidata="Q24965835" start="42133" end="42177" title="Cryoconservation of animal genetic resources" label="Cryoconservation of animal genetic resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="42180" end="42188" title="Eugenics" label="Eugenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q131683" start="42191" end="42201" title="Embryology" label="Embryology"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="42204" end="42220" title="Genetic disorder" label="Genetic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q585259" start="42223" end="42240" title="Genetic diversity" label="Genetic diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q159236" start="42243" end="42262" title="Genetic engineering" label="Genetic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q110927977" start="42265" end="42284" title="Genetic enhancement" label="Genetic enhancement"/>
<link wikidata="Q115829307" start="42287" end="42313" title="Glossary of genetics (M−Z)" label="Glossary of genetics (M−Z)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4432948" start="42316" end="42342" title="Index of genetics articles" label="Index of genetics articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071953" start="42345" end="42361" title="Medical genetics" label="Medical genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826844" start="42364" end="42394" title="Molecular tools for gene study" label="Molecular tools for gene study"/>
<link wikidata="Q55625002" start="42397" end="42413" title="Neuroepigenetics" label="Neuroepigenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112645" start="42416" end="42435" title="Outline of genetics" label="Outline of genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888649" start="42438" end="42473" title="Timeline of the history of genetics" label="Timeline of the history of genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630097" start="42476" end="42499" title="Plant genetic resources" label="Plant genetic resources"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12272" wikidata="Q2076348" url="?curid=12272" title="George Pappas">
<text>George Sotiros Pappas (born 1942) is a professor of philosophy at Ohio State University. Pappas specializes in epistemology, the history of early modern philosophy, philosophy of religion and metaphysics. He is of Greek and English origin.

He is the author of the &quot;Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy&quot; entry on &quot;Internalist versus Externalist&quot; conceptions of epistemic justification.

He was co-editor (with Marshall Swain) of &quot;Essays on Knowledge and Justification&quot; (1978), an anthology of essays relating to the Gettier problem used as a core text in undergraduate epistemology courses.

Pappas is an editorial consultant of Berkeley Studies.

== Studies in Berkeley&#x27;s philosophy ==
Pappas is known to be a leading Berkeley scholar; his essay &quot;Berkeley and Scepticism&quot; was in 1993 awarded the International Berkeley Prize. Pappas is a regular participant of International Berkeley Conferences. At one such conference, celebrating the 300th anniversary of George Berkeley&#x27;s birth, Pappas propounded a new approach to the relationship between Berkeley&#x27;s anti-abstractionism and &quot;esse est percipi&quot; principle. On Pappas&#x27; reading, Berkeley&#x27;s two theses — that there are no abstract ideas and that sensible objects must be perceived in order to exist — entail one another.

Pappas&#x27; interpretation of Berkeley&#x27;s esse&quot; is &quot;percipi thesis has sparked much discussion. In 1989, the Garland Publishing Company brought out a 15-volume collection of major works on Berkeley; Pappas&#x27; paper &quot;Abstract ideas and the &#x27;esse is percipi&#x27; thesis&quot; was included in the third volume, as it was considered to be a significant contribution to Berkeley scholarship.

Pappas developed his treatment of Berkeley&#x27;s &quot;esse est percipi&quot; principle to repudiate the &quot;inherence interpretation of Berkeley&quot;, upon which Edwin E. Allaire, among others, elaborated.

That account is put forward to answer an extremely perplexing question in the history of philosophy: Why did Berkeley embrace idealism, i. e., why did he hold that esse est percipi, that to be is to be perceived? 

After emerging in the early 1960s, the &quot;inherence account&quot; attracted numerous proponents and became an influential element of contemporary Berkeley scholarship. In his paper &quot;Ideas, minds, and Berkeley&quot; Pappas revealed some discrepancies between fountain-head evidences and Allaire&#x27;s approach to a reconstruction of Berkeley&#x27;s idealism. Pappas&#x27; critical examination of the &quot;inherence account&quot; is greatly appreciated by Berkeley scholars. Pappas&#x27; penetrating remarks compelled Edwin B. Allaire to revise and improve his conception. Even those who share Allaire&#x27;s account of Berkeley&#x27;s idealism acknowledge Pappas&#x27; article to be &quot;an excellent review and critique of the IA [inherence account].&quot;

In 2000, Pappas published his monograph &quot;Berkeley&#x27;s thought&quot; in which some parts were based on earlier papers of his. While writings by A. A. Luce or Geoffrey Warnock are long outdated, &quot;Berkeley&#x27;s thought&quot; is often included in lists of recommended literature on Berkeley&#x27;s philosophy.

== Publications ==

==See also==
* American philosophy
* List of American philosophers

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2076348" start="0" end="21" title="George Pappas" label="George Sotiros Pappas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="52" end="62" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="66" end="87" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="111" end="123" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966481" start="140" end="163" title="early modern philosophy" label="early modern philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q209295" start="165" end="187" title="philosophy of religion" label="philosophy of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="192" end="203" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q824553" start="271" end="306" title="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185050" start="328" end="358" title="Internalism and externalism" label="Internalist versus Externalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q145874" start="380" end="403" title="Theory of justification" label="epistemic justification"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="429" end="443" title="Marshall Swain" label="Marshall Swain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059362" start="545" end="560" title="Gettier problem" label="Gettier problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="598" end="610" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939165" start="658" end="674" title="Berkeley Studies" label="Berkeley Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647485" start="3110" end="3120" title="A. A. Luce" label="A. A. Luce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534962" start="3124" end="3140" title="Geoffrey Warnock" label="Geoffrey Warnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364399" start="3316" end="3335" title="American philosophy" label="American philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253148" start="3338" end="3367" title="List of American philosophers" label="List of American philosophers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12274" wikidata="Q9327" url="?curid=12274" title="Guy de Maupassant">
<text>Henri René Albert Guy de Maupassant (, ; ; 5 August 1850 – 6 July 1893) was a 19th-century French author, celebrated as a master of the short story, as well as a representative of the naturalist school, depicting human lives, destinies and social forces in disillusioned and often pessimistic terms.

Maupassant was a protégé of Gustave Flaubert and his stories are characterized by economy of style and efficient, seemingly effortless &quot;dénouements&quot;. Many are set during the Franco-Prussian War of the 1870s, describing the futility of war and the innocent civilians who, caught up in events beyond their control, are permanently changed by their experiences. He wrote 300 short stories, six novels, three travel books, and one volume of verse. His first published story, &quot;Boule de Suif&quot; (&quot;The Dumpling&quot;, 1880), is often considered his most famous work.

==Biography==

Henri-René-Albert-Guy de Maupassant was born on 5 August 1850 at the late 16th-century Château de Miromesnil (near Dieppe in the Seine-Inférieure (now Seine-Maritime) Department, France), the elder son of Gustave de Maupassant (1821–99) and Laure Le Poittevin, whose family hailed from the prosperous bourgeoisie. His mother urged her husband when they married in 1846 to obtain the right to use the particule or form &quot;de Maupassant&quot; instead of &quot;Maupassant&quot; as his family name, in order to indicate noble birth. Gustave&#x27;s great-great-grandfather, Jean-Baptiste de Maupassant (1699–1774), &quot;conseiller-secrétaire&quot; to King Louis XV, had been ennobled by Emperor Francis I in 1752, and although his family were considered petite noblesse they had not yet received official recognition by the Kingdom of France. He then obtained from the Tribunal Civil of Rouen by royal decree dated 9 July 1846 the right to style himself &quot;de Maupassant&quot; instead of &quot;Maupassant&quot;, being formally assumed as the family name before the birth of his children.

When Maupassant was 11 and his brother Hervé was five, his mother, an independent-minded woman, risked social disgrace to obtain a legal separation from her husband, who was violent towards her.

After the separation, Laure Le Poittevin kept custody of her two sons. In the absence of the Maupassant&#x27;s father, his mother became the most influential figure in the young boy&#x27;s life. She was an exceptionally well-read woman and was very fond of classical literature, particularly Shakespeare. Until the age of thirteen, Guy lived happily with his mother, at Étretat in Normandy. At the Villa des Verguies, between the sea and the luxuriant countryside, he grew very fond of fishing and of outdoor activities. When Guy reached the age of thirteen, his mother placed her two sons as day boarders in a private school, the Institution Leroy-Petit, in Rouen—the &quot;Institution Robineau&quot; of Maupassant&#x27;s story &quot;La Question du Latin&quot;—for classical studies. From his early education, he retained a marked hostility to religion, and to judge from verses composed around this time, he deplored the ecclesiastical atmosphere, its ritual and discipline. Finding the place unbearable, he finally got himself expelled in his penultimate year.

In 1867, while he was in junior high school, Maupassant met Gustave Flaubert at Croisset on the insistence of his mother. Next year, in autumn, he was sent to the &quot;Lycée Pierre-Corneille&quot; in Rouen where he proved a good scholar, indulging in poetry and taking a prominent part in theatricals. In October 1868, at the age of 18, he saved the famous poet Algernon Swinburne from drowning off the coast of Étretat.

The Franco-Prussian War broke out soon after his graduation from college in 1870 and Maupassant volunteered to serve in the French Army without attending military academy as aspirant. In 1871, he left Normandy and moved to Paris, where he spent ten years as a clerk in the Navy Department. During this time his only recreation and relaxation was boating on the Seine on Sundays and holidays.

Gustave Flaubert took him under his protection and acted as a kind of literary guardian to him, guiding his debut in journalism and literature. At Flaubert&#x27;s home he met Émile Zola (1840–1902) and the Russian novelist Ivan Turgenev (1818–1883), as well as many of the proponents of the realist and naturalist schools. He wrote and himself played (1875) in a comedy - &quot;À la feuille de rose, maison turque&quot; - with Flaubert&#x27;s blessing.

In 1878, he was transferred to the Ministry of Public Instruction and became a contributing editor to several leading newspapers such as &quot;Le Figaro&quot;, &quot;Gil Blas&quot;, &quot;Le Gaulois&quot; and &quot;l&#x27;Écho de Paris&quot;. He devoted his spare time to writing novels and short stories.
In 1880 he published what is considered his first masterpiece, &quot;Boule de Suif&quot;, which met with instant and tremendous success. Flaubert characterized it as &quot;a masterpiece that will endure&quot;. This, Maupassant&#x27;s first piece of short fiction set during the Franco-Prussian War of 1870–71, was followed by short stories such as &quot;Deux Amis&quot;, &quot;Mother Savage&quot;, and &quot;Mademoiselle Fifi&quot;.

&quot;The fear that haunted his restless brain day and night was already visible in his eyes, I for one considered him then as a doomed man. I knew that the subtle poison of his own Boule de Suif had already begun its work of destruction in this magnificent brain. Did he know it himself? I often thought he did. The MS. of his Sur L&#x27;Eau was lying on the table between us, he had just read me a few chapters, the best thing he had ever written I thought. He was still producing with feverish haste one masterpiece after another, slashing his excited brain with champagne, ether and drugs of all sorts. Women after women in endless succession hastened the destruction, women recruited from all quarters... actresses, ballet-dancers, midinettes, grisettes, common prostitutes-- &#x27;le taureau triste&#x27; his friends used to call him.
The decade from 1880 to 1891 was the most fertile period of Maupassant&#x27;s life. Made famous by his first short story, he worked methodically and produced two or sometimes four volumes annually. His talent and practical business sense made him wealthy.

In 1881 he published his first volume of short stories under the title of &quot;La Maison Tellier&quot;; it reached its twelfth edition within two years. In 1883 he finished his first novel, &quot;Une Vie&quot; (translated into English as &quot;A Woman&#x27;s Life&quot;), 25,000 copies of which were sold in less than a year.

&quot;Bed 29&quot;, published in 1884, is a social and political satirical collection of some of his best short stories, including the titular story which is shocking and scandalous, even by modern standards.

His editor, Victor Havard, commissioned him to write more stories, and Maupassant continued to produce them efficiently and frequently. His second novel, &quot;Bel-Ami&quot;, which came out in 1885, had thirty-seven printings in four months. Then, he wrote what many consider his greatest novel, &quot;Pierre et Jean&quot; (1888).

With a natural aversion to society, he loved retirement, solitude, and meditation. He traveled extensively in Algeria, Italy, England, Brittany, Sicily, and the Auvergne, and from each voyage brought back a new volume. He cruised on his private yacht &quot;Bel-Ami&quot;, named after his novel. This life did not prevent him from making friends among the literary celebrities of his day: Alexandre Dumas, &quot;fils&quot; had a paternal affection for him; at Aix-les-Bains he met Hippolyte Taine (1828–1893) and became devoted to the philosopher-historian.

Flaubert continued to act as his literary godfather. His friendship with the Goncourts was of short duration; his frank and practical nature reacted against the ambiance of gossip, scandal, duplicity, and invidious criticism that the two brothers had created around them in the guise of an 18th-century style salon.

Maupassant was one of a fair number of 19th-century Parisians (including Charles Gounod, Alexandre Dumas, &quot;fils&quot;, and Charles Garnier) who did not care for the Eiffel Tower (erected 1887/89). He often ate lunch in the restaurant at its base, not out of preference for the food but because only there could he avoid seeing its otherwise unavoidable profile. He and forty-six other Parisian literary and artistic notables attached their names to an elaborately irate letter of protest against the tower&#x27;s construction, written to the Minister of Public Works, and published on 14 February 1887.

Declining appointment to the Légion d&#x27;honneur and election to the Académie française, Maupassant also wrote under several pseudonyms, including &quot;Joseph Prunier&quot;, &quot;Guy de Valmont&quot;, and &quot;Maufrigneuse&quot; (which he used from 1881 to 1885).

In his later years he developed a constant desire for solitude, an obsession for self-preservation, and a fear of death and paranoia of persecution caused by the syphilis he had contracted in his youth. It has been suggested that his brother, Hervé, also suffered from syphilis and that the disease may have been congenital. On 2 January 1892, Maupassant tried to take his own life by cutting his throat; he was committed to the private asylum of Esprit Blanche at Passy, in Paris, where he died on 6 July 1893 from syphilis.
Maupassant penned his own epitaph: &quot;I have coveted everything and taken pleasure in nothing.&quot; He is buried in Section 26 of the Montparnasse Cemetery, Paris.

==Significance==
Maupassant is considered a father of the modern short story. Literary theorist Kornelije Kvas wrote that along &quot;with Chekhov, Maupassant is the greatest master of the short story in world literature. He is not a naturalist like Zola; to him, physiological processes do not constitute the basis of human actions, although the influence of the environment is manifested in his prose. In many respects, Maupassant&#x27;s naturalism is Schopenhauerian anthropological pessimism, as he is often harsh and merciless when it comes to depicting human nature. He owes most to Flaubert, from whom he learned to use a concise and measured style and to establish a distance towards the object of narration.&quot; He delighted in clever plotting, and served as a model for Somerset Maugham and O. Henry in this respect. One of his famous short stories, &quot;The Necklace&quot;, was imitated with a twist by Maugham (&quot;Mr Know-All&quot;, &quot;A String of Beads&quot;). Henry James&#x27;s &quot;Paste&quot; adapts another story of his with a similar title, &quot;The Jewels&quot;.

Taking his cue from Balzac, Maupassant wrote comfortably in both the high-realist and fantastic modes; stories and novels such as &quot;L&#x27;Héritage&quot; and &quot;Bel-Ami&quot; aim to recreate Third Republic France in a realistic way, whereas many of the short stories (notably &quot;Le Horla&quot; and &quot;Qui sait?&quot;) describe apparently supernatural phenomena.

The supernatural in Maupassant, however, is often implicitly a symptom of the protagonists&#x27; troubled minds; Maupassant was fascinated by the burgeoning discipline of psychiatry, and attended the public lectures of Jean-Martin Charcot between 1885 and 1886.

==Legacy==

Leo Tolstoy used Maupassant as the subject for one of his essays on art: &quot;&quot;. His stories are second only to Shakespeare in their inspiration of movie adaptations with films ranging from &quot;Stagecoach&quot;, &quot;Oyuki the Virgin&quot; and &quot;Masculine Feminine&quot;.

Friedrich Nietzsche&#x27;s autobiography mentions him in the following text:

&quot;I cannot at all conceive in which century of history one could haul together such inquisitive and at the same time delicate psychologists as one can in contemporary Paris: I can name as a sample – for their number is by no means small, ... or to pick out one of the stronger race, a genuine Latin to whom I am particularly attached, Guy de Maupassant.&quot;

William Saroyan wrote a short story about Maupassant in his 1971 book, &quot;Letters from 74 rue Taitbout or Don&#x27;t Go But If You Must Say Hello To Everybody&quot;.

Isaac Babel wrote a short story about him, &quot;Guy de Maupassant.&quot; It appears in &quot;The Collected Stories of Isaac Babel&quot; and in the story anthology &quot;You’ve Got To Read This: Contemporary American Writers Introduce Stories that Held Them in Awe.&quot;

Gene Roddenberry, in an early draft for &quot;The Questor Tapes&quot;, wrote a scene in which the android Questor employs Maupassant&#x27;s theory that, &quot;the human female will open her mind to a man to whom she has opened other channels of communications.&quot; In the script Questor copulates with a woman to obtain information that she is reluctant to impart. Due to complaints from NBC executives, this scene was never filmed.

Michel Drach directed and co-wrote a 1982 French biographical film: &quot;Guy de Maupassant&quot;. Claude Brasseur stars as the titular character.

Several of Maupassant&#x27;s short stories, including &quot;La Peur&quot; and &quot;The Necklace&quot;, were adapted as episodes of the 1986 Indian anthology television series &quot;Katha Sagar&quot;.

==Bibliography==
==References==
== Further reading==
* Abamine, E. P. &quot;German-French Sexual Encounters of the Franco-Prussian War Period in the Fiction of Guy de Maupassant.&quot; &quot;CLA Journal&quot; 32.3 (1989): 323–334. online
* Bonnefis, Philippe. &quot;Comme Maupassant&quot; (collection &quot;Objet&quot;, Presses Universitaires de Lille, 1983).
* Dugan, John Raymond. &quot;Illusion and reality: a study of descriptive techniques in the works of Guy de Maupassant&quot; (Walter de Gruyter, 2014).
* Fagley, Robert. &quot;Bachelors, Bastards, and Nomadic Masculinity: Illegitimacy in Guy de Maupassant and André Gide&quot; (Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2014) online (PDF).
* Harris, Trevor A. &quot;Le V. Maupassant in the Hall of Mirrors: Ironies of Repetition in the Work of Guy de Maupassant&quot; (Springer, 1990).
* Lanoux, Armand. &quot;Maupassant le Bel-Ami&quot; (Fayard, 1967).
* Morand, Paul. &quot;Vie de Guy de Maupassant&quot; (Flammarion, 1942).
* Reda, Jacques. &quot;Album Maupassant&quot; (Bibliothèque de la Pléiade, Gallimard, 1987).
* Rougle, Charles. &quot;Art and the Artist in Babel&#x27;s&quot; Guy de Maupassant&quot;.&quot; &quot;The Russian Review&quot; 48.2 (1989): 171–180. online
* Sattar, Atia. &quot;Certain Madness: Guy de Maupassant and Hypnotism&quot;. &quot;Configurations&quot; 19.2 (2011): 213–241. regarding both versions of his horror story &quot;The Horla&quot; (1886/87). online
* Schmidt, Albert-Marie. Maupassant par lui-même (Le Seuil, 1962).
* Stivale, Charles J. &quot;The art of rupture: narrative desire and duplicity in the tales of Guy de Maupassant&quot; (University of Michigan Press, 1994).
* Vial, André. &quot;Maupassant et l&#x27;art du roman&quot; (Nizet, 1954).

==External links==

* 
* 
* Guy de Maupassant timeline and stories at AsNotedIn.com
* Complete list of stories by Guy de Maupassant at Prospero&#x27;s Isle.com
* Université McGill: le roman selon les romanciers Recensement et analyse des écrits non romanesques de Guy de Maupassant
* Works by Guy de Maupassant at Online Literature (HTML)
* Works by Guy de Maupassant in Ebooks 
* Works by Guy de Maupassant (text, concordances and frequency list)
*Maupassantiana, a French scholar&#x27;s website on Maupassant and his works
* Oeuvres de Maupassant, à Athena 
* Guy de Maupassant&#x27;s &quot;The Jewels&quot; audiobook with video at YouTube
* Guy de Maupassant&#x27;s &quot;The Jewels&quot; audiobook at Libsyn
* &quot;The Pearl Necklace&quot; 一串珍珠 (Li Zeyuan, dir., 1926) - Chinese silent film adaptation of &quot;The Necklace,&quot; with English subtitles</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9327" start="0" end="35" title="Guy de Maupassant" label="Henri René Albert Guy de Maupassant"/>
<link wikidata="Q482980" start="98" end="104" title="author" label="author"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="136" end="147" title="short story" label="short story"/>
<link wikidata="Q55996" start="184" end="194" title="Naturalism (literature)" label="naturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387659" start="195" end="201" title="School of thought" label="school"/>
<link wikidata="Q967647" start="318" end="325" title="protégé" label="protégé"/>
<link wikidata="Q43444" start="329" end="345" title="Gustave Flaubert" label="Gustave Flaubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q847829" start="442" end="453" title="dénouements" label="dénouements"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="485" end="504" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q63971" start="788" end="801" title="Boule de Suif" label="Boule de Suif"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="987" end="1008" title="List of châteaux in Normandy#Seine-Maritime" label="Château de Miromesnil"/>
<link wikidata="Q183557" start="1015" end="1021" title="Dieppe, Seine-Maritime" label="Dieppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758" start="1029" end="1045" title="Seine-Inférieure" label="Seine-Inférieure"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758" start="1051" end="1065" title="Seine-Maritime" label="Seine-Maritime"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465" start="1067" end="1077" title="Departments of France" label="Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="1201" end="1212" title="bourgeoisie" label="bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q355505" start="1300" end="1309" title="Nobiliary particle" label="particule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738" start="1550" end="1563" title="King Louis XV" label="King Louis XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q151075" start="1586" end="1603" title="Francis I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Emperor Francis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7179397" start="1653" end="1668" title="Petty nobility" label="petite noblesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="1723" end="1740" title="Kingdom of France" label="Kingdom of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q671680" start="1768" end="1782" title="Judiciary of France" label="Tribunal Civil"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="1786" end="1791" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571972" start="1795" end="1807" title="royal decree" label="royal decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q780687" start="1830" end="1835" title="right" label="right"/>
<link wikidata="Q5767753" start="1839" end="1844" title="Style (form of address)" label="style"/>
<link wikidata="Q101352" start="1944" end="1955" title="family name" label="family name"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="2479" end="2490" title="William Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q290936" start="2557" end="2564" title="Étretat" label="Étretat"/>
<link wikidata="Q149566" start="3277" end="3295" title="Middle school" label="junior high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q43444" start="3312" end="3328" title="Gustave Flaubert" label="Gustave Flaubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q744205" start="3332" end="3340" title="Canteleu" label="Croisset"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268638" start="3421" end="3443" title="Lycée Pierre-Corneille" label="Lycée Pierre-Corneille"/>
<link wikidata="Q315511" start="3615" end="3633" title="Algernon Charles Swinburne" label="Algernon Swinburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="3679" end="3698" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="3799" end="3810" title="French Army" label="French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q737432" start="3849" end="3857" title="aspirant" label="aspirant"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147194" start="3948" end="3963" title="Ministry of the Navy (France)" label="Navy Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="4036" end="4041" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q504" start="4243" end="4253" title="Émile Zola" label="Émile Zola"/>
<link wikidata="Q42831" start="4291" end="4304" title="Ivan Turgenev" label="Ivan Turgenev"/>
<link wikidata="Q667661" start="4359" end="4366" title="Literary realism" label="realist"/>
<link wikidata="Q55996" start="4371" end="4381" title="naturalism (literature)" label="naturalist"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4446" end="4481" title=":fr:À la feuille de rose, maison turque" label="À la feuille de rose, maison turque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572330" start="4557" end="4587" title="Ministry of National Education (France)" label="Ministry of Public Instruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q216047" start="4665" end="4674" title="Le Figaro" label="Le Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143992" start="4682" end="4702" title="Gil Blas (periodical)" label="&amp;quot;Gil Blas&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082831" start="4710" end="4720" title="Le Gaulois" label="Le Gaulois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205139" start="4737" end="4757" title="l&amp;#x27;Écho de Paris" label="l&amp;#x27;Écho de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q63971" start="4897" end="4910" title="Boule de Suif" label="Boule de Suif"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024911" start="5182" end="5191" title="Deux Amis" label="Deux Amis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917423" start="5205" end="5218" title="Mother Savage" label="Mother Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275886" start="5230" end="5259" title="Mademoiselle Fifi (short story)" label="&amp;quot;Mademoiselle Fifi&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q63971" start="5444" end="5457" title="Boule de Suif" label="Boule de Suif"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001820" start="6326" end="6340" title="business acumen" label="business sense"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6694" end="6700" title=":fr:Le Lit 29" label="Bed 29"/>
<link wikidata="Q339761" start="7058" end="7065" title="Bel-Ami" label="Bel-Ami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163683" start="7200" end="7214" title="Pierre et Jean" label="Pierre et Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="7340" end="7347" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="7349" end="7354" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="7365" end="7373" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="7375" end="7381" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136880" start="7391" end="7399" title="Auvergne (province)" label="Auvergne"/>
<link wikidata="Q169150" start="7618" end="7651" title="Alexandre Dumas, fils" label="Alexandre Dumas, &amp;quot;fils&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q181955" start="7689" end="7702" title="Aix-les-Bains" label="Aix-les-Bains"/>
<link wikidata="Q297726" start="7710" end="7725" title="Hippolyte Taine" label="Hippolyte Taine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249210" start="7865" end="7874" title="Edmond Louis Antoine Huot de Goncourt" label="Goncourts"/>
<link wikidata="Q576342" start="8097" end="8102" title="Salon (gathering)" label="salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q180278" start="8178" end="8192" title="Charles Gounod" label="Charles Gounod"/>
<link wikidata="Q169150" start="8194" end="8227" title="Alexandre Dumas, fils" label="Alexandre Dumas, &amp;quot;fils&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q313556" start="8233" end="8248" title="Charles Garnier (architect)" label="Charles Garnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q243" start="8275" end="8287" title="Eiffel Tower" label="Eiffel Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="8743" end="8764" title="Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur" label="Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q161806" start="8785" end="8803" title="Académie française" label="Académie française"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="8841" end="8850" title="pseudonym" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="9146" end="9154" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241308" start="9449" end="9454" title="Passy" label="Passy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772" start="9536" end="9543" title="epitaph" label="epitaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q272208" start="9648" end="9669" title="Montparnasse Cemetery" label="Montparnasse Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5685" start="9818" end="9825" title="Anton Chekhov" label="Chekhov"/>
<link wikidata="Q134942" start="10461" end="10477" title="Somerset Maugham" label="Somerset Maugham"/>
<link wikidata="Q172788" start="10482" end="10490" title="O. Henry" label="O. Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650570" start="10547" end="10559" title="The Necklace" label="The Necklace"/>
<link wikidata="Q170509" start="10662" end="10673" title="Henry James" label="Henry James"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142957" start="10687" end="10692" title="Paste (story)" label="Paste"/>
<link wikidata="Q9711" start="10794" end="10800" title="Honoré de Balzac" label="Balzac"/>
<link wikidata="Q667661" start="10848" end="10855" title="Literary realism" label="realist"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="10860" end="10869" title="fantasy" label="fantastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="10972" end="10986" title="French Third Republic" label="Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701030" start="11063" end="11071" title="Le Horla" label="Le Horla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="11321" end="11331" title="psychiatry" label="psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q20710" start="11369" end="11388" title="Jean-Martin Charcot" label="Jean-Martin Charcot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="11425" end="11436" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Leo Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q50714" start="11627" end="11637" title="Stagecoach (1939 film)" label="Stagecoach"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11651" end="11667" title=":fr:Oyuki la vierge" label="Oyuki the Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q195593" start="11684" end="11702" title="Masculine Feminine" label="Masculine Feminine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="11711" end="11730" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q861527" start="11738" end="11751" title="Ecce Homo (Nietzsche)" label="autobiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q207356" start="12154" end="12169" title="William Saroyan" label="William Saroyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q28873506" start="12231" end="12259" title="Letters from 74 rue Taitbout" label="Letters from 74 rue Taitbout"/>
<link wikidata="Q49080" start="12324" end="12335" title="Isaac Babel" label="Isaac Babel"/>
<link wikidata="Q191716" start="12597" end="12613" title="Gene Roddenberry" label="Gene Roddenberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759069" start="12643" end="12660" title="The Questor Tapes" label="The Questor Tapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q181787" start="12695" end="12702" title="Android (robot)" label="android"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="12987" end="12990" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q530783" start="13033" end="13045" title="Michel Drach" label="Michel Drach"/>
<link wikidata="Q645928" start="13082" end="13099" title="biographical film" label="biographical film"/>
<link wikidata="Q106544" start="13132" end="13147" title="Claude Brasseur" label="Claude Brasseur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3211578" start="13235" end="13254" title="La Peur (short story)" label="&amp;quot;La Peur&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650570" start="13265" end="13277" title="The Necklace" label="The Necklace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022825" start="13322" end="13328" title="Indian television drama" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376078" start="13363" end="13374" title="Katha Sagar" label="Katha Sagar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12276" wikidata="Q189892" url="?curid=12276" title="Gheorghe Hagi">
<text>Gheorghe Hagi (; born 5 February 1965) is a Romanian professional football manager and former player, who is currently the owner and manager of Liga I club Farul Constanța. Deployed as an attacking midfielder, Hagi was considered one of the best players in the world during the 1980s and &#x27;90s, and is regarded by many as the greatest Romanian footballer of all time. Fans of Turkish club Galatasaray, with whom Hagi ended his career, called him (&quot;[The] Commander&quot;), while he was known as (&quot;The King&quot;) to Romanian supporters. Nicknamed &quot;The Maradona of the Carpathians&quot;, he was a creative advanced playmaker renowned for his dribbling, technique, vision, passing and shooting.

After starting his playing career in Romania, with FC Constanța, and subsequently featuring for Sportul Studențesc and Steaua București, he later also had spells in Spain with Real Madrid and Barcelona, Italy with Brescia, and Turkey, with Galatasaray. Hagi is one of the few footballers to have played for both Spanish rival clubs Real Madrid and Barcelona. Throughout his club career, he won numerous titles while playing in four different countries: he won three Romanian League titles, two Cupa României titles, and the European Super Cup with Steaua București – also reaching the final of the 1988–89 European Cup –, a Supercopa de España title with Real Madrid, the Anglo-Italian Cup with Brescia, another Supercopa de España title with Barcelona, and four Süper Lig titles, two Turkish Cups, two Turkish Super Cups, the UEFA Cup, and the UEFA Super Cup with Galatasaray.

At international level, Hagi played for the Romania national team in three FIFA World Cups, in 1990, 1994 (where he was named in the World Cup All-Star Team after helping his nation to the quarter-finals of the tournament) and 1998; as well as in three UEFA European Championships, in 1984, 1996 and 2000. He won a total of 124 caps for Romania between 1983 and 2000, making him the second-most capped Romanian player of all time, behind only Dorinel Munteanu; he is also the joint all-time leading goalscorer of the Romania national side (alongside Adrian Mutu) with 35 goals.

Hagi is considered a hero both in his homeland and in Turkey. He was named Romanian Footballer of the Year a record seven times, and is regarded as one of the best football players of his generation. Hagi was nominated six times for the Ballon d&#x27;Or, his best performance being a 4th place in 1994. In November 2003, to celebrate UEFA&#x27;s Jubilee, Hagi was selected as the Golden Player of Romania by the Romanian Football Federation as their most outstanding player of the past 50 years. In 2004, he was named by Pelé as one of the 125 Greatest Living Footballers at a FIFA Awards Ceremony. In 1999, he was ranked at number 25 in &quot;World Soccer Magazine&quot;″s list of the 100 greatest players of the 20th century.

Following his retirement in 2001, Hagi pursued a managerial career, coaching the Romania national team, as well as clubs in both Romania and Turkey, namely Bursaspor, Galatasaray, Politehnica Timișoara, Steaua București, Viitorul Constanța and Farul Constanța. In 2009, he founded Romanian club Viitorul Constanța, which he has coached between 2014 and 2020. Hagi also established his namesake football academy, one of the largest in Southeastern Europe.

==Early life==
Hagi was born to Iancu and Chirata Hagi on 5 February 1965. Hagi&#x27;s grandfather was one of 40,000 ethnic Aromanians who fled Greece to Romania. His mother was born in Mesolakkia Serron and her original surname was Mega. He set up home in the village of Săcele, near Constanța on the Black Sea coast. Hagi has fond memories of his grandfather who, like many Aromanians, was a shepherd. According to him, &quot;I was proud when he, who was called Gheorghe like me, asked me to go and spend the whole day with him minding the sheep,&quot; he said. &quot;I loved to eat cheese and tomatoes with him, and that is still my favorite food today.&quot; He also said &quot;ambition is the main quality of the Aromanians&quot;.

==Club career==
===FC Constanța===

Hagi started his career playing for the youth teams of FC Constanța under the guidance of coach Iosif Bükössy in 1978. He was selected by the Romanian Football Federation to join the squad of Luceafărul București in 1980, where he remained for two years. In 1982, he returned to FC Constanța, making his Divizia A debut on 11 September at age 17, being a starter under coach Emanoil Hașoti in a 3–0 away loss in front of SC Bacău. On 6 November he scored his first goal when he defeated goalkeeper Vasile Iordache with a 35-meters shot, closing the score in the 2–2 with Steaua București. In the &quot;Sportul&quot; newspaper, the chronicle of the match was signed by Stelian Trandafirescu, under the title &quot;A junior (Hagi) stops the Bucharest team!&quot; in which the journalist described the goal as:&quot;Hagi scored sensationally (what an effective shot!), from distance&quot;. Until the end of the season he would score six more goals, including two doubles against CS Târgoviște and Politehnica Timișoara, however the team finished on the last place, relegating to Divizia B.

===Sportul Studențesc===
He was originally directed to Universitatea Craiova, but chose Sportul Studențesc of Bucharest instead where he would form a successful offensive couple with Marcel Coraș. The highlights of his years with Sportul were becoming the top-scorer of the league for two consecutive seasons, in the first one with 20 goals scored, then in the second with 31 which include six in a 7–5 win over Olt Scornicești in the last round, at both times having a hard competition with Steaua&#x27;s Victor Pițurcă, also those 31 goals scored in the 1985–86 season, helped the team finish runner-up in the league. During his period spent with &quot;The Students&quot;, Hagi started playing in European competitions, making 10 appearances with four goals scored in the UEFA Cup over the course of four seasons, most notably playing in a historical 1–0 victory against Inter Milan from the first round of the 1984–85 season, then in the same round from the following edition he scored a hat-trick in a 4–4 with Neuchâtel Xamax, however on both occasions the team did not manage to qualify further, losing on the aggregate result.

===Steaua București===
In late 1986, Hagi transferred to Steaua București as the team prepared for the European Super Cup final against Dynamo Kyiv. The original contract was for a one-game loan only, the final. However, after winning the final, in which Hagi scored the only goal of the match from a free kick, Steaua did not want to release him back to Sportul Studențesc and retained him. By the end of his first season he helped &quot;The Military Men&quot; win the The Double, coach Anghel Iordănescu giving him 14 league appearances in which he scored 10 goals, also appearing the full 90 minutes in the 1–0 victory from the Cupa României final over rivals Dinamo București. 

In the next season, Hagi was used by Iordănescu in 31 league games in which he scored 25 goals which helped the club win another title, and made another continental performance as they reached the semi-finals of the European Cup where they lost in favor of Benfica, Hagi contributing with two doubles scored against MTK Budapest and Omonia Nicosia in the eight matches played, being the competition&#x27;s top-scorer alongside six other players.&lt;ref name=&quot;Champions Cup/Champions League Topscorers&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; 

In the 1988–89 season, the team won another Double, Hagi managing to score 31 goals in the 30 league matches he was played by Iordănescu, also scoring the only goal in another 1–0 victory in the Cupa României final over Dinamo and made another European performance by playing nine games in the European Cup campaign, including all the minutes from the 4–0 loss in front of AC Milan from the final, scoring three goals against Spartak Prague, two with Spartak Moscow and one in the semi-finals against Galatasaray. In addition to his goal scored in the Cupa României final, he also scored four league goals in the derby with Dinamo which helped his side earn one victory and two draws. On 6 May 1990, Hagi made his last appearance for Steaua, a Divizia A match in which he scored once in the 4–0 over Corvinul Hunedoara, having a total of 222 matches with 141 goals scored in the competition, also in December 1988 he netted five goals against the same opponent in a 11–0 win which is the biggest goal difference victory for Steaua in its first division history.

His strong performances had him linked with Arrigo Sacchi&#x27;s AC Milan, fellow Serie A club Juventus, and German side Bayern Munich, but Nicolae Ceaușescu&#x27;s communist government rejected any offer.

===Real Madrid===
After impressing at the 1990 World Cup, Hagi was signed on 27 June that same year by Spanish club Real Madrid who paid a sum estimated by the press in between 3.5 – 4.3 million$ to Steaua in order to acquire him. He made his La Liga debut on 1 September, being used all the minutes by coach John Toshack in a 1–0 home win against Castellón which was the club&#x27;s 1000th victory in the competition. On 21 September he netted his first goal by closing the score in a 3–1 away victory with Real Zaragoza. During his first season, Toshack got replaced with Alfredo Di Stéfano and under his command he managed to win the Supercopa de España, playing in the final minutes of the 1–0 win from the first leg with rivals Barcelona, being unable to play in the second because of an injury.

In the following season under the guidance of Radomir Antić, Hagi scored more often, most notably managing a hat-trick in a 5–0 home win over Athletic Bilbao and a double in another victory with Osasuna, one of the goals being scored from a folha seca from the center of the field. In 2013, the &quot;Marca&quot; newspaper organized a poll for the most beautiful long-distance goal in Real Madrid&#x27;s history and Hagi&#x27;s folha seca with Osasuna came on the first place. He also helped &quot;Los Blancos&quot; reach the 1991–92 UEFA Cup semi-finals, making 10 appearances in the campaign, scoring against FC Utrecht, Neuchâtel Xamax and in the lost semi-final with Torino. With one round before the end of the season, Real was on first place, needing a victory against Tenerife to win the title but after leading 2–0 at half-time with one goal netted by Hagi, they ended up losing 3–2 and Barcelona won the championship. The team would eventually also lose the Copa del Rey final with 2–0 in a derby with Atlético Madrid in which coach Leo Beenhakker used Hagi as a starter.

===Brescia===
In 1992 he was transferred for 8 billion lira (2.4 million$) by Mircea Lucescu&#x27;s &quot;Brescia Romena&quot; as during around that period his fellow Romanians Florin Răducioiu, Ioan Sabău, Dorin Mateuț and Dănuț Lupu also played for the club. He made his Serie A debut on 5 September 1992 in a 0–0 with Napoli in which he received a red card, one month later scoring his first goal in a 4–1 home win against Foggia. At the end of his first season, the team was relegated to Serie B. After the relegation, Hagi was wanted by Napoli who needed a replacement for Diego Maradona but Brescia denied his transfer.

In his second season with Brescia, he helped them win the Anglo-Italian Cup, after defeating Notts County 1–0 in the final at Wembley and also they finished third in Serie B and earned promotion back to Serie A. 

===Barcelona===
After performing memorably during the 1994 World Cup, Hagi returned to Spain, and was signed by Barcelona from Brescia for 3.2 million$ where he was coached by his childhood idol Johan Cruyff. His first performance was winning the Supercopa de España in front of Real Zaragoza where in the first leg, Hristo Stoichkov opened the score after a free kick executed by him and defended by the goalkeeper, then in the second leg Hagi played in the first 10 minutes but was replaced after suffering an injury. He made his league debut for &quot;Barça&quot; on 16 September 1994 in a goalless draw in the derby with Espanyol, then in the following round he netted a double in a 4–0 with Compostela. In December 1994 he scored from the center of the field a goal in an away victory with Celta Vigo which in 2007 was nominated by the &quot;Mundo Deportivo&quot; newspaper for the most beautiful goal in Barcelona&#x27;s history.

In the following season he was teammate with compatriot Gheorghe Popescu. Hagi scored three goals in five matches from the 1995–96 UEFA Cup campaign against Hapoel Be&#x27;er Sheva, Sevilla and in the lost semi-final with Bayern Munich. Barcelona reached the 1996 Copa del Rey final where they lost 1–0 after extra time with Atlético Madrid in which Cruyff used Hagi all the minutes.

===Galatasaray===

In 1996, 31-year-old Hagi signed for Turkish club Galatasaray who paid 3.5 million$ to Barcelona for his transfer, during this spell reuniting with Popescu, Romanians Adrian Ilie and Iulian Filipescu also being at the club. He had been the subject of a competing transfer offer from São Paulo. He made his Turkish league debut on 9 August under coach Fatih Terim, scoring a brace in a 4–0 with Vanspor. Although in the twilight of his career, at Galatasaray, he was extremely successful and became highly popular among the Turkish supporters, due to his excellent performances for the club as in his first four seasons, domestically he won four league titles, two Turkish Cups and two Turkish Super Cups. His highest success was when at age 35 he captained the club to win the 1999–2000 UEFA Cup, scoring two goals in the campaign against Borussia Dortmund and in the semi-finals with Leeds United, defeating Arsenal on penalties in the final, following a 0–0 draw and during the match, Hagi was sent off in extra time for punching Arsenal captain Tony Adams. Consequently, Galatasaray became the first Turkish club to win a UEFA club competition title. 

In June 2000, Romanian Mircea Lucescu replaced Fatih Terim at the &quot;Cim Bom Bom&quot; side, together winning the 2000 UEFA Super Cup, after a 2–1 victory against Real Madrid. They also reached the quarter-finals of the Champions League during the 2000–01 season where in the first group stage, Hagi netted a goal with a spectacular long-distance shot in a win over AS Monaco, then in the second group stage he scored his last goal in an European competition following a deep launch from Capone, then succeeding a lob over goalkeeper Dida in a 2–0 with AC Milan. In the quarter-finals they earned a 3–2 victory in the first leg against Real Madrid but lost with 3–0 in the second one. In 2014, UEFA placed his goal with Monaco in a top 60 all-time best goals scored in European club and national teams competitions, while in 2020, the journalists of &quot;France Football&quot; ranked it on the 19th place of most beautiful goals scored in the Champions League.

On 26 May 2001, Hagi played his last game as a professional footballer, managing to score a brace and provide an assist in Galatasaray&#x27;s 4–0 win over Trabzonspor in the Turkish league. Hagi drew praise from the Galatasaray supporters for his performances during his time with the club, who adopted the chant &quot;I Love You Hagi&quot; in his honour.

==International career==
===Early years and Euro 1984===
Gheorghe Hagi made his debut for Romania on 10 August 1983 at the age of 18, under coach Mircea Lucescu who used him in all the minutes of a friendly which ended 0–0 against Norway, played on the Ullevaal stadium from Oslo. After the game, the &quot;Sportul&quot; newspaper wrote:&quot;Hagi is the main win of the match with Norway&quot;.

He was selected by Lucescu to be part of the squad that went at Euro 1984 as the team needed a replacement for injured Ilie Balaci. In the first game which was a 1–1 with Spain he was sent in the 76th minute in order to replace Romulus Gabor, then in the 2–1 loss with West Germany he was a starter but replaced at half-time with Ion Zare and in the 1–0 loss with Portugal he did not play as Romania did not manage to get past the group stage. The 19-year-old Hagi&#x27;s performance at the final tournament was criticized by Lucescu:&quot;Țicleanu and Hagi failed to make a real contribution after entering. Hagi, especially, isolated himself on the wing, he was not able to make up for the great absence of Balaci&quot;.

He scored his first international goal against Northern Ireland in a 3–2 loss at the 1986 World Cup qualifiers. In the second leg with the Northern Irish he was made captain for the first time, the game ending with another loss which mathematically erased their chances to qualify at the final tournament.

===1990 World Cup===
He played six matches and scored once from a penalty in a 3–0 victory against Greece at the 1990 World Cup qualifiers. At the final tournament, coach Emeric Jenei could not use him in the first match which was a victory against Soviet Union as he was suspended for receiving a red card in the last qualifier match with Denmark. He played in the following two which were a loss with Cameroon and a draw with Argentina as Romania got past the group stage, reaching the round of 16 where the journey ended in front of Republic of Ireland at the penalty shoot-out following a 0–0 draw, with Hagi netting Romania&#x27;s first spot kick.

===1994 World Cup===
Hagi scored five goals at the 1994 World Cup qualifiers, including a brace in a 5–1 home win over Wales. In the last group game of the qualifiers, which was also against Wales, he opened the score, the first half ending 1–0. Then Hagi, feeling that his teammates were too relaxed, asked coach Anghel Iordănescu to leave the dressing room and let him talk to them, afterwards he started punching the closet and held a motivational speech. The match finished with a 2–1 victory which earned Romania the mathematical qualification to the final tournament, also this game is considered by Romanian journalists as the birth of Romania&#x27;s &quot;Golden Generation&quot;.

Hagi captained &quot;The Tricolours&quot; at the final tournament, in the first match with Colombia he provided the assists for both of Florin Răducioiu&#x27;s goals in the 3–1 win and he defeated goalkeeper Óscar Córdoba with a spectacular 35-meters lob from the side of the field in which the ball was not spinning in the air. After getting past the group stage, they eliminated Argentina with a 3–2 score in which Hagi gave an assist to one of Ilie Dumitrescu&#x27;s goals, then scored himself after Dumitrescu returned the favor. In the quarter-finals, Romania faced Sweden, the score was 2–2 after extra time, reaching the penalty shoot-out where Hagi netted his shot but two of his teammates missed, while all the Swedes scored, thus the campaign ended.

Hagi was named in the Team of the Tournament for his performances. His goal with Columbia was listed in 2010 as one of the most beautiful ten goals scored in the World Cup by the &quot;Agence France-Presse&quot; news agency, then in 2014 &quot;Diario AS&quot; placed it on the third place and &quot;L&#x27;Équipe&quot; on the 16th.

===Euro 1996===
At the successful Euro 1996 qualifiers he played six games and scored two goals in two victories against Slovakia. At the final tournament, Iordănescu used him all the minutes in all the games from the group stage but Romania lost all of them in front of France, Bulgaria and Spain.

===1998 World Cup===
At the 1998 World Cup qualifiers he made six appearances, scoring three goals with Iceland, one with Liechtenstein and a spectacular one in Dublin with a shot from a 35-meters free kick in a 1–1 draw with the Republic of Ireland. Hagi was used as captain by Iordănescu in all four games at the final tournament as in the group stage they earned victories in the first two rounds with Colombia and England, thus mathematically being qualified before the last group match with Tunisia where in order to celebrate, they all dyed their hair blonde and presented themselves like that at the game. They were defeated with 1–0 by Croatia in the round of 16 after a goal scored from a penalty by Davor Šuker.

===Euro 2000===
After World Cup 1998, Hagi retired from the national team. Before a game with rivals Hungary at the Euro 2000 qualifiers, Hagi was invited by Adrian Păunescu at his &quot;Meciul Meciurilor&quot; (The Match of Matches) TV show. During the show, Păunescu and all his guests which were names from Romanian football but also from politics tried over the course of about five hours to convince Hagi to come back to the national team, also over 100 fans spontaneously came in front of the TV station&#x27;s headquarters to cheer him even do it was past midnight. Seeing all of this happening, Hagi recalls saying to himself in those moments:&quot;Who are you, for an entire country to beg for you?!&quot; He played in the 2–0 victory with the Hungarians, having a praised evolution by the press even do coach Victor Pițurcă used him only in the first half as he injured his shoulder. At the end of the game he was carried on the arms of his colleagues to tour the stadium, although his shoulder was immobilized in a splint. In these qualifiers he would go on to score his last two goals for the national team in a win against Slovakia and a draw with Portugal.

At the final tournament, coach Emerich Jenei used him as a starter in the first two group stage matches, receiving a yellow card in each of them which got him suspended for the decisive game with England but his teammates managed to win it without him and qualify to the quarter-finals. There they lost with 2–0 in front of eventual runners-up Italy in which Hagi received a red card in the 59th minute.

===Retirement===
Hagi retired from professional football in 2001, at the age of 36 and that year he was given a send-off in a testimonial game on 24 April, called &quot;Gala Hagi,&quot; featuring a team of Romanian All-Stars against a team of international All-Stars. At the time of his retirement, his 124 caps for his country were a national record, which has since been surpassed by Dorinel Munteanu. He currently still holds the record of most goals scored for Romania, alongside Adrian Mutu, with 35.

For representing his country at six final tournaments, Hagi was decorated by President of Romania Traian Băsescu on 25 March 2008 with the Ordinul &quot;Meritul Sportiv&quot; – (The Medal &quot;The Sportive Merit&quot;) class II.

==Managerial career==
===Romania===
In 2001, Hagi was named the head coach of Romania, replacing Ladislau Bölöni, who left the squad to coach Sporting Lisbon. He led the team in the final matches of the 2002 World Cup qualifiers, the first match being a 2–0 away win against Hungary, followed by a 1–1 with Georgia. Afterwards the team reached a play-off where they faced Slovenia, losing 2–1 in the first leg and in the second the result was a 1–1 where by the end of the game Hagi was using five forwards.

===Bursaspor===
In July 2003, Hagi took over as coach of Turkish Süper Lig side Bursaspor, transferring Romanian players Ionel Ganea, Bogdan Vintilă, Iulian Miu and Cornel Frăsineanu to the club. However his spell was unsuccessful, earning just two victories out of 12 games, leaving in November.

===Galatasaray===
Hagi then became manager of Galatasaray in March 2004, replacing Fatih Terim, having fellow Romanian players Florin Bratu and Ovidiu Petre in the squad, finishing the season on the sixth place. In the following season, the team finished third in the league and won the Turkish Cup after a 5–1 victory in the final with fierce rivals Fenerbahçe, also he promoted young Arda Turan to the first team. Afterwards he was replaced with Eric Gerets.

===Politehnica Timișoara===
Hagi was hired by Politehnica Timișoara in November 2005, managing to win the his first two matches, a 2–0 over Oțelul Galați and a 1–0 with Pandurii Târgu Jiu. During this spell, he gave the first league debut to Gabriel Torje. However, after a string of poor results and disagreements with the management, he left the club in May 2006 after a 2–0 loss with Oțelul. His decision to coach Politehnica Timișoara did not go well with Farul&#x27;s fans, as Constanța&#x27;s main stadium used to bear his name since 2000, asking for the name to be changed.

===Steaua București===
From June to September 2007, Hagi coached Steaua București, managing to get past Zagłębie Lubin and BATE Borisov in the Champions League qualifying rounds, reaching the group stage where they were defeated 2–1 by Slavia Prague in the first match. After the defeat with Slavia he resigned due to a long series of conflicts with club owner Gigi Becali, which also happens to be his godson. The main reason for resigning was the owner&#x27;s policy of imposing players, making the team&#x27;s strategy and threatening him that he would be fired if he won&#x27;t comply.

===Return to Galatasaray===
After Frank Rijkaard was sacked as coach, Hagi signed a one-and-a-half-year contract with Galatasaray on 21 October 2010. He brought to the team Bogdan Stancu, Emmanuel Culio and Róbinson Zapata from the Romanian league. Under his guidance, the team&#x27;s results did not improve, so by the end of March 2011 his contract was terminated after a series of poor results.

===Viitorul Constanța===
In 2009, Hagi created a football academy in Constanța which he named after himself and also a senior football club named Viitorul Constanța which he registered in the third league, being its president. In a few years the team managed to promote to the first league, then in 2014 he installed himself as head coach. On 5 December 2014, he gave the senior debut to his son, Ianis. He had a good season in the 2015–16 edition, finishing on the fifth place and qualifying to the Europa League, also being named Romania Coach of the Year in 2015. In their first European match, Viitorul were defeated 5–0 by Gent at the Ghelamco Arena, being eliminated from the Europa League third qualifying round after a 0–0 in the second leg.

Viitorul won their first league title in the 2016–17 season after a 1–0 home victory over CFR Cluj in the last round, finishing on equal points with FCSB but on a better head-to-head record and as a result, Hagi won his second Romania Coach of the Year award. Hagi would go on to win two more trophies with Viitorul, first the 2018–19 Cupa României after a 2–1 victory against Astra Giurgiu in the final and shortly afterwards the 2019 Supercupa României when they defeated CFR Cluj with 1–0.

===Farul Constanța===
At a press conference from 21 June 2021, Hagi, together with club president Gheorghe Popescu and Farul Constanța&#x27;s owner Ciprian Marica announced that Viitorul and Farul had merged into one team which would have the name of the latter and Hagi would be head coach.

Led by Hagi, Farul won their first league title in the 2022–23 season, earning the points that mathematical made them champions with one round before the end of the season, after a 3–2 win against FCSB, coming back from 0–2.

==Style of play==
A talented left-footed attacking midfielder, Hagi&#x27;s playing style was frequently compared with Diego Maradona&#x27;s throughout his career, due to his technical ability as well as his temperamental character and leadership; as a youth, he was mainly inspired by compatriots Anghel Iordănescu and Ion Dumitru. A quick, agile, creative, and mobile advanced playmaker, Hagi was also tactically versatile, and capable of playing in several midfield and offensive positions on either wing or through the middle, due to his ability with both feet, despite being naturally left-footed, although he had a preference for using his stronger foot; his preferred position was in a free role as a classic number 10, but he was also used as a second striker on occasion. Hagi was renowned in particular for his first touch and speed on the ball, as well as his timing, interpretation of space, bursts of acceleration and dribbling skills, which enabled him to get past defenders; he was also highly regarded for his vision and precise passing, although he was capable of both scoring and assisting goals, and was also an accurate finisher and set-piece taker, who had a penchant for scoring goals from powerful, bending long range strikes. Despite his small stature and slender build, Hagi possessed significant upper body strength, which, along with his control, aided him in protecting the ball from opponents, and allowed him to create space for himself or his teammates. Despite his skill and his reputation as one of the greatest number 10s of his generation, his career was marked by inconsistency at times, and he was also considered to be a controversial player, due to his rebellious and arrogant attitude, as well as his low work-rate, aggression, unsportsmanlike behaviour, and lack of discipline, which led him to have several disagreements and confrontations with his managers, opponents, and officials.

==Publications==
On 5 February 2025, with the occasion of his 60th birthday, Hagi published his autobiography:
* &quot;(Hagi - My road)&quot;

Several books about Hagi were written by various authors:
* &quot;(Romario&#x27;s Samba and Hagi&#x27;s Perinița)&quot; - written by George Mihalache (1994)
* &quot;(With Hagi&amp;Co from Rome to New York (via Cardiff))&quot; - written by Gheorghe Nicolaescu (1994)
* &quot;(Hagi, the magician)&quot; - written by George Șeitan (1995)
* &quot;(Hagi, the master of miracles)&quot; - written by Gheorghe Nicolaescu (1998)
* - written by Grigore Cartianu (2000 - first edition; 2000 - second edition; 2001 - third edition; 2014 - fourth edition)
* &quot;(Hagi, unique in a century)&quot; - written by Gheorghe Nicolaescu (2000 - first edition; 2001 - second edition)
* &quot;(At the crossroads of Hagi)&quot; - written by Mircea M. Ionescu (2005)
* &quot;(The two Hagi)&quot; - written by Adrian Rachieru (2007)

==Personal life==
Hagi is currently married to Marilena Hagi, with whom he has two children. His son, Ianis Hagi, is also a footballer. His daughter, Kira Hagi, is an actress. He is the brother-in-law of fellow Romanian international Gheorghe Popescu who married Hagi&#x27;s wife&#x27;s sister.

Hagi was chosen to dub in Romanian the character Dagda in the animated movie &quot;Epic&quot;.

==Career statistics==
===Club===
===International===
:&quot;Scores and results list Romania&#x27;s goal tally first, score column indicates score after each Hagi goal&quot;.

===Managerial statistics===


==Honours==

===Player===
Steaua București
*Divizia A: 1986–87, 1987–88, 1988–89
*Cupa României: 1986–87, 1988–89
*European Super Cup: 1986
*European Cup runners-up: 1988–89

Real Madrid
*Copa del Rey runner-up: 1991–92
*Supercopa de España: 1990

Brescia
*Anglo-Italian Cup: 1993–94

Barcelona
*Copa del Rey runner-up: 1995–96
*Supercopa de España: 1994

Galatasaray
*1.Lig: 1996–97, 1997–98, 1998–99, 1999–2000
*Turkish Cup: 1998–99, 1999–2000
*Turkish Super Cup: 1996, 1997
*UEFA Cup: 1999–2000
*UEFA Super Cup: 2000

===Individual===
*Divizia A top scorer: 1984–85, 1985–86
*European Cup top scorer: 1987–88
*&quot;Gazeta Sporturilor&quot; Romanian Footballer of the Year: 1985, 1987, 1993, 1994, 1997, 1999, 2000
*ADN Eastern European Footballer of the Season: 1989
*FIFA World Cup All-Star Team: 1994
*Ballon d&#x27;Or: 4th place 1994
*FIFA XI: 1998
*Turkish Footballer of the Year: 1996, 1999, 2000,
*&quot;World Soccer Magazine&quot;″s 100 Greatest Players of the 20th century: 1999 (#25)
*UEFA Jubilee Awards – Greatest Romanian Footballer of the last 50 Years: 2003
*FIFA 100: 2004
*Golden Foot Legends Award: 2015
===Manager===
Galatasaray
*Turkish Cup: 2004–05

Viitorul Constanța
*Liga I: 2016–17
*Cupa României: 2018–19
*Supercupa României: 2019

Farul Constanta
*Liga I: 2022–23
*Supercupa României runner-up: 2023

===Individual===
*Romania Coach of the Year: 2015, 2017
*Liga I Manager of the Season: 2022–23

==See also==
*List of top international men&#x27;s football goalscorers by country
*The 100 Greatest Players of the 20th Century
*List of footballers with 100 or more caps

==Notes==

==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q189892" start="0" end="13" title="Gheorghe Hagi" label="Gheorghe Hagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="66" end="74" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q628099" start="75" end="82" title="Manager (association football)" label="manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q237753" start="144" end="150" title="Liga I" label="Liga I"/>
<link wikidata="Q368104" start="156" end="171" title="FCV Farul Constanța" label="Farul Constanța"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="188" end="208" title="attacking midfielder" label="attacking midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q495299" start="393" end="404" title="Galatasaray S.K. (football)" label="Galatasaray"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515" start="570" end="578" title="Diego Maradona" label="Maradona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288" start="586" end="597" title="Carpathian Mountains" label="Carpathians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201458" start="632" end="641" title="playmaker" label="playmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q368104" start="763" end="775" title="FC Farul Constanța" label="FC Constanța"/>
<link wikidata="Q842134" start="808" end="826" title="FC Sportul Studențesc București" label="Sportul Studențesc"/>
<link wikidata="Q179658" start="831" end="847" title="FCSB" label="Steaua București"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="888" end="899" title="Real Madrid CF" label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="904" end="913" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6651" start="926" end="933" title="Brescia Calcio" label="Brescia"/>
<link wikidata="Q237753" start="1178" end="1193" title="Liga I" label="Romanian League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138388" start="1206" end="1219" title="Cupa României" label="Cupa României"/>
<link wikidata="Q484028" start="1236" end="1254" title="UEFA Super Cup" label="European Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q39487082" start="1260" end="1276" title="CSA Steaua București (football)" label="Steaua București"/>
<link wikidata="Q696237" start="1310" end="1330" title="1988–89 European Cup" label="1988–89 European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q485997" start="1336" end="1355" title="Supercopa de España" label="Supercopa de España"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342576" start="1384" end="1401" title="Anglo-Italian Cup" label="Anglo-Italian Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q485568" start="1475" end="1484" title="Süper Lig" label="Süper Lig"/>
<link wikidata="Q752145" start="1497" end="1508" title="Turkish Cup" label="Turkish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q718298" start="1515" end="1532" title="Turkish Super Cup" label="Turkish Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="1539" end="1547" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q168397" start="1635" end="1656" title="Romania national football team" label="Romania national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="1666" end="1680" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="1686" end="1690" title="1990 FIFA World Cup" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q101751" start="1692" end="1696" title="1994 FIFA World Cup" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1724" end="1747" title="FIFA World Cup awards#All-Star Team" label="World Cup All-Star Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="1818" end="1822" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q260858" start="1844" end="1870" title="UEFA European Championship" label="UEFA European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q182770" start="1876" end="1880" title="UEFA Euro 1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q180563" start="1882" end="1886" title="UEFA Euro 1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q131239" start="1891" end="1895" title="UEFA Euro 2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q433666" start="2034" end="2050" title="Dorinel Munteanu" label="Dorinel Munteanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q202645" start="2141" end="2152" title="Adrian Mutu" label="Adrian Mutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q573142" start="2245" end="2276" title="Romanian Footballer of the Year" label="Romanian Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q166177" start="2407" end="2423" title="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432645" start="2467" end="2471" title="1994 Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="2504" end="2508" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q877573" start="2550" end="2563" title="UEFA Jubilee Awards" label="Golden Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q631999" start="2582" end="2610" title="Romanian Football Federation" label="Romanian Football Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12897" start="2691" end="2695" title="Pelé" label="Pelé"/>
<link wikidata="Q485048" start="2710" end="2741" title="FIFA 100" label="125 Greatest Living Footballers"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="2747" end="2751" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q729035" start="2814" end="2835" title="World Soccer Magazine" label="World Soccer Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q203573" start="3055" end="3064" title="Bursaspor" label="Bursaspor"/>
<link wikidata="Q723542" start="3079" end="3100" title="FC Politehnica Timișoara" label="Politehnica Timișoara"/>
<link wikidata="Q533094" start="3120" end="3138" title="FC Viitorul Constanța" label="Viitorul Constanța"/>
<link wikidata="Q5556343" start="3284" end="3309" title="Gheorghe Hagi Football Academy" label="namesake football academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="3333" end="3352" title="Southeastern Europe" label="Southeastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11916330" start="3479" end="3489" title="Aromanians in Greece" label="Aromanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409039" start="3541" end="3558" title="Mesolakkia" label="Mesolakkia Serron"/>
<link wikidata="Q368104" start="4183" end="4195" title="SSC Farul Constanța" label="FC Constanța"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615092" start="4224" end="4237" title="Iosif Bükössy" label="Iosif Bükössy"/>
<link wikidata="Q631999" start="4270" end="4298" title="Romanian Football Federation" label="Romanian Football Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q237753" start="4432" end="4441" title="Liga I" label="Divizia A"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369009" start="4503" end="4517" title="Emanoil Hașoti" label="Emanoil Hașoti"/>
<link wikidata="Q639091" start="4549" end="4557" title="FCM Bacău" label="SC Bacău"/>
<link wikidata="Q205746" start="4626" end="4641" title="Vasile Iordache" label="Vasile Iordache"/>
<link wikidata="Q179658" start="4699" end="4715" title="FCSB" label="Steaua București"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231486" start="5036" end="5042" title="1982–83 Divizia A" label="season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386794" start="5104" end="5117" title="FCM Târgoviște" label="CS Târgoviște"/>
<link wikidata="Q723542" start="5122" end="5143" title="FC Politehnica Timișoara" label="Politehnica Timișoara"/>
<link wikidata="Q386384" start="5204" end="5213" title="Liga II" label="Divizia B"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838020" start="5271" end="5292" title="CS Universitatea Craiova" label="Universitatea Craiova"/>
<link wikidata="Q842134" start="5304" end="5322" title="FC Sportul Studențesc București" label="Sportul Studențesc"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="5326" end="5335" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335757" start="5399" end="5411" title="Marcel Coraș" label="Marcel Coraș"/>
<link wikidata="Q659924" start="5628" end="5643" title="FC Olt Scornicești" label="Olt Scornicești"/>
<link wikidata="Q179658" start="5708" end="5714" title="FCSB" label="Steaua"/>
<link wikidata="Q381164" start="5722" end="5736" title="Victor Pițurcă" label="Victor Pițurcă"/>
<link wikidata="Q605645" start="5772" end="5779" title="1985–86 Divizia A" label="1985–86"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="5990" end="5998" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q631" start="6089" end="6100" title="Inter Milan" label="Inter Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q756133" start="6129" end="6136" title="1984–85 UEFA Cup" label="1984–85"/>
<link wikidata="Q754140" start="6177" end="6194" title="1985–86 UEFA Cup" label="following edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q123086" start="6207" end="6216" title="hat-trick" label="hat-trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q335195" start="6231" end="6246" title="Neuchâtel Xamax FCS" label="Neuchâtel Xamax"/>
<link wikidata="Q179658" start="6408" end="6424" title="FCSB" label="Steaua București"/>
<link wikidata="Q484028" start="6454" end="6472" title="UEFA Super Cup" label="European Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q179075" start="6487" end="6498" title="FC Dynamo Kyiv" label="Dynamo Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q550070" start="6556" end="6561" title="1986 European Super Cup" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q876065" start="6821" end="6831" title="Double (association football)" label="The Double"/>
<link wikidata="Q539072" start="6839" end="6856" title="Anghel Iordănescu" label="Anghel Iordănescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053867" start="6982" end="7001" title="1987 Cupa României final" label="Cupa României final"/>
<link wikidata="Q43955" start="7007" end="7013" title="Eternal derby (Romania)" label="rivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q204237" start="7014" end="7030" title="FC Dinamo Bucureşti" label="Dinamo București"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231511" start="7041" end="7052" title="1987–88 Divizia A" label="next season"/>
<link wikidata="Q392526" start="7250" end="7262" title="European Cup 1987–88" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q131499" start="7291" end="7298" title="S.L. Benfica" label="Benfica"/>
<link wikidata="Q208406" start="7350" end="7362" title="MTK Budapest FC" label="MTK Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q240783" start="7367" end="7381" title="AC Omonia" label="Omonia Nicosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231517" start="7571" end="7578" title="1988–89 Divizia A" label="1988–89"/>
<link wikidata="Q85726137" start="7759" end="7778" title="1989 Cupa României final" label="Cupa României final"/>
<link wikidata="Q696237" start="7858" end="7870" title="European Cup 1988–89" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="7937" end="7945" title="AC Milan" label="AC Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080075" start="7955" end="7960" title="1989 European Cup final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q193481" start="7990" end="8004" title="AC Sparta Prague" label="Spartak Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q29112" start="8015" end="8029" title="FC Spartak Moscow" label="Spartak Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q495299" start="8065" end="8076" title="Galatasaray S.K. (football team)" label="Galatasaray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135735" start="8364" end="8382" title="FC Corvinul Hunedoara" label="Corvinul Hunedoara"/>
<link wikidata="Q294259" start="8671" end="8684" title="Arrigo Sacchi" label="Arrigo Sacchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422" start="8722" end="8730" title="Juventus FC" label="Juventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15789" start="8748" end="8761" title="FC Bayern Munich" label="Bayern Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q80504" start="8767" end="8784" title="Nicolae Ceaușescu" label="Nicolae Ceaușescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q842794" start="8792" end="8812" title="Socialist Republic of Romania" label="communist government"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="8876" end="8890" title="1990 FIFA World Cup" label="1990 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="8950" end="8961" title="Real Madrid CF" label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q324867" start="9077" end="9084" title="La Liga" label="La Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q342989" start="9143" end="9155" title="John Toshack" label="John Toshack"/>
<link wikidata="Q743557" start="9182" end="9191" title="CD Castellón" label="Castellón"/>
<link wikidata="Q10308" start="9342" end="9355" title="Real Zaragoza" label="Real Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q164546" start="9408" end="9426" title="Alfredo Di Stéfano" label="Alfredo Di Stéfano"/>
<link wikidata="Q691342" start="9471" end="9490" title="1990 Supercopa de España" label="Supercopa de España"/>
<link wikidata="Q484736" start="9560" end="9566" title="El Clásico" label="rivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="9567" end="9576" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q720554" start="9643" end="9659" title="1991–92 La Liga" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q349585" start="9682" end="9695" title="Radomir Antić" label="Radomir Antić"/>
<link wikidata="Q8687" start="9778" end="9793" title="Athletic Bilbao" label="Athletic Bilbao"/>
<link wikidata="Q10286" start="9831" end="9838" title="CA Osasuna" label="Osasuna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9877" end="9887" title="Knuckleball#Association football" label="folha seca"/>
<link wikidata="Q917580" start="9937" end="9942" title="Marca (newspaper)" label="Marca"/>
<link wikidata="Q751828" start="10162" end="10178" title="1991–92 UEFA Cup" label="1991–92 UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q24680" start="10247" end="10257" title="FC Utrecht" label="FC Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q335195" start="10259" end="10274" title="Neuchâtel Xamax FCS" label="Neuchâtel Xamax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2768" start="10307" end="10313" title="Torino FC" label="Torino"/>
<link wikidata="Q216661" start="10411" end="10419" title="CD Tenerife" label="Tenerife"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587598" start="10603" end="10621" title="1992 Copa del Rey final" label="Copa del Rey final"/>
<link wikidata="Q856247" start="10636" end="10641" title="Madrid derby" label="derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q8701" start="10647" end="10662" title="Atlético Madrid" label="Atlético Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q158647" start="10678" end="10692" title="Leo Beenhakker" label="Leo Beenhakker"/>
<link wikidata="Q342698" start="10796" end="10810" title="Mircea Lucescu" label="Mircea Lucescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6651" start="10824" end="10831" title="Brescia Calcio" label="Brescia"/>
<link wikidata="Q358783" start="10895" end="10911" title="Florin Răducioiu" label="Florin Răducioiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334250" start="10913" end="10923" title="Ioan Sabău" label="Ioan Sabău"/>
<link wikidata="Q440797" start="10925" end="10937" title="Dorin Mateuț" label="Dorin Mateuț"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272524" start="10942" end="10952" title="Dănuț Lupu" label="Dănuț Lupu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15804" start="10991" end="10998" title="Serie A" label="Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641" start="11039" end="11045" title="SSC Napoli" label="Napoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q139399" start="11144" end="11150" title="Calcio Foggia 1920" label="Foggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q843573" start="11170" end="11182" title="1992–93 Serie A" label="first season"/>
<link wikidata="Q194052" start="11210" end="11217" title="Serie B" label="Serie B"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515" start="11296" end="11310" title="Diego Maradona" label="Diego Maradona"/>
<link wikidata="Q15505380" start="11403" end="11420" title="1993–94 Anglo-Italian Cup" label="Anglo-Italian Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19598" start="11438" end="11450" title="Notts County F.C." label="Notts County"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="11471" end="11478" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957558" start="11511" end="11518" title="1993–94 Serie B" label="Serie B"/>
<link wikidata="Q101751" start="11613" end="11627" title="1994 FIFA World Cup" label="1994 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="11671" end="11680" title="FC Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163" start="11754" end="11766" title="Johan Cruyff" label="Johan Cruyff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977732" start="11806" end="11825" title="1994 Supercopa de España" label="Supercopa de España"/>
<link wikidata="Q10308" start="11838" end="11851" title="Real Zaragoza" label="Real Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q187125" start="11876" end="11892" title="Hristo Stoichkov" label="Hristo Stoichkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988996" start="12173" end="12178" title="Derbi Barceloní" label="derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q8780" start="12184" end="12192" title="RCD Espanyol" label="Espanyol"/>
<link wikidata="Q929753" start="12255" end="12265" title="SD Compostela" label="Compostela"/>
<link wikidata="Q8749" start="12354" end="12364" title="RC Celta de Vigo" label="Celta Vigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458864" start="12406" end="12421" title="Mundo Deportivo" label="Mundo Deportivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q313205" start="12552" end="12568" title="Gheorghe Popescu" label="Gheorghe Popescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q509883" start="12619" end="12635" title="1995–96 UEFA Cup" label="1995–96 UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q986529" start="12653" end="12676" title="Hapoel Be&amp;#x27;er Sheva F.C." label="Hapoel Be&amp;#x27;er Sheva"/>
<link wikidata="Q10329" start="12678" end="12685" title="Sevilla FC" label="Sevilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q15789" start="12718" end="12731" title="FC Bayern Munich" label="Bayern Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4591295" start="12755" end="12778" title="1996 Copa del Rey final" label="1996 Copa del Rey final"/>
<link wikidata="Q186982" start="12805" end="12815" title="Overtime (sports)" label="extra time"/>
<link wikidata="Q8701" start="12821" end="12836" title="Atlético Madrid" label="Atlético Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q495299" start="12950" end="12961" title="Galatasaray S.K. (football)" label="Galatasaray"/>
<link wikidata="Q313205" start="13048" end="13055" title="Gheorghe Popescu" label="Popescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q359484" start="13067" end="13078" title="Adrian Ilie" label="Adrian Ilie"/>
<link wikidata="Q29062" start="13083" end="13099" title="Iulian Filipescu" label="Iulian Filipescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q38568" start="13183" end="13192" title="São Paulo FC" label="São Paulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q485568" start="13206" end="13220" title="Süper Lig" label="Turkish league"/>
<link wikidata="Q262203" start="13251" end="13262" title="Fatih Terim" label="Fatih Terim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6080023" start="13294" end="13301" title="Vanspor" label="Vanspor"/>
<link wikidata="Q752145" start="13564" end="13575" title="Turkish Cup" label="Turkish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q718298" start="13585" end="13602" title="Turkish Super Cup" label="Turkish Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q715772" start="13647" end="13656" title="Captain (association football)" label="captained"/>
<link wikidata="Q751822" start="13677" end="13695" title="1999–2000 UEFA Cup" label="1999–2000 UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q41420" start="13739" end="13756" title="Borussia Dortmund" label="Borussia Dortmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="13785" end="13797" title="Leeds United F.C." label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="13809" end="13816" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q840289" start="13837" end="13842" title="2000 UEFA Cup Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q186982" start="13908" end="13918" title="Overtime (sports)" label="extra time"/>
<link wikidata="Q299391" start="13948" end="13958" title="Tony Adams" label="Tony Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q115921120" start="14025" end="14046" title="UEFA club competitions" label="UEFA club competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q342698" start="14079" end="14093" title="Mircea Lucescu" label="Mircea Lucescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q495299" start="14128" end="14139" title="Galatasaray S.K. (football team)" label="Cim Bom Bom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088676" start="14173" end="14192" title="2000 UEFA Super Cup" label="2000 UEFA Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="14222" end="14233" title="Real Madrid C.F." label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="14279" end="14295" title="UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q456097" start="14307" end="14321" title="2000–01 UEFA Champions League" label="2000–01 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821608" start="14335" end="14352" title="2000–01 UEFA Champions League first group stage" label="first group stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q180305" start="14425" end="14434" title="AS Monaco FC" label="AS Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821618" start="14448" end="14466" title="2000–01 UEFA Champions League second group stage" label="second group stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q562705" start="14547" end="14553" title="Capone (footballer)" label="Capone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205353" start="14573" end="14576" title="Chip (association football)" label="lob"/>
<link wikidata="Q188544" start="14593" end="14597" title="Dida (footballer, born 1973)" label="Dida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543" start="14612" end="14620" title="AC Milan" label="AC Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="14753" end="14757" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q308705" start="14915" end="14930" title="France Football" label="France Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q192641" start="15177" end="15188" title="Trabzonspor" label="Trabzonspor"/>
<link wikidata="Q168397" start="15469" end="15476" title="Romania national football team" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q342698" start="15525" end="15539" title="Mircea Lucescu" label="Mircea Lucescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="15610" end="15616" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q680291" start="15632" end="15648" title="Ullevaal Stadion" label="Ullevaal stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="15654" end="15658" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q182770" start="15840" end="15849" title="UEFA Euro 1984" label="Euro 1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373246" start="15895" end="15906" title="Ilie Balaci" label="Ilie Balaci"/>
<link wikidata="Q42267" start="15947" end="15952" title="Spain national football team" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q942402" start="16004" end="16017" title="Romulus Gabor" label="Romulus Gabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="16045" end="16057" title="West Germany national football team" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671911" start="16106" end="16114" title="Ion Adrian Zare" label="Ion Zare"/>
<link wikidata="Q267245" start="16140" end="16148" title="Portugal national football team" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q775147" start="16316" end="16324" title="Aurel Țicleanu" label="Țicleanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q190978" start="16547" end="16563" title="Northern Ireland national football team" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4582997" start="16585" end="16610" title="1986 FIFA World Cup qualification – UEFA Group 3" label="1986 World Cup qualifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q46938" start="16788" end="16804" title="1986 FIFA World Cup" label="final tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q134925" start="16906" end="16912" title="Greece national football team" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866888" start="16920" end="16945" title="1990 FIFA World Cup qualification – UEFA Group 1" label="1990 World Cup qualifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q132529" start="16954" end="16970" title="1990 FIFA World Cup" label="final tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q369328" start="16978" end="16990" title="Emeric Jenei" label="Emeric Jenei"/>
<link wikidata="Q189275" start="17056" end="17068" title="Soviet Union national football team" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q131785" start="17147" end="17154" title="Denmark national football team" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q175309" start="17210" end="17218" title="Cameroon national football team" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q79800" start="17235" end="17244" title="Argentina national football team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q163547" start="17343" end="17362" title="Republic of Ireland national football team" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589410" start="17512" end="17537" title="1994 FIFA World Cup qualification – UEFA Group 4" label="1994 World Cup qualifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="17580" end="17585" title="Wales National Football Team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q539072" start="17775" end="17792" title="Anghel Iordănescu" label="Anghel Iordănescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q101751" start="18017" end="18033" title="1994 FIFA World Cup" label="final tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q212564" start="18242" end="18250" title="Colombia national football team" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q358783" start="18287" end="18303" title="Florin Răducioiu" label="Florin Răducioiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q293267" start="18359" end="18372" title="Óscar Córdoba" label="Óscar Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205353" start="18402" end="18405" title="Chip (association football)" label="lob"/>
<link wikidata="Q79800" start="18532" end="18541" title="Argentina national football team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q459279" start="18598" end="18613" title="Ilie Dumitrescu" label="Ilie Dumitrescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q160826" start="18722" end="18728" title="Sweden men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q186982" start="18754" end="18764" title="Overtime (sports)" label="extra time"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="19074" end="19083" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q40464" start="19097" end="19117" title="Agence France-Presse" label="Agence France-Presse"/>
<link wikidata="Q719880" start="19156" end="19165" title="Diario AS" label="Diario AS"/>
<link wikidata="Q815748" start="19211" end="19224" title="L&amp;#x27;Équipe" label="L&amp;#x27;Équipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q837987" start="19279" end="19299" title="UEFA Euro 1996 qualifying" label="Euro 1996 qualifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q174512" start="19366" end="19374" title="Slovakia national football team" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180563" start="19383" end="19399" title="UEFA Euro 1996" label="final tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="19516" end="19522" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q180845" start="19524" end="19532" title="Bulgaria national football team" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q42267" start="19537" end="19542" title="Spain national football team" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222374" start="19573" end="19598" title="1998 FIFA World Cup qualification – UEFA Group 8" label="1998 World Cup qualifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q189198" start="19649" end="19656" title="Iceland national football team" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q186690" start="19667" end="19680" title="Liechtenstein national football team" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="19706" end="19712" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q101730" start="19860" end="19876" title="1998 FIFA World Cup" label="final tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="19963" end="19970" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q27971" start="20041" end="20048" title="Tunisia national football team" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134479" start="20189" end="20196" title="Croatia national football team" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189217" start="20254" end="20265" title="Davor Šuker" label="Davor Šuker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589387" start="20362" end="20368" title="Hungary–Romania football rivalry" label="rivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q170561" start="20369" end="20376" title="Hungary national football team" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303327" start="20384" end="20404" title="UEFA Euro 2000 qualifying Group 7" label="Euro 2000 qualifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662067" start="20426" end="20441" title="Adrian Păunescu" label="Adrian Păunescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q381164" start="21087" end="21101" title="Victor Pițurcă" label="Victor Pițurcă"/>
<link wikidata="Q63865" start="21447" end="21463" title="UEFA Euro 2000 Final" label="final tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="21636" end="21643" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="21784" end="21789" title="Italy national football team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q433666" start="22231" end="22247" title="Dorinel Munteanu" label="Dorinel Munteanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q202645" start="22329" end="22340" title="Adrian Mutu" label="Adrian Mutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q839139" start="22429" end="22449" title="President of Romania" label="President of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q57279" start="22450" end="22464" title="Traian Băsescu" label="Traian Băsescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q168397" start="22661" end="22668" title="Romania national football team" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q353222" start="22680" end="22695" title="Ladislau Bölöni" label="Ladislau Bölöni"/>
<link wikidata="Q75729" start="22725" end="22740" title="Sporting Clube de Portugal" label="Sporting Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4403321" start="22786" end="22811" title="2002 FIFA World Cup qualification – UEFA Group 8" label="2002 World Cup qualifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q170561" start="22858" end="22865" title="Hungary national football team" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q186268" start="22890" end="22897" title="Georgia national football team" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25453807" start="22929" end="22937" title="2002 FIFA World Cup qualification – UEFA second round" label="play-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q172221" start="22955" end="22963" title="Slovenia national football team" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q280658" start="23081" end="23089" title="forward (association football)" label="forwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q485568" start="23157" end="23166" title="Süper Lig" label="Süper Lig"/>
<link wikidata="Q203573" start="23172" end="23181" title="Bursaspor" label="Bursaspor"/>
<link wikidata="Q527672" start="23213" end="23224" title="Ionel Ganea" label="Ionel Ganea"/>
<link wikidata="Q15085838" start="23226" end="23240" title="Bogdan Vintilă" label="Bogdan Vintilă"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544925" start="23242" end="23252" title="Iulian Miu" label="Iulian Miu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171128" start="23257" end="23274" title="Cornel Frăsineanu" label="Cornel Frăsineanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q495299" start="23436" end="23447" title="Galatasaray S.K. (football)" label="Galatasaray"/>
<link wikidata="Q262203" start="23473" end="23484" title="Fatih Terim" label="Fatih Terim"/>
<link wikidata="Q558873" start="23517" end="23529" title="Florin Bratu" label="Florin Bratu"/>
<link wikidata="Q935914" start="23534" end="23546" title="Ovidiu Petre" label="Ovidiu Petre"/>
<link wikidata="Q371628" start="23575" end="23581" title="2003–04 Süper Lig" label="season"/>
<link wikidata="Q902092" start="23609" end="23625" title="2004–05 Süper Lig" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359712" start="23677" end="23688" title="2004–05 Turkish Cup" label="Turkish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604965" start="23716" end="23721" title="2005 Turkish Cup Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q912417" start="23727" end="23740" title="Fenerbahçe–Galatasaray rivalry" label="fierce rivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601875" start="23741" end="23751" title="Fenerbahçe S.K. (football)" label="Fenerbahçe"/>
<link wikidata="Q487459" start="23776" end="23786" title="Arda Turan" label="Arda Turan"/>
<link wikidata="Q363141" start="23838" end="23849" title="Eric Gerets" label="Eric Gerets"/>
<link wikidata="Q723542" start="23898" end="23919" title="FC Politehnica Timișoara" label="Politehnica Timișoara"/>
<link wikidata="Q220863" start="23992" end="24005" title="ASC Oțelul Galați" label="Oțelul Galați"/>
<link wikidata="Q585958" start="24021" end="24039" title="CS Pandurii Târgu Jiu" label="Pandurii Târgu Jiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q237753" start="24072" end="24084" title="Liga I" label="first league"/>
<link wikidata="Q455905" start="24094" end="24107" title="Gabriel Torje" label="Gabriel Torje"/>
<link wikidata="Q368104" start="24312" end="24317" title="FC Farul Constanța" label="Farul"/>
<link wikidata="Q79808" start="24334" end="24343" title="Constanța" label="Constanța"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437251" start="24351" end="24363" title="Stadionul Farul" label="main stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q179658" start="24499" end="24515" title="FCSB" label="Steaua București"/>
<link wikidata="Q140497" start="24538" end="24552" title="Zagłębie Lubin" label="Zagłębie Lubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q191101" start="24557" end="24569" title="FC BATE Borisov" label="BATE Borisov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4610269" start="24577" end="24611" title="2007–08 UEFA Champions League qualifying rounds" label="Champions League qualifying rounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q843538" start="24626" end="24637" title="2007–08 UEFA Champions League group stage" label="group stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q194393" start="24670" end="24683" title="SK Slavia Prague" label="Slavia Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q737378" start="24795" end="24806" title="Gigi Becali" label="Gigi Becali"/>
<link wikidata="Q169098" start="25059" end="25073" title="Frank Rijkaard" label="Frank Rijkaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q681913" start="25198" end="25211" title="Bogdan Stancu" label="Bogdan Stancu"/>
<link wikidata="Q466161" start="25213" end="25227" title="Emmanuel Culio" label="Emmanuel Culio"/>
<link wikidata="Q594243" start="25232" end="25247" title="Róbinson Zapata" label="Róbinson Zapata"/>
<link wikidata="Q237753" start="25257" end="25272" title="Liga I" label="Romanian league"/>
<link wikidata="Q5556343" start="25524" end="25531" title="Gheorghe Hagi Football Academy" label="himself"/>
<link wikidata="Q533094" start="25570" end="25588" title="FC Viitorul Constanța" label="Viitorul Constanța"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707697" start="25616" end="25628" title="Liga III" label="third league"/>
<link wikidata="Q237753" start="25701" end="25713" title="Liga I" label="first league"/>
<link wikidata="Q17045723" start="25821" end="25826" title="Ianis Hagi" label="Ianis"/>
<link wikidata="Q20020135" start="25856" end="25863" title="2015–16 Liga I" label="2015–16"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="25924" end="25937" title="UEFA Europa League" label="Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362481" start="25956" end="25981" title="Romania Coach of the Year" label="Romania Coach of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q18740965" start="26006" end="26020" title="2016–17 UEFA Europa League" label="European match"/>
<link wikidata="Q18232" start="26052" end="26056" title="KAA Gent" label="Gent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708705" start="26064" end="26078" title="Planet Group Arena" label="Ghelamco Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q24664766" start="26106" end="26142" title="2016–17 UEFA Europa League qualifying phase" label="Europa League third qualifying round"/>
<link wikidata="Q24265138" start="26220" end="26227" title="2016–17 Liga I" label="2016–17"/>
<link wikidata="Q205998" start="26265" end="26273" title="CFR Cluj" label="CFR Cluj"/>
<link wikidata="Q179658" start="26324" end="26328" title="FCSB" label="FCSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q55132104" start="26502" end="26523" title="2018–19 Cupa României" label="2018–19 Cupa României"/>
<link wikidata="Q750322" start="26552" end="26565" title="FC Astra Giurgiu" label="Astra Giurgiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q63653973" start="26573" end="26578" title="2019 Cupa României final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q64114785" start="26606" end="26629" title="2019 Supercupa României" label="2019 Supercupa României"/>
<link wikidata="Q313205" start="26767" end="26783" title="Gheorghe Popescu (footballer, born 1967)" label="Gheorghe Popescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q368104" start="26788" end="26803" title="FC Farul Constanța" label="Farul Constanța"/>
<link wikidata="Q299498" start="26817" end="26831" title="Ciprian Marica" label="Ciprian Marica"/>
<link wikidata="Q111973179" start="27017" end="27024" title="2022–23 Liga I" label="2022–23"/>
<link wikidata="Q179658" start="27159" end="27163" title="FCSB" label="FCSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="27229" end="27249" title="attacking midfielder" label="attacking midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384889" start="27292" end="27300" title="New Maradona" label="compared"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515" start="27306" end="27320" title="Diego Maradona" label="Diego Maradona"/>
<link wikidata="Q539072" start="27485" end="27502" title="Anghel Iordănescu" label="Anghel Iordănescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q724879" start="27507" end="27518" title="Ion Dumitru" label="Ion Dumitru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201458" start="27557" end="27575" title="advanced playmaker" label="advanced playmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="27647" end="27655" title="Midfielder" label="midfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q280658" start="27660" end="27669" title="Forward (association football)" label="offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="27690" end="27694" title="Winger (association football)" label="wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="27710" end="27716" title="Central midfielder" label="middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7581895" start="27895" end="27912" title="Squad number (association football)" label="classic number 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q280658" start="27940" end="27954" title="second striker" label="second striker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215228" start="28118" end="28127" title="Dribbling (association football)" label="dribbling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379266" start="28340" end="28349" title="Direct free kick" label="set-piece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756277" start="28409" end="28416" title="Curl (football)" label="bending"/>
<link wikidata="Q17045723" start="30170" end="30180" title="Ianis Hagi" label="Ianis Hagi"/>
<link wikidata="Q168397" start="30279" end="30301" title="Romania national football team" label="Romanian international"/>
<link wikidata="Q313205" start="30302" end="30318" title="Gheorghe Popescu" label="Gheorghe Popescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700629" start="30447" end="30451" title="Epic (2013 film)" label="Epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q237753" start="30709" end="30718" title="Liga I" label="Divizia A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231508" start="30720" end="30727" title="1986–87 Divizia A" label="1986–87"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231511" start="30729" end="30736" title="1987–88 Divizia A" label="1987–88"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231517" start="30738" end="30745" title="1988–89 Divizia A" label="1988–89"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138388" start="30747" end="30760" title="Cupa României" label="Cupa României"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144288" start="30762" end="30769" title="1986–87 Cupa României" label="1986–87"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144290" start="30771" end="30778" title="1988–89 Cupa României" label="1988–89"/>
<link wikidata="Q484028" start="30780" end="30798" title="UEFA Super Cup" label="European Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q550070" start="30800" end="30804" title="1986 European Super Cup" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="30806" end="30818" title="European Cup" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q696237" start="30831" end="30838" title="1988–89 European Cup" label="1988–89"/>
<link wikidata="Q483794" start="30853" end="30865" title="Copa del Rey" label="Copa del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130808" start="30877" end="30884" title="1991–92 Copa del Rey" label="1991–92"/>
<link wikidata="Q485997" start="30886" end="30905" title="Supercopa de España" label="Supercopa de España"/>
<link wikidata="Q691342" start="30907" end="30911" title="1990 Supercopa de España" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342576" start="30922" end="30939" title="Anglo-Italian Cup" label="Anglo-Italian Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q15505380" start="30941" end="30948" title="1993–94 Anglo-Italian Cup" label="1993–94"/>
<link wikidata="Q483794" start="30961" end="30973" title="Copa del Rey" label="Copa del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130828" start="30985" end="30992" title="1995–96 Copa del Rey" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q485997" start="30994" end="31013" title="Supercopa de España" label="Supercopa de España"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977732" start="31015" end="31019" title="1994 Supercopa de España" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q485568" start="31034" end="31039" title="Süper Lig" label="1.Lig"/>
<link wikidata="Q934321" start="31041" end="31048" title="1996–97 1.Lig" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q913562" start="31050" end="31057" title="1997–98 1.Lig" label="1997–98"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502683" start="31059" end="31066" title="1998–99 1.Lig" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q916923" start="31068" end="31077" title="1999–2000 1.Lig" label="1999–2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q752145" start="31079" end="31090" title="Turkish Cup" label="Turkish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q194875" start="31092" end="31099" title="1998–99 Turkish Cup" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q129690" start="31101" end="31110" title="1999–2000 Turkish Cup" label="1999–2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q718298" start="31112" end="31129" title="Turkish Super Cup" label="Turkish Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="31143" end="31151" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q751822" start="31153" end="31162" title="1999–2000 UEFA Cup" label="1999–2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q484028" start="31164" end="31178" title="UEFA Super Cup" label="UEFA Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088676" start="31180" end="31184" title="2000 UEFA Super Cup" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q237753" start="31204" end="31213" title="Liga I" label="Divizia A"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31226" end="31233" title="1984–85 Divizia A#Top goalscorers" label="1984–85"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31235" end="31242" title="1985–86 Divizia A#Top goalscorers" label="1985–86"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="31244" end="31256" title="UEFA Champions League" label="European Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31269" end="31276" title="1987–88 European Cup#Top scorers" label="1987–88"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055060" start="31284" end="31302" title="Gazeta Sporturilor" label="Gazeta Sporturilor"/>
<link wikidata="Q573142" start="31309" end="31340" title="Romanian Footballer of the Year (Gazeta Sporturilor)" label="Romanian Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q665940" start="31384" end="31429" title="Allgemeiner Deutscher Nachrichtendienst" label="ADN Eastern European Footballer of the Season"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31437" end="31465" title="1994 FIFA World Cup#All-star team" label="FIFA World Cup All-Star Team"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31467" end="31471" title="1994 FIFA World Cup#All-star team" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q166177" start="31473" end="31489" title="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432645" start="31501" end="31505" title="1994 Ballon d&amp;#x27;Or" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="31507" end="31514" title="FIFA" label="FIFA XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859880" start="31522" end="31552" title="Milliyet Sports Awards" label="Turkish Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31573" end="31649" title="World Soccer Magazine#The Greatest Players of the 20th century" label="&amp;quot;World Soccer Magazine&amp;quot;″s 100 Greatest Players of the 20th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q877573" start="31663" end="31682" title="UEFA Jubilee Awards" label="UEFA Jubilee Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q485048" start="31742" end="31750" title="FIFA 100" label="FIFA 100"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31758" end="31783" title="Golden Foot#Award legends" label="Golden Foot Legends Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q752145" start="31817" end="31828" title="Turkish Cup" label="Turkish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604965" start="31830" end="31837" title="2005 Turkish Cup Final" label="2004–05"/>
<link wikidata="Q237753" start="31859" end="31865" title="Liga I" label="Liga I"/>
<link wikidata="Q24265138" start="31867" end="31874" title="2016–17 Liga I" label="2016–17"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138388" start="31876" end="31889" title="Cupa României" label="Cupa României"/>
<link wikidata="Q55132104" start="31891" end="31898" title="2018–19 Cupa României" label="2018–19"/>
<link wikidata="Q634364" start="31900" end="31918" title="Supercupa României" label="Supercupa României"/>
<link wikidata="Q64114785" start="31920" end="31924" title="2019 Supercupa României" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q237753" start="31943" end="31949" title="Liga I" label="Liga I"/>
<link wikidata="Q111973179" start="31951" end="31958" title="2022–23 Liga I" label="2022–23"/>
<link wikidata="Q634364" start="31960" end="31978" title="Supercupa României" label="Supercupa României"/>
<link wikidata="Q125354101" start="31990" end="31994" title="2023 Supercupa României" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362481" start="32014" end="32039" title="Romania Coach of the Year" label="Romania Coach of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q237753" start="32053" end="32059" title="Liga I" label="Liga I"/>
<link wikidata="Q111973179" start="32083" end="32090" title="2022–23 Liga I" label="2022–23"/>
<link wikidata="Q746551" start="32106" end="32174" title="List of top international men&amp;#x27;s football goal scorers by country" label="List of top international men&amp;#x27;s football goalscorers by country"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32176" end="32220" title="World Soccer Magazine#The Greatest Players of the 20th century" label="The 100 Greatest Players of the 20th Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q945035" start="32222" end="32263" title="List of men&amp;#x27;s footballers with 100 or more international caps" label="List of footballers with 100 or more caps"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12277" wikidata="Q213879" url="?curid=12277" title="Gordon Banks">
<text>Gordon Banks (30 December 1937 – 12 February 2019) was an English professional footballer who played as a goalkeeper. Widely regarded as one of the greatest goalkeepers of all time, he made 679 appearances during a 20-year professional career, and won 73 caps for England, highlighted by starting every game of the nation&#x27;s 1966 World Cup victory.

Banks joined Chesterfield in March 1953 and played for their youth team in the 1956 FA Youth Cup final. He made his first-team debut in November 1958 and was sold to Leicester City for £7,000 in July 1959. He played in four cup finals for the club, as they were beaten in the 1961 and 1963 FA Cup finals before winning the League Cup in 1964 and finishing as finalists in 1965. Despite this success and his World Cup win in 1966, Banks was dropped by Leicester and sold on to Stoke City for £50,000 in April 1967. In the 1970 World Cup, he made one of the game&#x27;s greatest saves to prevent a Pelé goal, but was absent due to illness as England were beaten by West Germany in the quarter-finals.

Banks was Stoke City&#x27;s goalkeeper in the 1972 League Cup win, the club&#x27;s only major honour. He was still Stoke&#x27;s and England&#x27;s number one when a car crash in October 1972 cost him both the sight in his right eye and, eventually, his professional career. He played two last seasons in the United States for the Fort Lauderdale Strikers in 1977 and 1978, and despite only having the vision in one eye, was NASL Goalkeeper of the Year in 1977 after posting the best defensive record in the league. He briefly entered management with Telford United but left the game in December 1980.

Banks was named FWA Footballer of the Year in 1972 and was named FIFA Goalkeeper of the Year on six occasions. The IFFHS named Banks the second-best goalkeeper of the 20th century, after Lev Yashin.

== Early life ==
Banks was born in Abbeydale, Sheffield, on 30 December 1937, and brought up in the working-class area of Tinsley. The family later moved to the village of Catcliffe after his father set up a (then-illegal) betting shop. This brought greater prosperity but also misery; one day, Banks&#x27;s disabled brother was mugged for the shop&#x27;s daily takings and died of his injuries some weeks later. Banks left school in December 1952, aged 15, and took up employment as a bagger with a local coal merchant, which helped to build up his upper body strength. He spent a season playing for amateur side Millspaugh after their regular goalkeeper failed to turn up for a match; the club&#x27;s trainer spotted Banks amongst the spectators and invited him to play in goal as he was aware that Banks had previously played for Sheffield Schoolboys. His performances there earned him a game in the Yorkshire League for Rawmarsh Welfare. However, a 12–2 defeat to Stocksbridge Works on his debut was followed by a 3–1 home defeat, and he was dropped by Rawmarsh and returned to Millspaugh. Still aged 15, he then switched jobs to become a hod carrier.

== Club career ==
=== Chesterfield ===
Banks was scouted by Chesterfield whilst playing for Millspaugh and offered a six-game trial in the youth team in March 1953. He impressed enough in these games to be offered a part-time £3-a-week contract by manager Teddy Davison in July 1953. The reserve team were placed in the Central League on account of a powerful club director rather than on merit, and Banks conceded 122 goals in the 1954–55 season as the &quot;Spireites&quot; finished in last place with only three victories. Banks was posted to Germany with the Royal Signals on national service, and won the Rhine Cup with his regimental team. He recovered from a fractured elbow to help the Chesterfield youth team to the 1956 final of the FA Youth Cup. There they were beaten 4–3 on aggregate by Manchester United&#x27;s famous &quot;Busby Babes&quot;—a team that included both Wilf McGuinness and Bobby Charlton.

Banks was given his first-team debut by manager Doug Livingstone, at the expense of long-serving Ron Powell, in a Third Division game against Colchester United at Saltergate in November 1958. The game ended 2–2, and Banks kept his place against Norwich City in the following match; by the end of the 1958–59 season, he had missed only three games, those owing to injury. With no goalkeeping coach to guide him, Banks had to learn from his mistakes on the pitch, and he soon developed into a modern vocal goalkeeper who ordered the players in front of him into a more effective defence. Having just 23 league and three cup appearances to his name, it came as a surprise to Banks when Matt Gillies, manager of First Division club Leicester City, bought him from Chesterfield for £7,000 in July 1959; this also meant a wage increase to £15 a week.

=== Leicester City ===
Banks faced competition from five other goalkeepers, including 30-year-old Scotland international Johnny Anderson and 25-year-old Dave MacLaren. He started the 1959–60 season as the reserve team&#x27;s goalkeeper. This, in effect, made him the club&#x27;s second-choice, ahead of four of his rivals but behind first-team choice MacLaren. He had played four reserve team games when MacLaren picked up an injury, and manager Matt Gillies selected Banks for his Leicester debut against Blackpool at Filbert Street on 9 September. The match finished 1–1, with Jackie Mudie&#x27;s strike cancelling out Ken Leek&#x27;s opener. Banks retained his place for the 2–0 loss to Newcastle United at St James&#x27; Park three days later. With McLaren fit again, Banks was sent back to the reserves, but after the first team conceded 14 goals in the next five games, he was recalled and became the first-choice goalkeeper for the remainder of the season. The defensive record did not improve at first, with Banks conceding six in a heavy defeat by Everton at Goodison Park. Still, he improved in each match, and the Foxes settled for a comfortable 12th-place finish. In training, he worked extensively on improving his weaknesses, such as coming for crosses. He put in extra hours during training and came up with practice sessions to improve his skills – this was largely unique in an era where there were no specialized goalkeeping coaches. In the summer, both Anderson and MacLaren departed, leaving Banks as the club&#x27;s undisputed number one ahead of a group of understudies.

Leicester finished sixth in 1960–61, and managed to beat champions Tottenham Hotspur at White Hart Lane. Yet their greatest accomplishment was in reaching the final of the FA Cup, with Banks conceding only five goals in their nine games &quot;en route&quot; to the final, and keeping three clean sheets in the semi-final and two replays against Sheffield United. Their opponents in the final at Wembley were Tottenham, who had already won the First Division title by an eight-point margin. Right-back Len Chalmers picked up a severe injury early in the match, and with Ken Leek dropped for disciplinary reasons in favour of rookie Hughie McIlmoyle, City were effectively playing with ten men and offered little threat going forward. Bobby Smith and Terry Dyson gave Spurs a 2–0 win and the first &quot;double&quot; of the 20th century, with Banks unable to prevent either goal.

The 1961–62 season proved to be highly disappointing, as Leicester finished 14th in the league and exited the FA Cup at the hands of Stoke City. The only highlight was the club&#x27;s participation in the European Cup Winners&#x27; Cup, which put Banks in the difficult position of choosing to play for his club against Spanish club Atlético Madrid or choosing to attend the England versus Portugal match as a non-playing squad member. He elected to attend both games, leaving London at full-time to reach Leicester 30 minutes before the kick-off against Madrid. A last-minute goal earned the Spaniards a 1–1 draw at Filbert Street. In the return leg, Banks saved an Enrique Collar penalty, but Atlético were awarded a second penalty which Collar converted, and Leicester lost the game 2–0 (losing the tie 3–1 on aggregate).

Banks broke his nose at Craven Cottage on the opening day of the 1962–63 season, in a 2–1 defeat by Fulham. Leicester went to chase a possible double, reaching the FA Cup semi-finals whilst sitting on top of the table in April. City beat Liverpool 1–0 at Hillsborough to reach the final, with Banks keeping a clean sheet despite his goal being under a near-constant siege from the Merseyside club. The &quot;News of the World&quot; reported that Liverpool had had 34 attempts on goal to Leicester&#x27;s one, and Banks later stated that it was his finest performance at club level. Unluckily, Banks then broke a finger in a 2–1 defeat by West Bromwich Albion at The Hawthorns, and was out injured as Leicester lost their final three league games, ending the season in a disappointing fourth place. In the 1963 FA Cup final Banks and the rest of the team underperformed, and lost the game 3–1 to Manchester United.

City ended the 1963–64 season in 11th place, having been inconsistent all season. Success instead came through the League Cup, as they beat West Ham United 6–3 over two legs in the semi-finals to reach the final against Stoke City. The opening tie at the Victoria Ground finished 1–1 in extremely muddy conditions as Banks spilled a shot from Bill Asprey, with Keith Bebbington pouncing on the rebound. Back at Filbert Street, goals from Mike Stringfellow, Dave Gibson and Howard Riley won the game for Leicester 3–2 and settled the tie at 4–3.

Banks started the 1964–65 season on wages of £40 a week, and the club only agreed to pay £60 a week in December. These miserly wages made it difficult for the club to spend the £80,000 it received from the sale of Frank McLintock – he had put in a transfer request over dissatisfaction with his pay and quality replacements were reluctant to join a club that paid full internationals like Banks and McLintock no more than the base rate that rival clubs paid to average players. Leicester finished 18th in the league and were knocked out of the FA Cup by Liverpool at Anfield in the sixth round. In the League Cup, City struggled to get past Peterborough United (in a replay), Grimsby Town and Crystal Palace (in a replay), before they recorded an 8–1 victory over Coventry City at Highfield Road. After easing past Plymouth Argyle in the semi-finals, Banks found himself playing in another League Cup final. However, Chelsea won the final after successfully defending their 3–2 win at Stamford Bridge with a goalless draw at Filbert Street.

Banks missed the first nine games of the 1965–66 season after breaking his wrist when diving at the feet of Northampton Town&#x27;s Joe Kiernan in a pre-season friendly. Leicester finished the season in seventh spot and exited both cup competitions at the hands of Manchester City.

Despite being a World Cup winner in the summer of 1966, Banks was dropped towards the end of the 1966–67 season in favour of highly promising teenage reserve Peter Shilton. Manager Matt Gillies was blunt, telling Banks &quot;we [Gillies and the club&#x27;s directors] think your best days are behind you, and you should move on&quot;. Teammate Richie Norman told Banks that Gillies was pressured into the decision, Shilton having told the board he would leave the club unless he was given first-team football. Banks was transfer listed at £50,000, the same price the club received for Derek Dougan in March 1967. However, many of the big clubs were unwilling to spend such a sum on a goalkeeper. Liverpool manager Bill Shankly showed strong interest, but could not convince the club&#x27;s board of directors to agree to such a large fee for a goalkeeper. West Ham United manager Ron Greenwood was prepared to match the fee, but instead signed Kilmarnock&#x27;s Bobby Ferguson for £65,000 because he had already agreed terms with Kilmarnock and did not want to go back on his word. Terms were instead agreed with Stoke City, a mid-table First Division side.

=== Stoke City ===

On leaving Filbert Street, Banks requested a loyalty bonus from Leicester and was told by Matt Gillies, &quot;We&#x27;ve decided not to pay you a penny. There&#x27;s to be no compensation payment and that&#x27;s final.&quot; Banks then refused the move until Stoke boss Tony Waddington seemingly negotiated a £2,000 payment out of Leicester. It was only some years later that Banks was informed that Stoke had made the payment, not Leicester. Waddington valued good goalkeepers highly, and the two built up a close relationship. During this time, Banks moved to Madeley, Staffordshire. He replaced John Farmer as the club&#x27;s number one, and kept goal in the last four games of the 1966–67 season, making his home debut at the Victoria Ground in a 3–1 win over his former club Leicester.

Banks fitted in well at Stoke, as Waddington built a team of veteran players who were judged by some to be past their best. The Potters struggled near the foot of the First Division table in the 1967–68 and 1968–69 campaigns, before rising to ninth place in the 1969–70 season. Banks remained a reliable stopper for the club. However, on 1 March 1969, he was knocked unconscious at Roker Park by Sunderland&#x27;s Malcolm Moore, and his replacement David Herd conceded four goals in a 4–1 defeat. Banks also played a season for the Cleveland Stokers of the American United Soccer Association in the summer of 1968: he played seven of the short-lived club&#x27;s 12 games in Cleveland, Ohio.

Banks made what he believed to be three of the best saves of his career in a Stoke shirt. In the first instance, he saved and caught a powerful and well-placed header from Manchester City&#x27;s Wyn Davies from out; in the second case he saved a Francis Lee header at Maine Road; and he made his third great save for the club by catching a volley from Tottenham Hotspur&#x27;s Alan Gilzean that had been hit from out at White Hart Lane.

Stoke began to compete for honours in the 1970–71 season, though despite impressive victories against the top two clubs—Arsenal and Leeds United—City ended the season in mid-table obscurity. The club&#x27;s great achievement was in reaching the semi-finals of the FA Cup, beating Millwall, Huddersfield Town, Ipswich Town and Hull City &quot;en route&quot;. Facing Arsenal at Hillsborough in the semi-finals, they lost a two-goal lead to draw 2–2, and were then beaten 2–0 in the replay at Villa Park.

Despite another mid-table finish in 1971–72, Stoke beat Chesterfield, Tranmere Rovers, Hull City and Manchester United to reach another FA Cup semi-final. They again faced Arsenal, and once more, a draw at Villa Park meant a replay at Goodison Park. The Gunners&#x27; goals in a 2–1 victory came from a disputed Frank McLintock penalty and a John Radford goal that television replays showed was clearly offside. In a May 2011 interview, Banks said that he still felt &quot;cheated&quot; out of a chance to play for the club in an FA Cup final. Stoke and Banks found solace in the League Cup, though it took them 11 matches to reach the final after overcoming Southport, then Oxford United in a replay, Manchester United in a second replay, Bristol Rovers, and then West Ham United in a second replay following an aggregate draw after two legs. In extra time of the second leg with West Ham, Banks fouled Harry Redknapp, conceding a penalty, and then saved Geoff Hurst&#x27;s powerful spot-kick to keep City in the competition. They then faced Chelsea in the final at Wembley. Peter Osgood beat Banks with a hooked shot just before half-time, but goals from Terry Conroy and George Eastham won Stoke the game 2–1. At the end of the season, Banks was named the FWA Footballer of the Year, becoming the first goalkeeper to receive the honour since Bert Trautmann in 1956.

On 22 October 1972, while driving home from a session of work on his injured shoulder with the Stoke physiotherapist, Banks lost control of his new Ford Consul (a re-badged Ford Granada Mk I) car, which ended up in a ditch. He had attempted to overtake a car on a sharp bend and collided with an oncoming Austin A60 van. He was taken to the North Staffordshire Hospital and, during an operation, received 200 stitches in his face and over 100 micro-stitches inside the socket of his right eye, and was told the chances of saving the sight in his eye were 50–50. His sight never returned, and as the loss of binocular vision severely limited his abilities as a goalkeeper, he retired from professional football the following summer.

=== Fort Lauderdale Strikers ===
In April 1977, he went on to play as a named superstar in the North American Soccer League (NASL) for Fort Lauderdale Strikers. The Strikers won their division in 1977, and Banks was named NASL Goalkeeper of the Year after he conceded only 29 goals in 26 games—the best defensive record in the NASL. He also played one League of Ireland game for St Patrick&#x27;s Athletic, keeping a clean sheet in a 1–0 win over Shamrock Rovers at Richmond Park on 2 October 1977. He returned to Fort Lauderdale and played 11 games in the 1978 season.

== International career ==
Banks was capped twice for the England under-23 side, in matches against Wales and Scotland in 1961.

Ron Springett was the goalkeeper for England as Banks rose to prominence. Still, after the 1962 World Cup in Chile, a new coach was appointed in former England right-back Alf Ramsey. Ramsey demanded sole control of the team and began looking towards the next World Cup. Banks won his first cap on 6 April 1963 against Scotland at Wembley, after Springett was dropped following a poor performance. England lost 2–1, though Banks was blameless as Scotland&#x27;s goals came firstly from an error by Jimmy Armfield and then secondly from the penalty spot. He was picked for the next match against Brazil, which ended in a creditable 1–1 draw after Bryan Douglas cancelled out Pepe&#x27;s opener. Banks continued to play consistently to become established as England&#x27;s first-choice goalkeeper. In 1963, he was picked to play against the Rest of the World, in a celebration match to mark 100 years of The Football Association.

Banks also played in two of England&#x27;s three games at the &quot;Little World Cup&quot; in Brazil in the summer of 1964, a 1–1 draw with Portugal and a 1–0 defeat to Argentina. Blackpool&#x27;s Tony Waiters won five caps in the England goal in 1964 but found that his challenge to Banks&#x27;s first-team place came to an end after he conceded five goals to Brazil. During England&#x27;s summer of 1965 tour he built up a solid understanding with his defenders—George Cohen, Jack Charlton, Bobby Moore, and Ray Wilson—as he only conceded two goals in four matches against Hungary, Yugoslavia, West Germany, and Sweden. They then played seven friendlies in 1966 in the build-up to the World Cup, though the team passed their biggest test of character in the British Home Championship, beating Scotland 4–3 in front of a crowd of over 130,000 at Hampden Park. Going into the competition, the only defeat in 21 matches since the &quot;Little World Cup&quot; came against Austria, in a game that Banks missed due to injury.

=== 1966 World Cup ===
Banks entered the 1966 FIFA World Cup as England&#x27;s first-choice goalkeeper, and his understudies Ron Springett and Peter Bonetti never took to the field during the tournament. England opened the tournament with a goalless draw against Uruguay, with Banks a virtual spectator as the highly defensive Uruguayans rarely ventured out of their half. They then defeated Mexico 2–0, with Banks again rarely troubled throughout. A 2–0 win over France then took England through the group stage without Banks conceding a goal.

England beat Argentina 1–0 in the last eight, with Geoff Hurst scoring with a header; the match was sullied by the first-half sending off of Argentinian midfielder Antonio Rattín, who refused to leave the pitch after being dismissed for dissent. In contrast to the previous games, the semi-final against Portugal proved to be a fair contest between two sides of talented players eager to attack from the start of the match. Yet there was panic in the buildup to the game as trainer Harold Shepherdson forgot to buy chewing gum, which Banks used to make his hands stickier and better able to handle the ball, and so Shepherdson had to run to a nearby newsagents to purchase gum as the teams were in the tunnel. Bobby Charlton scored two goals, but Portugal made a strong finish and won a penalty on 82 minutes after Jack Charlton handled the ball in the penalty area. Eusébio converted the penalty after sending Banks the wrong way, and the game finished 2–1 in England&#x27;s favour. This was the first goal Banks had conceded for England in 721 minutes of regular play since giving up Scotland&#x27;s last goal after 81 minutes of the Home International clash in April. This remained a record for an England goalkeeper until 2021 when it was broken by Jordan Pickford.

England&#x27;s opponents in the final were West Germany. It was England who dominated the final, but it was Banks who was beaten first. A weak header from Ray Wilson handed a chance to Helmut Haller, who sent an accurate but relatively weak shot into the corner of the net; Banks had been unsighted by Jack Charlton, and he failed to adjust his position in time to reach the ball. England equalised through a Geoff Hurst header within six minutes and went ahead late in the second half through Martin Peters. With seconds left in the game, Lothar Emmerich sent a free kick into the England penalty area, and the ball fell to Wolfgang Weber, who guided the ball over a lunging Ray Wilson and an outstretched Banks into the net to take the game into extra-time. In extra time, the Germans sent shots in at the England goal, which Banks managed to catch and control without any great danger. Hurst scored two goals to complete his hat-trick, and though many claimed his second goal never crossed the line Banks always maintained his belief that the officials called the decision correctly. Between these goals, Banks had to deal with a fiery shot from Sigfried Held and was later exposed only for Uwe Seeler to come just centimetres away from connecting with the ball.

=== Euro 1968 ===
Scotland were the first team to beat the world champions, as goals from Denis Law, Bobby Lennox and Jim McCalliog secured a 3–2 victory at Wembley on 15 April 1967. Despite this set-back, England qualified for UEFA Euro 1968, which consisted of just four teams: England, Italy (hosts), the Soviet Union, and Yugoslavia. England played just two games at the tournament, losing 1–0 to Yugoslavia, and then beating the Soviets 2–0 in the third-place play-off.

=== 1970 World Cup ===

Banks went into the 1970 World Cup as England&#x27;s number one with 59 caps to his name, and had Peter Bonetti (six caps) and Alex Stepney (one cap) as his understudies. He found the heat and altitude at Guadalajara, Mexico difficult to cope with. The team&#x27;s efforts at acclimatisation were not helped when Bobby Moore was falsely accused of stealing the infamous &quot;Bogotá Bracelet&quot;. Despite this, a Geoff Hurst goal was enough to beat their first opponents, Romania. A far tougher test awaited on 7 June, when England faced Brazil. The day before the match, Banks was informed that he had been awarded an OBE.
Playing at pace, Brazil were putting England under enormous pressure and an attack was begun by captain Carlos Alberto who sent a low ball down the right flank for the speedy Jairzinho to latch on to. The Brazilian winger sped past left-back Terry Cooper and crossed the ball into the six-yard box, where Pelé connected with a powerful header to send the ball low towards the right-hand corner of the goal. In the knowledge that his header was placed to perfection, Pelé immediately shouted &quot;Gol!&quot; (Brazilian Portuguese for goal).

The split-second incident only allowed Banks time for one conscious thought – that the shot was impossible to catch, and the only way to prevent Pelé from following up on the rebound would be to parry the ball over the bar. The ball bounced in front of the goal-line, and Banks managed to make contact with the ball with the fingers of his right hand and rolled his hand slightly to angle the ball over the crossbar. He landed in the inner netting of the goal and knew he had saved the ball after seeing Pelé&#x27;s reaction. Banks then rose to his feet to defend the corner and broke into laughter after the following exchange:

:&quot;I thought that was a goal.&quot; (Pelé)
:&quot;You and me both.&quot; (Banks)
:&quot;You&#x27;re getting old, Banksy, you used to hold on to them.&quot; (Bobby Moore)

Pelé and numerous journalists and pundits would later describe the save as the greatest in the game&#x27;s history. Banks later said &quot;They won&#x27;t remember me for winning the World Cup, it&#x27;ll be for that save. That&#x27;s how big a thing it is. People just want to talk about that save.&quot; In 2002 the UK public voted the save No. 41 in the list of the 100 Greatest Sporting Moments.

Brazil won 1–0 after Jairzinho beat Banks in the second half. England ultimately joined Brazil in the last eight after a win in the final group game against Czechoslovakia. The reward was a rematch of the 1966 final against West Germany.

The day before the West Germany game, England&#x27;s hopes of making further inroads into the World Cup were dented when Banks complained of an upset stomach. He became affected by violent stomach cramps and aching limbs and spent his time in the bathroom sweating, shivering and vomiting. He passed an extremely undemanding fitness test but suffered a relapse shortly before the game, and Ramsey was forced to rest him and play Peter Bonetti in his place. Ramsey remarked that &quot;of all the players to lose, we had to lose him.&quot; Banks watched the game on television at the hotel as England lost a two-goal lead to be eliminated 3–2 after extra time. Due to a delay in the broadcast, he switched the television off, with England 2–0 in the lead, as Bobby Moore returned to the hotel to break the news of the defeat. Suspicions later surfaced that Banks had been poisoned to take him out of the game, but with no evidence to support them, Banks never believed in them.

=== Final years ===
Only four teams competed in UEFA Euro 1972: Belgium (hosts), Hungary, the Soviet Union, and West Germany. England came close to qualifying but lost 3–1 to West Germany in the final round of qualifying.

On 15 May 1971, Banks was involved in a notorious incident with George Best who, while playing against England for Northern Ireland, flicked the ball out of Banks&#x27;s hands and headed it into the net. The move was audacious, but was disallowed by the referee, who judged it to be dangerous play. Banks played his 73rd and final game for England on 27 May 1972, in a 1–0 win over Scotland at Hampden Park. During his 73 international games, he kept 35 clean sheets and lost just nine games.

== Coaching career ==
In December 1977, he was appointed as a coach at Port Vale by manager Dennis Butler, being demoted to reserve coach in October 1978 by new boss Alan Bloor. Banks enjoyed coaching but soon resigned his position, feeling that players such as Bernie Wright refused to take his advice on board. He applied for the vacant management positions at Lincoln City and Rotherham United, but was rejected. He instead accepted the role as manager of Alliance Premier League part-time club Telford United. He signed a goalkeeper, centre-half and centre-forward from Bangor City for £1,500, as well as former Stoke striker John Ruggiero. The &quot;Bucks&quot; finished in 13th place in 1979–80.

In November 1980, he left Jackie Mudie in temporary charge of team affairs whilst he underwent surgery and led the club to defeat in the FA Trophy at the hands of a lower league club. On his return to the club Banks was sacked. He was offered the position of raffle ticket seller and accepted the post in the belief that it would entitle him to the money owed to him in the terms of his management contract; he eventually had to settle for 50% of his contract. He later stated that &quot;It broke my heart ... I did not want to stay in the game.&quot;

== Style of play ==
An excellent, consistent, and instinctive goalkeeper who possessed significant physical strength, athleticism, and excellent shot-stopping abilities, Banks is regarded as one of the greatest players of all time in his position. He possessed an excellent positional sense, which he felt to be one of his best assets, and was also known for his handling, awareness, composure, and mental strength, as well as his agility, speed, and quick reflexes, which enabled him to produce acrobatic saves, such as his famous stop from Pelé&#x27;s header against Brazil at the 1970 World Cup in Mexico.

== Personal life and health ==
Banks first met his wife, Ursula, during his national service in Germany in 1955. They married in 1957 and had three children: Robert, Julia and Wendy. He separated from Ursula during his time in America. Still, the couple reunited when Banks returned to England.

In October 1972, Banks was involved in a car crash in his Ford Consul while driving on the wrong side of the road, close to his home in Madeley Heath. Fragments of glass had perforated his right eye and damaged the retina, requiring 100 micro stitches to the eye and a further 200 to his face.

Banks&#x27;s nephew is Nick Banks, drummer of the band Pulp.

Shortly after his retirement, Banks was surprised by Eamonn Andrews for an episode of &quot;This Is Your Life&quot;. He later fronted a Leicester-based hospitality company. He lost a significant sum of money when the business failed but was helped out by Leicester City, who offered him a belated testimonial match. He was appointed as Stoke City&#x27;s president following the death of Stanley Matthews. From the 1980s he was a member of the three-man pools panel.

In 2001, he sold his World Cup winners medal at Christie&#x27;s for £124,750, and his international cap from the final was also sold for £27,025.

Banks was an Inaugural Inductee to the English Football Hall of Fame in 2002. In March 2004, he was named by Pelé as one of the world&#x27;s 125 greatest living footballers. He was awarded an honorary doctorate from Keele University in February 2006. In May 2006, Banks was the first &#x27;legend&#x27; to be inducted into a new Walk of Fame, by having a plaque installed in the pavement in front of Sheffield Town Hall. In July 2008, Pelé unveiled a statue of Banks making his famous 1970 World Cup save outside the Britannia Stadium. In March 2011, he was also inducted into the City of Stoke-on-Trent Hall of Fame, along with Roy Sproson. Pelé became a good friend of Banks and following his death the Brazilian described Banks as a &quot;goalkeeper with magic&quot;.

In 1980, Banks published his first autobiography, &quot;Banks of England&quot;. He published a more comprehensive autobiography in 2002: &quot;Banksy: My Autobiography&quot;. Irish investigative author, Don Mullan, published a boyhood memoir in 2006 called &quot;Gordon Banks – A Hero Who Could Fly&quot; in which he wrote about the influence of the England goalkeeper on his life.

In December 2015, it was announced Banks was receiving treatment for kidney cancer. He died from cancer in his sleep at his home in Madeley, Staffordshire, 12 February 2019 at the age of 81. Banks&#x27;s funeral took place on 4 March 2019 at Stoke Minster. His pallbearers were goalkeepers representing his former teams; Joe Anyon (Chesterfield), Jack Butland (Stoke City), Joe Hart (England) and Kasper Schmeichel (Leicester City).

== Career statistics ==
=== Club ===

===International===
== Honours ==
Leicester City
*Football League Cup: 1963–64
*FA Cup runner-up: 1960–61, 1962–63

Stoke City
*Football League Cup: 1971–72

England
*FIFA World Cup: 1966
*UEFA European Championship third-place: 1968
*British Home Championship: 1964 (shared), 1965, 1966, 1968, 1969, 1970 (shared), 1971, 1972

Individual

*FIFA Goalkeeper of the Year: 1966, 1967, 1968, 1969, 1970, 1971
*FIFA World Cup All-Star Team: 1966
*World XI: 1969, 1971, 1972
*&quot;FUWO European Team of the Season&quot;: 1969, 1970
*&quot;Rothmans Golden Boots Awards&quot;: 1970, 1971, 1972
*Officer of the Order of the British Empire: 1970
*&quot;Daily Express&quot; Sportsmen of the Year: 1971, 1972
*&quot;Sport Ideal European XI&quot;: 1971, 1972
*FWA Footballer of the Year: 1972
*Football League 100 Legends: 1998
*English Football Hall of Fame: 2002
*NASL All-Stars: 1977
*NASL Goalkeeper of the Year: 1977
*FIFA 100: 2004
*PFA Team of the Century (1907–1976): 2007
* Freedom of the City of Stoke-on-Trent 16 October 2014.
*Freedom of the Borough of Newcastle-under-Lyme 23 February 2018.

== References ==
;Specific

;General
*

== External links ==
*
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q213879" start="0" end="12" title="Gordon Banks" label="Gordon Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="79" end="89" title="Association football" label="footballer"/>
<link wikidata="Q201330" start="106" end="116" title="Goalkeeper (association football)" label="goalkeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q179304" start="255" end="258" title="Cap (sport)" label="cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="264" end="271" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q134202" start="329" end="343" title="1966 FIFA World Cup" label="1966 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q48935" start="367" end="379" title="Chesterfield F.C." label="Chesterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119268" start="415" end="425" title="Youth system" label="youth team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466284" start="438" end="450" title="FA Youth Cup" label="FA Youth Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481" start="520" end="534" title="Leicester City F.C." label="Leicester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="539" end="540" title="Pound sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q977680" start="630" end="634" title="1961 FA Cup final" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484495" start="639" end="643" title="1963 FA Cup final" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="644" end="650" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="677" end="687" title="EFL Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571512" start="691" end="695" title="1964 Football League Cup final" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077606" start="726" end="730" title="1965 Football League Cup final" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q18736" start="830" end="840" title="Stoke City F.C." label="Stoke City"/>
<link wikidata="Q132664" start="875" end="889" title="1970 FIFA World Cup" label="1970 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305941" start="931" end="935" title="Save (goaltender)" label="save"/>
<link wikidata="Q12897" start="950" end="954" title="Pelé" label="Pelé"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="1017" end="1029" title="Germany national football team" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077635" start="1100" end="1115" title="1972 Football League Cup final" label="1972 League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502565" start="1384" end="1408" title="Fort Lauderdale Strikers (1977–1983)" label="Fort Lauderdale Strikers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095556" start="1478" end="1482" title="North American Soccer League (1968–1984)" label="NASL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283867" start="1604" end="1618" title="Telford United F.C." label="Telford United"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750244" start="1672" end="1698" title="FWA Footballer of the Year" label="FWA Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="1721" end="1725" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383" start="1771" end="1776" title="International Federation of Football History &amp;amp; Statistics" label="IFFHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q167828" start="1843" end="1853" title="Lev Yashin" label="Lev Yashin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664092" start="1891" end="1911" title="Abbeydale, Sheffield" label="Abbeydale, Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808461" start="1978" end="1985" title="Tinsley, South Yorkshire" label="Tinsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852245" start="2028" end="2037" title="Catcliffe" label="Catcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719063" start="2079" end="2091" title="betting shop" label="betting shop"/>
<link wikidata="Q10723637" start="2759" end="2775" title="Yorkshire Football League" label="Yorkshire League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18691" start="2780" end="2796" title="Rawmarsh Welfare F.C." label="Rawmarsh Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618193" start="2824" end="2842" title="Stocksbridge Works F.C." label="Stocksbridge Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622650" start="2999" end="3010" title="Brick hod" label="hod carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438308" start="3062" end="3067" title="Scout (association football)" label="scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q48935" start="3073" end="3085" title="Chesterfield F.C." label="Chesterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119268" start="3152" end="3162" title="Youth system" label="youth team"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="3239" end="3240" title="Pound sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809333" start="3249" end="3257" title="Association football contracts" label="contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q628099" start="3261" end="3268" title="Manager (association football)" label="manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555820" start="3269" end="3282" title="Teddy Davison" label="Teddy Davison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412834" start="3301" end="3313" title="reserve team" label="reserve team"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721916" start="3329" end="3347" title="Central League (England)" label="the Central League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322747" start="3576" end="3589" title="Royal Corps of Signals" label="Royal Signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089965" start="3593" end="3609" title="national service" label="national service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752478" start="3679" end="3694" title="Elbow fracture" label="fractured elbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466284" start="3756" end="3768" title="FA Youth Cup" label="FA Youth Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203506" start="3800" end="3809" title="aggregate score" label="aggregate"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="3813" end="3830" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q373507" start="3851" end="3862" title="Busby Babes" label="Busby Babes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006716" start="3895" end="3910" title="Wilf McGuinness" label="Wilf McGuinness"/>
<link wikidata="Q171583" start="3915" end="3929" title="Bobby Charlton" label="Bobby Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189899" start="3980" end="3996" title="Doug Livingstone" label="Doug Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364275" start="4029" end="4039" title="Ron Powell" label="Ron Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436448" start="4046" end="4060" title="Football League Third Division" label="Third Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q19578" start="4074" end="4091" title="Colchester United F.C." label="Colchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770382" start="4095" end="4105" title="Saltergate" label="Saltergate"/>
<link wikidata="Q18721" start="4177" end="4189" title="Norwich City F.C." label="Norwich City"/>
<link wikidata="Q47509509" start="4232" end="4239" title="1958–59 Football League" label="1958–59"/>
<link wikidata="Q41583" start="4323" end="4328" title="Coach (sport)" label="coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q8524" start="4387" end="4392" title="Football pitch" label="pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q915929" start="4615" end="4627" title="Matt Gillies" label="Matt Gillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="4640" end="4654" title="Football League First Division" label="First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481" start="4660" end="4674" title="Leicester City F.C." label="Leicester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q34044" start="4876" end="4884" title="Scotland national football team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809038" start="4899" end="4914" title="Johnny Anderson (footballer)" label="Johnny Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q10414622" start="4931" end="4944" title="Dave MacLaren" label="Dave MacLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q370276" start="4961" end="4968" title="1959–60 Football League" label="1959–60"/>
<link wikidata="Q19449" start="5284" end="5293" title="Blackpool F.C." label="Blackpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448298" start="5297" end="5311" title="Filbert Street" label="Filbert Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q466728" start="5357" end="5369" title="Jackie Mudie" label="Jackie Mudie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814488" start="5399" end="5407" title="Ken Leek" label="Ken Leek"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="5468" end="5484" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q191774" start="5488" end="5507" title="St James&amp;#x27; Park" label="St James&amp;#x27; Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="5835" end="5842" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q968420" start="5846" end="5859" title="Goodison Park" label="Goodison Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436148" start="6400" end="6407" title="1960–61 Football League" label="1960–61"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="6439" end="6456" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q186425" start="6460" end="6475" title="White Hart Lane" label="White Hart Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="6544" end="6550" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q262031" start="6662" end="6673" title="Shutout" label="clean sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q794589" start="6701" end="6707" title="Replay (sports)" label="replay"/>
<link wikidata="Q19607" start="6717" end="6733" title="Sheffield United F.C." label="Sheffield United"/>
<link wikidata="Q977680" start="6754" end="6763" title="1961 FA Cup final" label="the final"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="6767" end="6774" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521721" start="6873" end="6885" title="Len Chalmers" label="Len Chalmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933564" start="7003" end="7019" title="Hughie McIlmoyle" label="Hughie McIlmoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q888686" start="7105" end="7116" title="Bobby Smith (footballer, born 1933)" label="Bobby Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704335" start="7121" end="7132" title="Terry Dyson" label="Terry Dyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q876065" start="7174" end="7180" title="Double (association football)" label="double"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153210" start="7255" end="7262" title="1961–62 Football League" label="1961–62"/>
<link wikidata="Q18736" start="7384" end="7394" title="Stoke City F.C." label="Stoke City"/>
<link wikidata="Q40241" start="7456" end="7486" title="UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q8701" start="7584" end="7599" title="Atlético Madrid" label="Atlético Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="7626" end="7633" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q267245" start="7641" end="7649" title="Portugal national football team" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q570364" start="7789" end="7797" title="Kick-off (association football)" label="kick-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q6494097" start="7816" end="7832" title="last-minute goal" label="last-minute goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305941" start="7909" end="7913" title="Save (goaltender)" label="save"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344010" start="7918" end="7932" title="Enrique Collar" label="Enrique Collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q279532" start="7933" end="7940" title="Penalty kick (association football)" label="penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320101" start="8083" end="8097" title="Nasal fracture" label="broke his nose"/>
<link wikidata="Q318043" start="8101" end="8115" title="Craven Cottage" label="Craven Cottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570979" start="8142" end="8149" title="1962–63 Leicester City F.C. season" label="1962–63"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="8177" end="8183" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="8315" end="8324" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q642557" start="8332" end="8344" title="Hillsborough Stadium" label="Hillsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q190534" start="8485" end="8502" title="News of the World" label="News of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q68833" start="8681" end="8686" title="Bone fracture" label="broke"/>
<link wikidata="Q18744" start="8715" end="8735" title="West Bromwich Albion F.C." label="West Bromwich Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q31678" start="8739" end="8752" title="The Hawthorns" label="The Hawthorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484495" start="8882" end="8899" title="1963 FA Cup final" label="1963 FA Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808921" start="9007" end="9014" title="1963–64 Football League" label="1963–64"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="9107" end="9117" title="EFL Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="9132" end="9147" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592109" start="9247" end="9262" title="Victoria Ground" label="Victoria Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154246" start="9325" end="9329" title="Shooting (association football)" label="shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q861920" start="9335" end="9346" title="Bill Asprey" label="Bill Asprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384049" start="9353" end="9369" title="Keith Bebbington" label="Keith Bebbington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810016" start="9386" end="9393" title="Rebound (sports)" label="rebound"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848967" start="9430" end="9447" title="Mike Stringfellow" label="Mike Stringfellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228821" start="9449" end="9460" title="Dave Gibson (Scottish footballer)" label="Dave Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5920742" start="9465" end="9477" title="Howard Riley (footballer)" label="Howard Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807997" start="9556" end="9563" title="1964–65 Football League" label="1964–65"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336750" start="9752" end="9767" title="Frank McLintock" label="Frank McLintock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811518" start="9786" end="9794" title="Transfer (association football)" label="transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q45671" start="10105" end="10112" title="Anfield" label="Anfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q19495" start="10179" end="10198" title="Peterborough United F.C." label="Peterborough United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18515" start="10214" end="10226" title="Grimsby Town F.C." label="Grimsby Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="10231" end="10245" title="Crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q19580" start="10302" end="10315" title="Coventry City F.C." label="Coventry City"/>
<link wikidata="Q628342" start="10319" end="10333" title="Highfield Road" label="Highfield Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q48947" start="10353" end="10368" title="Plymouth Argyle F.C." label="Plymouth Argyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077606" start="10428" end="10444" title="1965 Football League Cup final" label="League Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="10455" end="10462" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q171458" start="10523" end="10538" title="Stamford Bridge (stadium)" label="Stamford Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11969493" start="10621" end="10628" title="1965–66 Football League" label="1965–66"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229353" start="10642" end="10660" title="Distal radius fracture" label="breaking his wrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q48945" start="10688" end="10704" title="Northampton Town F.C." label="Northampton Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q6210682" start="10712" end="10723" title="Joe Kiernan" label="Joe Kiernan"/>
<link wikidata="Q493386" start="10740" end="10748" title="Exhibition game" label="friendly"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="10845" end="10860" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037105" start="10960" end="10967" title="1966–67 Football League" label="1966–67"/>
<link wikidata="Q244799" start="11021" end="11034" title="Peter Shilton" label="Peter Shilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330549" start="11207" end="11220" title="Richie Norman" label="Richie Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200026" start="11448" end="11460" title="Derek Dougan" label="Derek Dougan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="11559" end="11568" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q207457" start="11577" end="11589" title="Bill Shankly" label="Bill Shankly"/>
<link wikidata="Q708818" start="11743" end="11756" title="Ron Greenwood" label="Ron Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q210961" start="11807" end="11817" title="Kilmarnock F.C." label="Kilmarnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934994" start="11825" end="11839" title="Bobby Ferguson (footballer, born 1945)" label="Bobby Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3993319" start="12312" end="12327" title="Tony Waddington" label="Tony Waddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438868" start="12604" end="12626" title="Madeley, Staffordshire" label="Madeley, Staffordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232726" start="12640" end="12651" title="John Farmer (footballer)" label="John Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572602" start="12727" end="12734" title="1966–67 Stoke City F.C. season" label="1966–67"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573007" start="13029" end="13036" title="1967–68 Stoke City F.C. season" label="1967–68"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573418" start="13041" end="13048" title="1968–69 Stoke City F.C. season" label="1968–69"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573855" start="13096" end="13103" title="1969–70 Stoke City F.C. season" label="1969–70"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541691" start="13216" end="13226" title="Roker Park" label="Roker Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="13230" end="13240" title="Sunderland A.F.C." label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742512" start="13248" end="13261" title="Malcolm Moore (footballer)" label="Malcolm Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174720" start="13283" end="13293" title="David Herd (footballer)" label="David Herd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134121" start="13366" end="13383" title="Cleveland Stokers" label="Cleveland Stokers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547526" start="13400" end="13425" title="United Soccer Association" label="United Soccer Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="13508" end="13517" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="13519" end="13523" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q8040064" start="13721" end="13731" title="Wyn Davies" label="Wyn Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q657352" start="13772" end="13783" title="Francis Lee (footballer)" label="Francis Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q865093" start="13794" end="13804" title="Maine Road" label="Maine Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139520" start="13866" end="13872" title="Volley (association football)" label="volley"/>
<link wikidata="Q922804" start="13903" end="13915" title="Alan Gilzean" label="Alan Gilzean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574386" start="14006" end="14013" title="1970–71 Stoke City F.C. season" label="1970–71"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="14084" end="14091" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="14096" end="14108" title="Leeds United F.C." label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="Q19487" start="14244" end="14252" title="Millwall F.C." label="Millwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q19473" start="14254" end="14271" title="Huddersfield Town A.F.C." label="Huddersfield Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q9653" start="14273" end="14285" title="Ipswich Town F.C." label="Ipswich Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q19477" start="14290" end="14299" title="Hull City A.F.C." label="Hull City"/>
<link wikidata="Q175339" start="14454" end="14464" title="Villa Park" label="Villa Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574893" start="14503" end="14510" title="1971–72 Stoke City F.C. season" label="1971–72"/>
<link wikidata="Q19637" start="14537" end="14552" title="Tranmere Rovers F.C." label="Tranmere Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179465" start="14809" end="14821" title="John Radford (footballer)" label="John Radford"/>
<link wikidata="Q18531" start="14870" end="14877" title="Offside (association football)" label="offside"/>
<link wikidata="Q18525" start="15126" end="15135" title="Southport F.C." label="Southport"/>
<link wikidata="Q48946" start="15142" end="15155" title="Oxford United F.C." label="Oxford United"/>
<link wikidata="Q48925" start="15207" end="15221" title="Bristol Rovers F.C." label="Bristol Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q186982" start="15314" end="15324" title="Overtime (sports)" label="extra time"/>
<link wikidata="Q265777" start="15364" end="15370" title="Fouls and misconduct (association football)" label="fouled"/>
<link wikidata="Q221349" start="15371" end="15385" title="Harry Redknapp" label="Harry Redknapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q212738" start="15423" end="15434" title="Geoff Hurst" label="Geoff Hurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077635" start="15521" end="15530" title="1972 Football League Cup final" label="the final"/>
<link wikidata="Q178312" start="15543" end="15555" title="Peter Osgood" label="Peter Osgood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321220" start="15598" end="15607" title="half-time" label="half-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704242" start="15624" end="15636" title="Terry Conroy" label="Terry Conroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q709041" start="15641" end="15655" title="George Eastham" label="George Eastham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750244" start="15726" end="15752" title="FWA Footballer of the Year" label="FWA Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q374982" start="15812" end="15826" title="Bert Trautmann" label="Bert Trautmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q16363" start="15914" end="15922" title="shoulder" label="shoulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q186005" start="15938" end="15953" title="Physical therapy" label="physiotherapist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273342" start="15985" end="15996" title="Ford Consul" label="Ford Consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q494481" start="16010" end="16027" title="Ford Granada (Europe)" label="Ford Granada Mk I"/>
<link wikidata="Q781054" start="16142" end="16156" title="Austin Cambridge" label="Austin A60 van"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894771" start="16178" end="16206" title="Royal Stoke University Hospital" label="North Staffordshire Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q609543" start="16444" end="16460" title="binocular vision" label="binocular vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095556" start="16665" end="16693" title="North American Soccer League (1968–1984)" label="North American Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502565" start="16705" end="16729" title="Fort Lauderdale Strikers (1977–1983)" label="Fort Lauderdale Strikers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118204" start="16766" end="16770" title="1977 North American Soccer League season" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q312370" start="16922" end="16939" title="League of Ireland" label="League of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q394452" start="16949" end="16975" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s Athletic F.C." label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q203976" start="17017" end="17032" title="Shamrock Rovers F.C." label="Shamrock Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860189" start="17036" end="17049" title="Richmond Park (football ground)" label="Richmond Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q961550" start="17127" end="17138" title="1978 North American Soccer League season" label="1978 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q179304" start="17178" end="17184" title="Cap (sport)" label="capped"/>
<link wikidata="Q204238" start="17199" end="17215" title="England national under-21 football team" label="England under-23"/>
<link wikidata="Q946297" start="17241" end="17246" title="Wales national under-21 football team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812121" start="17251" end="17259" title="Scotland national under-21 football team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q532442" start="17270" end="17283" title="Ron Springett" label="Ron Springett"/>
<link wikidata="Q160813" start="17361" end="17375" title="1962 FIFA World Cup" label="1962 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="17379" end="17384" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q311029" start="17441" end="17451" title="Alf Ramsey" label="Alf Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="17529" end="17538" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q179304" start="17560" end="17563" title="Cap (sport)" label="cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q124495" start="17767" end="17781" title="Jimmy Armfield" label="Jimmy Armfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q83459" start="17864" end="17870" title="Brazil national football team" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q592615" start="17915" end="17928" title="Bryan Douglas" label="Bryan Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q509491" start="17943" end="17947" title="José Macia" label="Pepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571095" start="18108" end="18125" title="1963 England v Rest of the World football match" label="Rest of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="18171" end="18195" title="The Football Association" label="The Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750820" start="18266" end="18282" title="Taça das Nações" label="Little World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q79800" start="18367" end="18376" title="Argentina national football team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629224" start="18395" end="18407" title="Tony Waiters" label="Tony Waiters"/>
<link wikidata="Q446908" start="18662" end="18674" title="George Cohen" label="George Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q313674" start="18676" end="18689" title="Jack Charlton" label="Jack Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q191492" start="18691" end="18702" title="Bobby Moore" label="Bobby Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q249912" start="18708" end="18718" title="Ray Wilson (English footballer)" label="Ray Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q170561" start="18773" end="18780" title="Hungary national football team" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188363" start="18782" end="18792" title="Yugoslavia national football team" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43310" start="18794" end="18806" title="Germany national football team" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q160826" start="18812" end="18818" title="Sweden men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q493386" start="18843" end="18853" title="Exhibition game" label="friendlies"/>
<link wikidata="Q919472" start="18958" end="18983" title="British Home Championship" label="British Home Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q193651" start="19045" end="19057" title="Hampden Park" label="Hampden Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q163534" start="19169" end="19176" title="Austria national football team" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q134202" start="19263" end="19282" title="1966 FIFA World Cup" label="1966 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q344902" start="19365" end="19378" title="Peter Bonetti" label="Peter Bonetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q134916" start="19485" end="19492" title="Uruguay national football team" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q164089" start="19614" end="19620" title="Mexico national football team" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="19686" end="19692" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350113" start="19894" end="19905" title="Ejection (sports)" label="sending off"/>
<link wikidata="Q604553" start="19932" end="19946" title="Antonio Rattín" label="Antonio Rattín"/>
<link wikidata="Q5662363" start="20250" end="20268" title="Harold Shepherdson" label="Harold Shepherdson"/>
<link wikidata="Q130878" start="20283" end="20294" title="chewing gum" label="chewing gum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528905" start="20418" end="20428" title="Newsagent&amp;#x27;s shop" label="newsagents"/>
<link wikidata="Q162043" start="20635" end="20642" title="Eusébio" label="Eusébio"/>
<link wikidata="Q13014035" start="21021" end="21036" title="Jordan Pickford" label="Jordan Pickford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065912" start="21071" end="21076" title="1966 FIFA World Cup final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q57375" start="21224" end="21237" title="Helmut Haller" label="Helmut Haller"/>
<link wikidata="Q505028" start="21533" end="21546" title="Martin Peters" label="Martin Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q498257" start="21579" end="21594" title="Lothar Emmerich" label="Lothar Emmerich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379266" start="21602" end="21611" title="Free kick (association football)" label="free kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q509064" start="21664" end="21678" title="Wolfgang Weber" label="Wolfgang Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q123086" start="21967" end="21976" title="hat-trick" label="hat-trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427106" start="22024" end="22031" title="Cross (association football)" label="crossed"/>
<link wikidata="Q509178" start="22188" end="22201" title="Sigfried Held" label="Sigfried Held"/>
<link wikidata="Q44470" start="22233" end="22243" title="Uwe Seeler" label="Uwe Seeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q233565" start="22396" end="22405" title="Denis Law" label="Denis Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q888610" start="22407" end="22419" title="Bobby Lennox" label="Bobby Lennox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808355" start="22424" end="22437" title="Jim McCalliog" label="Jim McCalliog"/>
<link wikidata="Q182201" start="22534" end="22548" title="UEFA Euro 1968" label="UEFA Euro 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q676899" start="22595" end="22600" title="Italy national football team" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189275" start="22614" end="22626" title="Soviet Union national football team" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q132664" start="22826" end="22840" title="1970 FIFA World Cup" label="1970 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q380205" start="22933" end="22945" title="Alex Stepney" label="Alex Stepney"/>
<link wikidata="Q9022" start="23011" end="23022" title="Guadalajara" label="Guadalajara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937753" start="23182" end="23197" title="Bogotá Bracelet" label="Bogotá Bracelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q168397" start="23280" end="23287" title="Romania national football team" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="23427" end="23430" title="Order of the British Empire" label="OBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q715772" start="23528" end="23535" title="Captain (association football)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q295262" start="23536" end="23550" title="Carlos Alberto Torres" label="Carlos Alberto"/>
<link wikidata="Q210102" start="23607" end="23616" title="Jairzinho" label="Jairzinho"/>
<link wikidata="Q959830" start="23674" end="23686" title="Terry Cooper (footballer, born 1944)" label="Terry Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q12897" start="23737" end="23741" title="Pelé" label="Pelé"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546135" start="25148" end="25177" title="100 Greatest (TV series)" label="100 Greatest Sporting Moments"/>
<link wikidata="Q182072" start="25337" end="25351" title="Czechoslovakia national football team" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182386" start="26444" end="26458" title="UEFA Euro 1972" label="UEFA Euro 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q166776" start="26460" end="26467" title="Belgium national football team" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q934600" start="26606" end="26616" title="UEFA Euro 1972 qualifying" label="qualifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q164521" start="26683" end="26694" title="George Best" label="George Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q190978" start="26734" end="26750" title="Northern Ireland national football team" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783939" start="26799" end="26805" title="Header (association football)" label="headed"/>
<link wikidata="Q859528" start="26873" end="26880" title="Referee (association football)" label="referee"/>
<link wikidata="Q48948" start="27184" end="27193" title="Port Vale F.C." label="Port Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258242" start="27205" end="27218" title="Dennis Butler" label="Dennis Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706198" start="27279" end="27289" title="Alan Bloor" label="Alan Bloor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894529" start="27375" end="27388" title="Bernie Wright" label="Bernie Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q18519" start="27476" end="27488" title="Lincoln City F.C." label="Lincoln City"/>
<link wikidata="Q48950" start="27493" end="27509" title="Rotherham United F.C." label="Rotherham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18504" start="27572" end="27595" title="Football Conference" label="Alliance Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283867" start="27611" end="27625" title="Telford United F.C." label="Telford United"/>
<link wikidata="Q264129" start="27687" end="27698" title="Bangor City F.C." label="Bangor City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255921" start="27743" end="27756" title="John Ruggiero" label="John Ruggiero"/>
<link wikidata="Q4063703" start="27806" end="27813" title="1979–80 Alliance Premier League" label="1979–80"/>
<link wikidata="Q466728" start="27842" end="27854" title="Jackie Mudie" label="Jackie Mudie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046509" start="27953" end="27962" title="FA Trophy" label="FA Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273342" start="29333" end="29344" title="Ford Consul" label="Ford Consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438868" start="29411" end="29424" title="Madeley Heath" label="Madeley Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026739" start="29593" end="29603" title="Nick Banks" label="Nick Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q504464" start="29625" end="29629" title="Pulp (band)" label="Pulp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778021" start="29685" end="29699" title="Eamonn Andrews" label="Eamonn Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249607" start="29724" end="29741" title="This Is Your Life (British TV series)" label="This Is Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q83065" start="29768" end="29777" title="Leicester" label="Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q12143498" start="29929" end="29946" title="testimonial match" label="testimonial match"/>
<link wikidata="Q216140" start="30019" end="30035" title="Stanley Matthews" label="Stanley Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323289" start="30085" end="30096" title="Football pools" label="pools panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q503176" start="30147" end="30162" title="Christie&amp;#x27;s" label="Christie&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323117" start="30285" end="30314" title="English Football Hall of Fame" label="English Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q485048" start="30387" end="30418" title="FIFA 100" label="125 greatest living footballers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737734" start="30462" end="30478" title="Keele University" label="Keele University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492691" start="30536" end="30542" title="Sheffield Legends" label="legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492762" start="30646" end="30665" title="Sheffield Town Hall" label="Sheffield Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q500922" start="30763" end="30780" title="bet365 Stadium" label="Britannia Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q134902" start="30835" end="30849" title="Stoke-on-Trent" label="Stoke-on-Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373396" start="30875" end="30886" title="Roy Sproson" label="Roy Sproson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293187" start="31221" end="31231" title="Don Mullan" label="Don Mullan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242950" start="31470" end="31483" title="kidney cancer" label="kidney cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438868" start="31533" end="31555" title="Madeley, Staffordshire" label="Madeley, Staffordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618472" start="31643" end="31656" title="Stoke Minster" label="Stoke Minster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127679" start="31662" end="31672" title="pallbearer" label="pallbearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594229" start="31722" end="31731" title="Joe Anyon" label="Joe Anyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q313089" start="31748" end="31760" title="Jack Butland" label="Jack Butland"/>
<link wikidata="Q187184" start="31775" end="31783" title="Joe Hart" label="Joe Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q295797" start="31798" end="31815" title="Kasper Schmeichel" label="Kasper Schmeichel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="31923" end="31942" title="Football League Cup" label="Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571356" start="31944" end="31951" title="1963–64 Football League Cup" label="1963–64"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="31953" end="31959" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639104" start="31971" end="31978" title="1960–61 FA Cup" label="1960–61"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054774" start="31980" end="31987" title="1962–63 FA Cup" label="1962–63"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574841" start="32022" end="32029" title="1971–72 Football League Cup" label="1971–72"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="32040" end="32054" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q134202" start="32056" end="32060" title="1966 FIFA World Cup" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q260858" start="32062" end="32088" title="UEFA European Championship" label="UEFA European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q182201" start="32102" end="32106" title="UEFA Euro 1968" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q919472" start="32108" end="32133" title="British Home Championship" label="British Home Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093175" start="32135" end="32139" title="1964 British Home Championship" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093161" start="32150" end="32154" title="1965 British Home Championship" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q952318" start="32156" end="32160" title="1966 British Home Championship" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092798" start="32162" end="32166" title="1968 British Home Championship" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094020" start="32168" end="32172" title="1969 British Home Championship" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093934" start="32174" end="32178" title="1970 British Home Championship" label="1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093927" start="32189" end="32193" title="1971 British Home Championship" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q679922" start="32195" end="32199" title="1972 British Home Championship" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32279" end="32307" title="FIFA World Cup awards#All-Star Team" label="FIFA World Cup All-Star Team"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32315" end="32323" title="World Soccer (magazine)#Eric Batty&amp;#x27;s World XI" label="World XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="32461" end="32503" title="Order of the British Empire" label="Officer of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="32517" end="32530" title="Daily Express" label="Daily Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750244" start="32621" end="32647" title="FWA Footballer of the Year" label="FWA Footballer of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661771" start="32655" end="32682" title="Football League 100 Legends" label="Football League 100 Legends"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323117" start="32690" end="32719" title="English Football Hall of Fame" label="English Football Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118204" start="32743" end="32747" title="1977 North American Soccer League season" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118204" start="32778" end="32782" title="1977 North American Soccer League season" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q485048" start="32784" end="32792" title="FIFA 100" label="FIFA 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276089" start="32800" end="32803" title="Professional Footballers&amp;#x27; Association" label="PFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="32844" end="32863" title="Freedom of the City" label="Freedom of the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q134902" start="32867" end="32881" title="Stoke-on-Trent" label="Stoke-on-Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="32900" end="32922" title="Freedom of the City" label="Freedom of the Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q894089" start="32926" end="32946" title="Borough of Newcastle-under-Lyme" label="Newcastle-under-Lyme"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12278" wikidata="Q108158" url="?curid=12278" title="Ganglion">
<text>A ganglion (: ganglia) is a group of neuron cell bodies in the peripheral nervous system. In the somatic nervous system, this includes dorsal root ganglia and trigeminal ganglia among a few others. In the autonomic nervous system, there are both sympathetic and parasympathetic ganglia which contain the cell bodies of postganglionic sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons respectively.

A pseudoganglion looks like a ganglion, but only has nerve fibers and has no nerve cell bodies.

==Structure==
Ganglia are primarily made up of somata and dendritic structures, which are bundled or connected. Ganglia often interconnect with other ganglia to form a complex system of ganglia known as a plexus. Ganglia provide relay points and intermediary connections between different neurological structures in the body, such as the peripheral and central nervous systems.

Among vertebrates there are three major groups of ganglia:
* Dorsal root ganglia (also known as the spinal ganglia) contain the cell bodies of sensory (afferent) neurons.
* Cranial nerve ganglia contain the cell bodies of cranial nerve neurons.
* Autonomic ganglia contain the cell bodies of autonomic nerves.

In the autonomic nervous system, fibers from the central nervous system to the ganglia are known as preganglionic fibers, while those from the ganglia to the effector organ are called postganglionic fibers.

===Basal ganglia===
The term &quot;ganglion&quot; refers to the peripheral nervous system.

However, in the brain (part of the central nervous system), the basal ganglia are a group of nuclei interconnected with the cerebral cortex, thalamus, and brainstem, associated with a variety of functions: motor control, cognition, emotions, and learning.

Partly due to this ambiguity, the &quot;Terminologia Anatomica&quot; recommends using the term &#x27;basal nuclei&#x27; instead of &#x27;basal ganglia&#x27;; however, this usage has not been generally adopted.

===Pseudoganglion===
A pseudoganglion is a localized thickening of the main part or trunk of a nerve that has the appearance of a ganglion but has only nerve fibers and no nerve cell bodies.

Pseudoganglia are found in the teres minor muscle and radial nerve.

==See also==
* Sympathetic ganglion
* Ganglion cyst
* Nervous system
* Neuron
* Chiasm

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q108158" start="2" end="10" title="Ganglion" label="ganglion"/>
<link wikidata="Q108158" start="14" end="21" title="Ganglion" label="ganglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q842429" start="37" end="55" title="neuron cell body" label="neuron cell bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q169953" start="63" end="88" title="peripheral nervous system" label="peripheral nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q505535" start="97" end="119" title="somatic nervous system" label="somatic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395415" start="135" end="154" title="Dorsal root ganglion" label="dorsal root ganglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q776972" start="159" end="177" title="Trigeminal ganglion" label="trigeminal ganglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171064" start="205" end="229" title="autonomic nervous system" label="autonomic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554908" start="246" end="257" title="Sympathetic ganglion" label="sympathetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q947277" start="262" end="285" title="Parasympathetic ganglion" label="parasympathetic ganglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q108158" start="391" end="405" title="Ganglion" label="pseudoganglion"/>
<link wikidata="Q842429" start="533" end="539" title="Soma (biology)" label="somata"/>
<link wikidata="Q12821248" start="544" end="564" title="dendrite" label="dendritic structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q750130" start="691" end="697" title="Nerve plexus" label="plexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q169953" start="824" end="834" title="peripheral nervous system" label="peripheral"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="839" end="846" title="central nervous system" label="central"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395415" start="926" end="945" title="Dorsal root ganglion" label="Dorsal root ganglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635510" start="1008" end="1026" title="Afferent nerve" label="sensory (afferent)"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="1027" end="1034" title="neurons" label="neurons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182128" start="1038" end="1059" title="Cranial nerve ganglia" label="Cranial nerve ganglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q788151" start="1112" end="1129" title="Autonomic ganglion" label="Autonomic ganglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q171064" start="1157" end="1166" title="autonomic nervous system" label="autonomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="1225" end="1247" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756509" start="1276" end="1295" title="preganglionic fiber" label="preganglionic fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234279" start="1360" end="1380" title="postganglionic fiber" label="postganglionic fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q169953" start="1448" end="1473" title="peripheral nervous system" label="peripheral nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="1511" end="1533" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q464210" start="1540" end="1553" title="basal ganglia" label="basal ganglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934178" start="1569" end="1575" title="nucleus (neuroanatomy)" label="nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q75839" start="1600" end="1615" title="cerebral cortex" label="cerebral cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q184215" start="1617" end="1625" title="thalamus" label="thalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q182228" start="1631" end="1640" title="brainstem" label="brainstem"/>
<link wikidata="Q286567" start="1773" end="1795" title="Terminologia Anatomica" label="Terminologia Anatomica"/>
<link wikidata="Q74963" start="2167" end="2185" title="teres minor muscle" label="teres minor muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365325" start="2190" end="2202" title="radial nerve" label="radial nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554908" start="2220" end="2240" title="Sympathetic ganglion" label="Sympathetic ganglion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144367" start="2243" end="2256" title="Ganglion cyst" label="Ganglion cyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="2259" end="2273" title="Nervous system" label="Nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="2276" end="2282" title="Neuron" label="Neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751871" start="2285" end="2291" title="Chiasm (anatomy)" label="Chiasm"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12281" wikidata="Q9047" url="?curid=12281" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz">
<text>Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (or Leibnitz; – 14 November 1716) was a German polymath active as a mathematician, philosopher, scientist and diplomat who is credited, alongside Sir Isaac Newton, with the creation of calculus in addition to many other branches of mathematics, such as binary arithmetic and statistics. Leibniz has been called the &quot;last universal genius&quot; due to his vast expertise across fields, which became a rarity after his lifetime with the coming of the Industrial Revolution and the spread of specialized labor. He is a prominent figure in both the history of philosophy and the history of mathematics. He wrote works on philosophy, theology, ethics, politics, law, history, philology, games, music, and other studies. Leibniz also made major contributions to physics and technology, and anticipated notions that surfaced much later in probability theory, biology, medicine, geology, psychology, linguistics and computer science. 

Leibniz contributed to the field of library science by developing a cataloguing system while working at the Herzog August Library in Wolfenbüttel, Germany, that served as a model for many of Europe&#x27;s largest libraries. His contributions to a wide range of subjects were scattered in various learned journals, in tens of thousands of letters and in unpublished manuscripts. He wrote in several languages, primarily in Latin, French and German.

As a philosopher, he was a leading representative of 17th-century rationalism and idealism. As a mathematician, his major achievement was the development of the main ideas of differential and integral calculus, independently of Newton&#x27;s contemporaneous developments. Leibniz&#x27;s notation has been favored as the conventional and more exact expression of calculus. He devised the modern binary number system, which is the basis of modern digital computing and communications, and also envisioned the field of combinatorial topology as early as 1679.

In the 20th century, Leibniz&#x27;s notions of the law of continuity and transcendental law of homogeneity found a consistent mathematical formulation by means of non-standard analysis. He was also a pioneer in the field of mechanical calculators. While working on adding automatic multiplication and division to Pascal&#x27;s calculator, he was the first to describe a pinwheel calculator in 1685 and invented the Leibniz wheel, later used in the arithmometer, the first mass-produced mechanical calculator. 

In philosophy and theology, Leibniz is most noted for his optimism, i.e. his conclusion that our world is, in a qualified sense, the best possible world that God could have created, a view sometimes lampooned by other thinkers, such as Voltaire in his satirical novella &quot;Candide&quot;. Leibniz, along with René Descartes and Baruch Spinoza, was one of the three influential early modern rationalists. His philosophy also assimilates elements of the scholastic tradition, notably the assumption that some substantive knowledge of reality can be achieved by reasoning from first principles or prior definitions. The work of Leibniz anticipated modern logic and still influences contemporary analytic philosophy, such as its adopted use of the term &quot;possible world&quot; to define modal notions.

==Biography==
===Early life===
Gottfried Leibniz was born on 1 July 1646, in Leipzig, Saxony, to Friedrich Leibniz (1597–1652) and Catharina Schmuck (1621–1664).
He was baptized two days later at St. Nicholas Church, Leipzig; his godfather was the Lutheran theologian . His father died when he was six years old, and Leibniz was raised by his mother.

Leibniz&#x27;s father had been a Professor of Moral Philosophy at the University of Leipzig, where he also served as dean of philosophy. The boy inherited his father&#x27;s personal library. He was given free access to it from the age of seven, shortly after his father&#x27;s death. While Leibniz&#x27;s schoolwork was largely confined to the study of a small canon of authorities, his father&#x27;s library enabled him to study a wide variety of advanced philosophical and theological works—ones that he would not have otherwise been able to read until his college years. Access to his father&#x27;s library, largely written in Latin, also led to his proficiency in the Latin language, which he achieved by the age of 12. At the age of 13 he composed 300 hexameters of Latin verse in a single morning for a special event at school.

In April 1661 he enrolled in his father&#x27;s former university at age 14. There he was guided, among others, by Jakob Thomasius, previously a student of Friedrich. Leibniz completed his bachelor&#x27;s degree in Philosophy in December 1662. He defended his &quot;Disputatio Metaphysica de Principio Individui&quot; (&quot;Metaphysical Disputation on the Principle of Individuation&quot;), which addressed the principle of individuation, on , presenting an early version of monadic substance theory. Leibniz earned his master&#x27;s degree in Philosophy on 7 February 1664. In December 1664 he published and defended a dissertation &quot;Specimen Quaestionum Philosophicarum ex Jure collectarum&quot; (&quot;An Essay of Collected Philosophical Problems of Right&quot;), arguing for both a theoretical and a pedagogical relationship between philosophy and law. After one year of legal studies, he was awarded his bachelor&#x27;s degree in Law on 28 September 1665. His dissertation was titled &quot;De conditionibus&quot; (&quot;On Conditions&quot;).

In early 1666, at age 19, Leibniz wrote his first book, &quot;De Arte Combinatoria&quot; (&quot;On the Combinatorial Art&quot;), the first part of which was also his habilitation thesis in Philosophy, which he defended in March 1666. &quot;De Arte Combinatoria&quot; was inspired by Ramon Llull&#x27;s &quot;Ars Magna&quot; and contained a proof of the existence of God, cast in geometrical form, and based on the argument from motion.

His next goal was to earn his license and Doctorate in Law, which normally required three years of study. In 1666, the University of Leipzig turned down Leibniz&#x27;s doctoral application and refused to grant him a Doctorate in Law, most likely due to his relative youth. Leibniz subsequently left Leipzig.

Leibniz then enrolled in the University of Altdorf and quickly submitted a thesis, which he had probably been working on earlier in Leipzig. The title of his thesis was &quot;Disputatio Inauguralis de Casibus Perplexis in Jure&quot; (&quot;Inaugural Disputation on Ambiguous Legal Cases&quot;). Leibniz earned his license to practice law and his Doctorate in Law in November 1666. He next declined the offer of an academic appointment at Altdorf, saying that &quot;my thoughts were turned in an entirely different direction&quot;.

As an adult, Leibniz often introduced himself as &quot;Gottfried von Leibniz&quot;. Many posthumously published editions of his writings presented his name on the title page as &quot;Freiherr G. W. von Leibniz.&quot; However, no document has ever been found from any contemporary government that stated his appointment to any form of nobility.

===1666–1676===

Leibniz&#x27;s first position was as a salaried secretary to an alchemical society in Nuremberg. He knew fairly little about the subject at that time but presented himself as deeply learned. He soon met Johann Christian von Boyneburg (1622–1672), the dismissed chief minister of the Elector of Mainz, Johann Philipp von Schönborn. Von Boyneburg hired Leibniz as an assistant, and shortly thereafter reconciled with the Elector and introduced Leibniz to him. Leibniz then dedicated an essay on law to the Elector in the hope of obtaining employment. The stratagem worked; the Elector asked Leibniz to assist with the redrafting of the legal code for the Electorate. In 1669, Leibniz was appointed assessor in the Court of Appeal. Although von Boyneburg died late in 1672, Leibniz remained under the employment of his widow until she dismissed him in 1674.

Von Boyneburg did much to promote Leibniz&#x27;s reputation, and the latter&#x27;s memoranda and letters began to attract favorable notice. After Leibniz&#x27;s service to the Elector there soon followed a diplomatic role. He published an essay, under the pseudonym of a fictitious Polish nobleman, arguing (unsuccessfully) for the German candidate for the Polish crown. The main force in European geopolitics during Leibniz&#x27;s adult life was the ambition of Louis XIV of France, backed by French military and economic might. Meanwhile, the Thirty Years&#x27; War had left German-speaking Europe exhausted, fragmented, and economically backward. Leibniz proposed to protect German-speaking Europe by distracting Louis as follows: France would be invited to take Egypt as a stepping stone towards an eventual conquest of the Dutch East Indies. In return, France would agree to leave Germany and the Netherlands undisturbed. This plan obtained the Elector&#x27;s cautious support. In 1672, the French government invited Leibniz to Paris for discussion, but the plan was soon overtaken by the outbreak of the Franco-Dutch War and became irrelevant. Napoleon&#x27;s failed invasion of Egypt in 1798 can be seen as an unwitting, late implementation of Leibniz&#x27;s plan, after the Eastern hemisphere colonial supremacy in Europe had already passed from the Dutch to the British.

Thus Leibniz went to Paris in 1672. Soon after arriving, he met Dutch physicist and mathematician Christiaan Huygens and realised that his own knowledge of mathematics and physics was patchy. With Huygens as his mentor, he began a program of self-study that soon pushed him to making major contributions to both subjects, including discovering his version of the differential and integral calculus. He met Nicolas Malebranche and Antoine Arnauld, the leading French philosophers of the day, and studied the writings of Descartes and Pascal, unpublished as well as published. He befriended a German mathematician, Ehrenfried Walther von Tschirnhaus; they corresponded for the rest of their lives.

When it became clear that France would not implement its part of Leibniz&#x27;s Egyptian plan, the Elector sent his nephew, escorted by Leibniz, on a related mission to the English government in London, early in 1673. There Leibniz came into acquaintance of Henry Oldenburg and John Collins. He met with the Royal Society where he demonstrated a calculating machine that he had designed and had been building since 1670. The machine was able to execute all four basic operations (adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing), and the society quickly made him an external member.

The mission ended abruptly when news of the Elector&#x27;s death (12 February 1673) reached them. Leibniz promptly returned to Paris and not, as had been planned, to Mainz. The sudden deaths of his two patrons in the same winter meant that Leibniz had to find a new basis for his career.

In this regard, a 1669 invitation from Duke John Frederick of Brunswick to visit Hanover proved to have been fateful. Leibniz had declined the invitation, but had begun corresponding with the duke in 1671. In 1673, the duke offered Leibniz the post of counsellor. Leibniz very reluctantly accepted the position two years later, only after it became clear that no employment was forthcoming in Paris, whose intellectual stimulation he relished, or with the Habsburg imperial court.

In 1675 he tried to get admitted to the French Academy of Sciences as a foreign honorary member, but it was considered that there were already enough foreigners there and so no invitation came. He left Paris in October 1676.

===House of Hanover, 1676–1716===

Leibniz managed to delay his arrival in Hanover until the end of 1676 after making one more short journey to London, where Newton accused him of having seen his unpublished work on calculus in advance. This was alleged to be evidence supporting the accusation, made decades later, that he had stolen calculus from Newton. On the journey from London to Hanover, Leibniz stopped in The Hague where he met van Leeuwenhoek, the discoverer of microorganisms. He also spent several days in intense discussion with Spinoza, who had just completed, but had not published, his masterwork, the &quot;Ethics&quot;. Spinoza died very shortly after Leibniz&#x27;s visit.

In 1677, he was promoted, at his request, to Privy Counselor of Justice, a post he held for the rest of his life. Leibniz served three consecutive rulers of the House of Brunswick as historian, political adviser, and most consequentially, as librarian of the ducal library. He thenceforth employed his pen on all the various political, historical, and theological matters involving the House of Brunswick; the resulting documents form a valuable part of the historical record for the period.

Leibniz began promoting a project to use windmills to improve the mining operations in the Harz Mountains. This project did little to improve mining operations and was shut down by Duke Ernst August in 1685.

Among the few people in north Germany to accept Leibniz were the Electress Sophia of Hanover (1630–1714), her daughter Sophia Charlotte of Hanover (1668–1705), the Queen of Prussia and his avowed disciple, and Caroline of Ansbach, the consort of her grandson, the future George II. To each of these women he was correspondent, adviser, and friend. In turn, they all approved of Leibniz more than did their spouses and the future king George I of Great Britain.

The population of Hanover was only about 10,000, and its provinciality eventually grated on Leibniz. Nevertheless, to be a major courtier to the House of Brunswick was quite an honor, especially in light of the meteoric rise in the prestige of that House during Leibniz&#x27;s association with it. In 1692, the Duke of Brunswick became a hereditary Elector of the Holy Roman Empire. The British Act of Settlement 1701 designated the Electress Sophia and her descent as the royal family of England, once both King William III and his sister-in-law and successor, Queen Anne, were dead. Leibniz played a role in the initiatives and negotiations leading up to that Act, but not always an effective one. For example, something he published anonymously in England, thinking to promote the Brunswick cause, was formally censured by the British Parliament.

The Brunswicks tolerated the enormous effort Leibniz devoted to intellectual pursuits unrelated to his duties as a courtier, pursuits such as perfecting calculus, writing about other mathematics, logic, physics, and philosophy, and keeping up a vast correspondence. He began working on calculus in 1674; the earliest evidence of its use in his surviving notebooks is 1675. By 1677 he had a coherent system in hand, but did not publish it until 1684. Leibniz&#x27;s most important mathematical papers were published between 1682 and 1692, usually in a journal which he and Otto Mencke founded in 1682, the &quot;Acta Eruditorum&quot;. That journal played a key role in advancing his mathematical and scientific reputation, which in turn enhanced his eminence in diplomacy, history, theology, and philosophy.

The Elector Ernest Augustus commissioned Leibniz to write a history of the House of Brunswick, going back to the time of Charlemagne or earlier, hoping that the resulting book would advance his dynastic ambitions. From 1687 to 1690, Leibniz traveled extensively in Germany, Austria, and Italy, seeking and finding archival materials bearing on this project. Decades went by but no history appeared; the next Elector became quite annoyed at Leibniz&#x27;s apparent dilatoriness. Leibniz never finished the project, in part because of his huge output on many other fronts, but also because he insisted on writing a meticulously researched and erudite book based on archival sources, when his patrons would have been quite happy with a short popular book, one perhaps little more than a genealogy with commentary, to be completed in three years or less. They never knew that he had in fact carried out a fair part of his assigned task: when the material Leibniz had written and collected for his history of the House of Brunswick was finally published in the 19th century, it filled three volumes.

Leibniz was appointed Librarian of the Herzog August Library in Wolfenbüttel, Lower Saxony, in 1691.

In 1708, John Keill, writing in the journal of the Royal Society and with Newton&#x27;s presumed blessing, accused Leibniz of having plagiarised Newton&#x27;s calculus. Thus began the calculus priority dispute which darkened the remainder of Leibniz&#x27;s life. A formal investigation by the Royal Society (in which Newton was an unacknowledged participant), undertaken in response to Leibniz&#x27;s demand for a retraction, upheld Keill&#x27;s charge. Historians of mathematics writing since 1900 or so have tended to acquit Leibniz, pointing to important differences between Leibniz&#x27;s and Newton&#x27;s versions of calculus.

In 1712, Leibniz began a two-year residence in Vienna, where he was appointed Imperial Court Councillor to the Habsburgs. On the death of Queen Anne in 1714, Elector George Louis became King George I of Great Britain, under the terms of the 1701 Act of Settlement. Even though Leibniz had done much to bring about this happy event, it was not to be his hour of glory. Despite the intercession of the Princess of Wales, Caroline of Ansbach, George I forbade Leibniz to join him in London until he completed at least one volume of the history of the Brunswick family his father had commissioned nearly 30 years earlier. Moreover, for George I to include Leibniz in his London court would have been deemed insulting to Newton, who was seen as having won the calculus priority dispute and whose standing in British official circles could not have been higher. Finally, his dear friend and defender, the Dowager Electress Sophia, died in 1714. In 1716, while traveling in northern Europe, the Russian Tsar Peter the Great stopped in Bad Pyrmont and met Leibniz, who took interest in Russian matters since 1708 and was appointed advisor in 1711.

===Death===
Leibniz died in Hanover in 1716. At the time, he was so out of favor that neither George I (who happened to be near Hanover at that time) nor any fellow courtier other than his personal secretary attended the funeral. Even though Leibniz was a life member of the Royal Society and the Berlin Academy of Sciences, neither organization saw fit to honor his death. His grave went unmarked for more than 50 years. He was, however, eulogized by Fontenelle, before the French Academy of Sciences in Paris, which had admitted him as a foreign member in 1700. The eulogy was composed at the behest of the Duchess of Orleans, a niece of the Electress Sophia.

===Personal life===
Leibniz never married. He proposed to an unknown woman at age 50, but changed his mind when she took too long to decide. He complained on occasion about money, but the fair sum he left to his sole heir, his sister&#x27;s stepson, proved that the Brunswicks had paid him fairly well. In his diplomatic endeavors, he at times verged on the unscrupulous, as was often the case with professional diplomats of his day. On several occasions, Leibniz backdated and altered personal manuscripts, actions which put him in a bad light during the calculus controversy.

He was charming, well-mannered, and not without humor and imagination. He had many friends and admirers all over Europe. He was identified as a Protestant and a philosophical theist. Leibniz remained committed to Trinitarian Christianity throughout his life.

== Philosophy ==
Leibniz&#x27;s philosophical thinking appears fragmented because his philosophical writings consist mainly of a multitude of short pieces: journal articles, manuscripts published long after his death, and letters to correspondents. He wrote two book-length philosophical treatises, of which only the &quot;Théodicée&quot; of 1710 was published in his lifetime.

Leibniz dated his beginning as a philosopher to his &quot;Discourse on Metaphysics&quot;, which he composed in 1686 as a commentary on a running dispute between Nicolas Malebranche and Antoine Arnauld. This led to an extensive correspondence with Arnauld; it and the &quot;Discourse&quot; were not published until the 19th century. In 1695, Leibniz made his public entrée into European philosophy with a journal article titled &quot;New System of the Nature and Communication of Substances&quot;. Between 1695 and 1705, he composed his &quot;New Essays on Human Understanding&quot;, a lengthy commentary on John Locke&#x27;s 1690 &quot;An Essay Concerning Human Understanding&quot;, but upon learning of Locke&#x27;s 1704 death, lost the desire to publish it, so that the &quot;New Essays&quot; were not published until 1765. The &quot;Monadologie&quot;, composed in 1714 and published posthumously, consists of 90 aphorisms.

Leibniz also wrote a short paper, &quot;Primae veritates&quot; (&quot;First Truths&quot;), first published by Louis Couturat in 1903 (pp. 518–523) summarizing his views on metaphysics. The paper is undated; that he wrote it while in Vienna in 1689 was determined only in 1999, when the ongoing critical edition finally published Leibniz&#x27;s philosophical writings for the period 1677–1690. Couturat&#x27;s reading of this paper influenced much 20th-century thinking about Leibniz, especially among analytic philosophers. After a meticulous study (informed by the 1999 additions to the critical edition) of all of Leibniz&#x27;s philosophical writings up to 1688, Mercer (2001) disagreed with Couturat&#x27;s reading.

Leibniz met Baruch Spinoza in 1676, read some of his unpublished writings, and had since been influenced by some of Spinoza&#x27;s ideas. While Leibniz befriended him and admired Spinoza&#x27;s powerful intellect, he was also dismayed by Spinoza&#x27;s conclusions, especially when these were inconsistent with Christian orthodoxy.

Unlike Descartes and Spinoza, Leibniz had a university education in philosophy. He was influenced by his Leipzig professor Jakob Thomasius, who also supervised his BA thesis in philosophy. Leibniz also read Francisco Suárez, a Spanish Jesuit respected even in Lutheran universities. Leibniz was deeply interested in the new methods and conclusions of Descartes, Huygens, Newton, and Boyle, but the established philosophical ideas in which he was educated influenced his view of their work.

=== Principles ===
Leibniz variously invoked one or another of seven fundamental philosophical Principles:
* Identity/contradiction. If a proposition is true, then its negation is false and vice versa.
* Identity of indiscernibles. Two distinct things cannot have all their properties in common. If every predicate possessed by &quot;x&quot; is also possessed by &quot;y&quot; and vice versa, then entities &quot;x&quot; and &quot;y&quot; are identical; to suppose two things indiscernible is to suppose the same thing under two names. The &quot;identity of indiscernibles&quot; is frequently invoked in modern logic and philosophy. It has attracted the most controversy and criticism, especially from corpuscular philosophy and quantum mechanics. The converse of this is often called &quot;Leibniz&#x27;s law&quot;, or the &quot;indiscernibility of identicals&quot;, which is mostly uncontroversial. 
* Sufficient reason. &quot;There must be a sufficient reason for anything to exist, for any event to occur, for any truth to obtain.&quot;
* Pre-established harmony. &quot;[T]he appropriate nature of each substance brings it about that what happens to one corresponds to what happens to all the others, without, however, their acting upon one another directly.&quot; (&quot;Discourse on Metaphysics&quot;, XIV) A dropped glass shatters because it &quot;knows&quot; it has hit the ground, and not because the impact with the ground &quot;compels&quot; the glass to split.
* Law of continuity. &quot;Natura non facit saltus&quot; (literally, &quot;Nature does not make jumps&quot;).
* Optimism. &quot;God assuredly always chooses the best.&quot;
* Plenitude. Leibniz believed that the best of all possible worlds would actualize every genuine possibility, and argued in &quot;Théodicée&quot; that this best of all possible worlds will contain all possibilities, with our finite experience of eternity giving no reason to dispute nature&#x27;s perfection.

Leibniz would on occasion give a rational defense of a specific principle, but more often took them for granted.

===Monads===

Leibniz&#x27;s best known contribution to metaphysics is his theory of monads, as exposited in &quot;Monadologie&quot;. He proposes his theory that the universe is made of an infinite number of simple substances known as monads. Monads can also be compared to the corpuscles of the mechanical philosophy of René Descartes and others. These simple substances or monads are the &quot;ultimate units of existence in nature&quot;. Monads have no parts but still exist by the qualities that they have. These qualities are continuously changing over time, and each monad is unique. They are also not affected by time and are subject to only creation and annihilation. Monads are centers of force; substance is force, while space, matter, and motion are merely phenomenal. He argued, against Newton, that space, time, and motion are completely relative: &quot;As for my own opinion, I have said more than once, that I hold space to be something merely relative, as time is, that I hold it to be an order of coexistences, as time is an order of successions.&quot; Einstein, who called himself a &quot;Leibnizian&quot;, wrote in the introduction to Max Jammer&#x27;s book &quot;Concepts of Space&quot; that Leibnizianism was superior to Newtonianism, and his ideas would have dominated over Newton&#x27;s had it not been for the poor technological tools of the time; Joseph Agassi argues that Leibniz paved the way for Einstein&#x27;s theory of relativity.

Leibniz&#x27;s proof of God can be summarized in the &quot;Théodicée&quot;. Reason is governed by the principle of contradiction and the principle of sufficient reason. Using the principle of reasoning, Leibniz concluded that the first reason of all things is God. All that we see and experience is subject to change, and the fact that this world is contingent can be explained by the possibility of the world being arranged differently in space and time. The contingent world must have some necessary reason for its existence. Leibniz uses a geometry book as an example to explain his reasoning. If this book was copied from an infinite chain of copies, there must be some reason for the content of the book. Leibniz concluded that there must be the &quot;monas monadum&quot; or God.

The ontological essence of a monad is its irreducible simplicity. Unlike atoms, monads possess no material or spatial character. They also differ from atoms by their complete mutual independence, so that interactions among monads are only apparent. Instead, by virtue of the principle of pre-established harmony, each monad follows a pre-programmed set of &quot;instructions&quot; peculiar to itself, so that a monad &quot;knows&quot; what to do at each moment. By virtue of these intrinsic instructions, each monad is like a little mirror of the universe. Monads need not be &quot;small&quot;; e.g., each human being constitutes a monad, in which case free will is problematic.

Monads are purported to have gotten rid of the problematic:
* interaction between mind and matter arising in the system of Descartes;
* lack of individuation inherent to the system of Spinoza, which represents individual creatures as merely accidental.

===Theodicy and optimism===
The &quot;Theodicy&quot; tries to justify the apparent imperfections of the world by claiming that it is optimal among all possible worlds. It must be the best possible and most balanced world, because it was created by an all powerful and all knowing God, who would not choose to create an imperfect world if a better world could be known to him or possible to exist. In effect, apparent flaws that can be identified in this world must exist in every possible world, because otherwise God would have chosen to create the world that excluded those flaws.

Leibniz asserted that the truths of theology (religion) and philosophy cannot contradict each other, since reason and faith are both &quot;gifts of God&quot; so that their conflict would imply God contending against himself. The &quot;Theodicy&quot; is Leibniz&#x27;s attempt to reconcile his personal philosophical system with his interpretation of the tenets of Christianity. This project was motivated in part by Leibniz&#x27;s belief, shared by many philosophers and theologians during the Enlightenment, in the rational and enlightened nature of the Christian religion. It was also shaped by Leibniz&#x27;s belief in the perfectibility of human nature (if humanity relied on correct philosophy and religion as a guide), and by his belief that metaphysical necessity must have a rational or logical foundation, even if this metaphysical causality seemed inexplicable in terms of physical necessity (the natural laws identified by science).

In the view of Leibniz, because reason and faith must be entirely reconciled, any tenet of faith which could not be defended by reason must be rejected. Leibniz then approached one of the central criticisms of Christian theism: if God is all good, all wise, and all powerful, then how did evil come into the world? The answer (according to Leibniz) is that, while God is indeed unlimited in wisdom and power, his human creations, as creations, are limited both in their wisdom and in their will (power to act). This predisposes humans to false beliefs, wrong decisions, and ineffective actions in the exercise of their free will. God does not arbitrarily inflict pain and suffering on humans; rather he permits both &quot;moral evil&quot; (sin) and &quot;physical evil&quot; (pain and suffering) as the necessary consequences of &quot;metaphysical evil&quot; (imperfection), as a means by which humans can identify and correct their erroneous decisions, and as a contrast to true good.

Further, although human actions flow from prior causes that ultimately arise in God and therefore are known to God as metaphysical certainties, an individual&#x27;s free will is exercised within natural laws, where choices are merely contingently necessary and to be decided in the event by a &quot;wonderful spontaneity&quot; that provides individuals with an escape from rigorous predestination.

=== &quot;Discourse on Metaphysics&quot; ===
For Leibniz, &quot;God is an absolutely perfect being&quot;. He describes this perfection later in section VI as the simplest form of something with the most substantial outcome (VI). Along these lines, he declares that every type of perfection &quot;pertains to him (God) in the highest degree&quot; (I). Even though his types of perfections are not specifically drawn out, Leibniz highlights the one thing that, to him, does certify imperfections and proves that God is perfect: &quot;that one acts imperfectly if he acts with less perfection than he is capable of&quot;, and since God is a perfect being, he cannot act imperfectly (III). Because God cannot act imperfectly, the decisions he makes pertaining to the world must be perfect. Leibniz also comforts readers, stating that because he has done everything to the most perfect degree; those who love him cannot be injured. However, to love God is a subject of difficulty as Leibniz believes that we are &quot;not disposed to wish for that which God desires&quot; because we have the ability to alter our disposition (IV). In accordance with this, many act as rebels, but Leibniz says that the only way we can truly love God is by being content &quot;with all that comes to us according to his will&quot; (IV).

Because God is &quot;an absolutely perfect being&quot; (I), Leibniz argues that God would be acting imperfectly if he acted with any less perfection than what he is able of (III). His syllogism then ends with the statement that God has made the world perfectly in all ways. This also affects how we should view God and his will. Leibniz states that, in lieu of God&#x27;s will, we have to understand that God &quot;is the best of all masters&quot; and he will know when his good succeeds, so we, therefore, must act in conformity to his good will—or as much of it as we understand (IV). In our view of God, Leibniz declares that we cannot admire the work solely because of the maker, lest we mar the glory and love God in doing so. Instead, we must admire the maker for the work he has done (II). Effectively, Leibniz states that if we say the earth is good because of the will of God, and not good according to some standards of goodness, then how can we praise God for what he has done if contrary actions are also praiseworthy by this definition (II). Leibniz then asserts that different principles and geometry cannot simply be from the will of God, but must follow from his understanding.
Leibniz wrote: &quot;Why is there something rather than nothing? The sufficient reason ... is found in a substance which ... is a necessary being bearing the reason for its existence within itself.&quot; Martin Heidegger called this question &quot;the fundamental question of metaphysics&quot;.

===Symbolic thought and rational resolution of disputes===
Leibniz believed that much of human reasoning could be reduced to calculations of a sort, and that such calculations could resolve many differences of opinion:

Leibniz&#x27;s calculus ratiocinator, which resembles symbolic logic, can be viewed as a way of making such calculations feasible. Leibniz wrote memoranda that can now be read as groping attempts to get symbolic logic—and thus his &quot;calculus&quot;—off the ground. These writings remained unpublished until the appearance of a selection edited by Carl Immanuel Gerhardt (1859). Louis Couturat published a selection in 1901; by this time the main developments of modern logic had been created by Charles Sanders Peirce and by Gottlob Frege.

Leibniz thought symbols were important for human understanding. He attached so much importance to the development of good notations that he attributed all his discoveries in mathematics to this. His notation for calculus is an example of his skill in this regard. Leibniz&#x27;s passion for symbols and notation, as well as his belief that these are essential to a well-running logic and mathematics, made him a precursor of semiotics.

But Leibniz took his speculations much further. Defining a character as any written sign, he then defined a &quot;real&quot; character as one that represents an idea directly and not simply as the word embodying the idea. Some real characters, such as the notation of logic, serve only to facilitate reasoning. Many characters well known in his day, including Egyptian hieroglyphics, Chinese characters, and the symbols of astronomy and chemistry, he deemed not real. Instead, he proposed the creation of a &quot;characteristica universalis&quot; or &quot;universal characteristic&quot;, built on an alphabet of human thought in which each fundamental concept would be represented by a unique &quot;real&quot; character:

Complex thoughts would be represented by combining characters for simpler thoughts. Leibniz saw that the uniqueness of prime factorization suggests a central role for prime numbers in the universal characteristic, a striking anticipation of Gödel numbering. Granted, there is no intuitive or mnemonic way to number any set of elementary concepts using the prime numbers.

Because Leibniz was a mathematical novice when he first wrote about the &quot;characteristic&quot;, at first he did not conceive it as an algebra but rather as a universal language or script. Only in 1676 did he conceive of a kind of &quot;algebra of thought&quot;, modeled on and including conventional algebra and its notation. The resulting &quot;characteristic&quot; included a logical calculus, some combinatorics, algebra, his &quot;analysis situs&quot; (geometry of situation), a universal concept language, and more. What Leibniz actually intended by his &quot;characteristica universalis&quot; and calculus ratiocinator, and the extent to which modern formal logic does justice to calculus, may never be established. Leibniz&#x27;s idea of reasoning through a universal language of symbols and calculations remarkably foreshadows great 20th-century developments in formal systems, such as Turing completeness, where computation was used to define equivalent universal languages (see Turing degree).

===Formal logic===

Leibniz has been noted as one of the most important logicians between the times of Aristotle and Gottlob Frege. Leibniz enunciated the principal properties of what we now call conjunction, disjunction, negation, identity, set inclusion, and the empty set. The principles of Leibniz&#x27;s logic and, arguably, of his whole philosophy, reduce to two:

# All our ideas are compounded from a very small number of simple ideas, which form the alphabet of human thought.
# Complex ideas proceed from these simple ideas by a uniform and symmetrical combination, analogous to arithmetical multiplication.

The formal logic that emerged early in the 20th century also requires, at minimum, unary negation and quantified variables ranging over some universe of discourse.

Leibniz published nothing on formal logic in his lifetime; most of what he wrote on the subject consists of working drafts. In his &quot;History of Western Philosophy&quot;, Bertrand Russell went so far as to claim that Leibniz had developed logic in his unpublished writings to a level which was reached only 200 years later.

Russell&#x27;s principal work on Leibniz found that many of Leibniz&#x27;s most startling philosophical ideas and claims (e.g., that each of the fundamental monads mirrors the whole universe) follow logically from Leibniz&#x27;s conscious choice to reject &quot;relations&quot; between things as unreal. He regarded such relations as (real) &quot;qualities&quot; of things (Leibniz admitted unary predicates only): For him, &quot;Mary is the mother of John&quot; describes separate qualities of Mary and of John. This view contrasts with the relational logic of De Morgan, Peirce, Schröder and Russell himself, now standard in predicate logic. Notably, Leibniz also declared space and time to be inherently relational.

Leibniz&#x27;s 1690 discovery of his algebra of concepts (deductively equivalent to the Boolean algebra) and the associated metaphysics, are of interest in present-day computational metaphysics.

==Mathematics==
Although the mathematical notion of function was implicit in trigonometric and logarithmic tables, which existed in his day, Leibniz was the first, in 1692 and 1694, to employ it explicitly, to denote any of several geometric concepts derived from a curve, such as abscissa, ordinate, tangent, chord, and the perpendicular (see History of the function concept). In the 18th century, &quot;function&quot; lost these geometrical associations. Leibniz was also one of the pioneers in actuarial science, calculating the purchase price of life annuities and the liquidation of a state&#x27;s debt.

Leibniz&#x27;s research into formal logic, also relevant to mathematics, is discussed in the preceding section. The best overview of Leibniz&#x27;s writings on calculus may be found in Bos (1974).

Leibniz, who invented one of the earliest mechanical calculators, said of calculation: &quot;For it is unworthy of excellent men to lose hours like slaves in the labor of calculation which could safely be relegated to anyone else if machines were used.&quot;

===Linear systems===
Leibniz arranged the coefficients of a system of linear equations into an array, now called a matrix, in order to find a solution to the system if it existed. This method was later called Gaussian elimination. Leibniz laid down the foundations and theory of determinants, although the Japanese mathematician Seki Takakazu also discovered determinants independently of Leibniz. His works show calculating the determinants using cofactors. Calculating the determinant using cofactors is named the Leibniz formula. Finding the determinant of a matrix using this method proves impractical with large &quot;n&quot;, requiring to calculate &quot;n!&quot; products and the number of n-permutations. He also solved systems of linear equations using determinants, which is now called Cramer&#x27;s rule. This method for solving systems of linear equations based on determinants was found in 1684 by Leibniz (Gabriel Cramer published his findings in 1750). Although Gaussian elimination requires formula_1 arithmetic operations, linear algebra textbooks still teach cofactor expansion before LU factorization.

===Geometry===
The Leibniz formula for states that
:formula_2
Leibniz wrote that circles &quot;can most simply be expressed by this series, that is, the aggregate of fractions alternately added and subtracted&quot;. However this formula is only accurate with a large number of terms, using 10,000,000 terms to obtain the correct value of to 8 decimal places. Leibniz attempted to create a definition for a straight line while attempting to prove the parallel postulate. While most mathematicians defined a straight line as the shortest line between two points, Leibniz believed that this was merely a property of a straight line rather than the definition.

===Calculus===
Leibniz is credited, along with Isaac Newton, with the discovery of calculus (differential and integral calculus). According to Leibniz&#x27;s notebooks, a critical breakthrough occurred on 11 November 1675, when he employed integral calculus for the first time to find the area under the graph of a function . He introduced several notations used to this day, for instance the integral sign (formula_3), representing an elongated S, from the Latin word &quot;summa&quot;, and the used for differentials (formula_4), from the Latin word &quot;differentia&quot;. Leibniz did not publish anything about his calculus until 1684. Leibniz expressed the inverse relation of integration and differentiation, later called the fundamental theorem of calculus, by means of a figure in his 1693 paper &quot;Supplementum geometriae dimensoriae...&quot;. However, James Gregory is credited for the theorem&#x27;s discovery in geometric form, Isaac Barrow proved a more generalized geometric version, and Newton developed supporting theory. The concept became more transparent as developed through Leibniz&#x27;s formalism and new notation. The product rule of differential calculus is still called &quot;Leibniz&#x27;s law&quot;. In addition, the theorem that tells how and when to differentiate under the integral sign is called the Leibniz integral rule.

Leibniz exploited infinitesimals in developing calculus, manipulating them in ways suggesting that they had paradoxical algebraic properties. George Berkeley, in a tract called &quot;The Analyst&quot; and also in &quot;De Motu&quot;, criticized these. A recent study argues that Leibnizian calculus was free of contradictions, and was better grounded than Berkeley&#x27;s empiricist criticisms.

From 1711 until his death, Leibniz was engaged in a dispute with John Keill, Newton and others, over whether Leibniz had invented calculus independently of Newton.

The use of infinitesimals in mathematics was frowned upon by followers of Karl Weierstrass, but survived in science and engineering, and even in rigorous mathematics, via the fundamental computational device known as the differential. Beginning in 1960, Abraham Robinson worked out a rigorous foundation for Leibniz&#x27;s infinitesimals, using model theory, in the context of a field of hyperreal numbers. The resulting non-standard analysis can be seen as a belated vindication of Leibniz&#x27;s mathematical reasoning. Robinson&#x27;s transfer principle is a mathematical implementation of Leibniz&#x27;s heuristic law of continuity, while the standard part function implements the Leibnizian transcendental law of homogeneity.

===Topology===
Leibniz was the first to use the term &quot;analysis situs&quot;, later used in the 19th century to refer to what is now known as topology. There are two takes on this situation. On the one hand, Mates, citing a 1954 paper in German by Jacob Freudenthal, argues:

But Hideaki Hirano argues differently, quoting Mandelbrot:

Thus the fractal geometry promoted by Mandelbrot drew on Leibniz&#x27;s notions of self-similarity and the principle of continuity: &quot;Natura non facit saltus&quot;. We also see that when Leibniz wrote, in a metaphysical vein, that &quot;the straight line is a curve, any part of which is similar to the whole&quot;, he was anticipating topology by more than two centuries. As for &quot;packing&quot;, Leibniz told his friend and correspondent Des Bosses to imagine a circle, then to inscribe within it three congruent circles with maximum radius; the latter smaller circles could be filled with three even smaller circles by the same procedure. This process can be continued infinitely, from which arises a good idea of self-similarity. Leibniz&#x27;s improvement of Euclid&#x27;s axiom contains the same concept.

He envisioned the field of combinatorial topology as early as 1679, in his work titled &quot;Characteristica Geometrica,&quot; as he &quot;tried to formulate basic geometric properties of figures, to use special symbols to represent them, and to combine these properties under operations so as to produce new ones.&quot;

==Science and engineering==
Leibniz&#x27;s writings are currently discussed, not only for their anticipations and possible discoveries not yet recognized, but as ways of advancing present knowledge. Much of his writing on physics is included in Gerhardt&#x27;s &quot;Mathematical Writings&quot;.

===Physics===

Leibniz contributed a fair amount to the statics and dynamics emerging around him, often disagreeing with Descartes and Newton. He devised a new theory of motion (dynamics) based on kinetic energy and potential energy, which posited space as relative, whereas Newton was thoroughly convinced that space was absolute. An important example of Leibniz&#x27;s mature physical thinking is his &quot;Specimen Dynamicum&quot; of 1695.

Until the discovery of subatomic particles and the quantum mechanics governing them, many of Leibniz&#x27;s speculative ideas about aspects of nature not reducible to statics and dynamics made little sense. For instance, he anticipated Albert Einstein by arguing, against Newton, that space, time and motion are relative, not absolute: &quot;As for my own opinion, I have said more than once, that I hold space to be something merely relative, as time is, that I hold it to be an order of coexistences, as time is an order of successions.&quot;

Leibniz held a relational notion of space and time, against Newton&#x27;s substantivalist views. According to Newton&#x27;s substantivalism, space and time are entities in their own right, existing independently of things. Leibniz&#x27;s relationalism, in contrast, describes space and time as systems of relations that exist between objects. The rise of general relativity and subsequent work in the history of physics has put Leibniz&#x27;s stance in a more favorable light.

One of Leibniz&#x27;s projects was to recast Newton&#x27;s theory as a vortex theory. However, his project went beyond vortex theory, since at its heart there was an attempt to explain one of the most difficult problems in physics, that of the origin of the cohesion of matter.

The principle of sufficient reason has been invoked in recent cosmology, and his identity of indiscernibles in quantum mechanics, a field some even credit him with having anticipated in some sense. In addition to his theories about the nature of reality, Leibniz&#x27;s contributions to the development of calculus have also had a major impact on physics.

====The &quot;vis viva&quot;====
Leibniz&#x27;s &quot;vis viva&quot; (Latin for &quot;living force&quot;) is , twice the modern kinetic energy. He realized that the total energy would be conserved in certain mechanical systems, so he considered it an innate motive characteristic of matter. Here too his thinking gave rise to another regrettable nationalistic dispute. His &quot;vis viva&quot; was seen as rivaling the conservation of momentum championed by Newton in England and by Descartes and Voltaire in France; hence academics in those countries tended to neglect Leibniz&#x27;s idea. Leibniz knew of the validity of conservation of momentum. In reality, both energy and momentum are conserved (in closed systems), so both approaches are valid.

===Other natural science===
By proposing that the earth has a molten core, he anticipated modern geology. In embryology, he was a preformationist, but also proposed that organisms are the outcome of a combination of an infinite number of possible microstructures and of their powers. In the life sciences and paleontology, he revealed an amazing transformist intuition, fueled by his study of comparative anatomy and fossils. One of his principal works on this subject, &quot;Protogaea&quot;, unpublished in his lifetime, has recently been published in English for the first time. He worked out a primal organismic theory. In medicine, he exhorted the physicians of his time—with some results—to ground their theories in detailed comparative observations and verified experiments, and to distinguish firmly scientific and metaphysical points of view.

===Psychology===
Psychology had been a central interest of Leibniz. He appears to be an &quot;underappreciated pioneer of psychology&quot; He wrote on topics which are now regarded as fields of psychology: attention and consciousness, memory, learning (association), motivation (the act of &quot;striving&quot;), emergent individuality, the general dynamics of development (evolutionary psychology). His discussions in the &quot;New Essays&quot; and &quot;Monadology&quot; often rely on everyday observations such as the behaviour of a dog or the noise of the sea, and he develops intuitive analogies (the synchronous running of clocks or the balance spring of a clock). He also devised postulates and principles that apply to psychology: the continuum of the unnoticed &quot;petites perceptions&quot; to the distinct, self-aware apperception, and psychophysical parallelism from the point of view of causality and of purpose: &quot;Souls act according to the laws of final causes, through aspirations, ends and means. Bodies act according to the laws of efficient causes, i.e. the laws of motion. And these two realms, that of efficient causes and that of final causes, harmonize with one another.&quot; This idea refers to the mind-body problem, stating that the mind and brain do not act upon each other, but act alongside each other separately but in harmony. Leibniz, however, did not use the term &quot;psychologia&quot;.
Leibniz&#x27;s epistemological position—against John Locke and English empiricism (sensualism)—was made clear: &quot;Nihil est in intellectu quod non fuerit in sensu, nisi intellectu ipse.&quot; – &quot;Nothing is in the intellect that was not first in the senses, except the intellect itself.&quot; Principles that are not present in sensory impressions can be recognised in human perception and consciousness: logical inferences, categories of thought, the principle of causality and the principle of purpose (teleology).

Leibniz found his most important interpreter in Wilhelm Wundt, founder of psychology as a discipline. Wundt used the &quot;… nisi intellectu ipse&quot; quotation 1862 on the title page of his &quot;Beiträge zur Theorie der Sinneswahrnehmung&quot; (Contributions on the Theory of Sensory Perception) and published a detailed and aspiring monograph on Leibniz. Wundt shaped the term apperception, introduced by Leibniz, into an experimental psychologically based apperception psychology that included neuropsychological modelling – an excellent example of how a concept created by a great philosopher could stimulate a psychological research program. One principle in the thinking of Leibniz played a fundamental role: &quot;the principle of equality of separate but corresponding viewpoints.&quot; Wundt characterized this style of thought (perspectivism) in a way that also applied for him—viewpoints that &quot;supplement one another, while also being able to appear as opposites that only resolve themselves when considered more deeply.&quot;
Much of Leibniz&#x27;s work went on to have a great impact on the field of psychology. Leibniz thought that there are many petites perceptions, or small perceptions of which we perceive but of which we are unaware. He believed that by the principle that phenomena found in nature were continuous by default, it was likely that the transition between conscious and unconscious states had intermediary steps. For this to be true, there must also be a portion of the mind of which we are unaware at any given time. His theory regarding consciousness in relation to the principle of continuity can be seen as an early theory regarding the stages of sleep. In this way, Leibniz&#x27;s theory of perception can be viewed as one of many theories leading up to the idea of the unconscious. Leibniz was a direct influence on Ernst Platner, who is credited with originally coining the term Unbewußtseyn (unconscious). Additionally, the idea of subliminal stimuli can be traced back to his theory of small perceptions. Leibniz&#x27;s ideas regarding music and tonal perception went on to influence the laboratory studies of Wilhelm Wundt.

===Social science===

In public health, he advocated establishing a medical administrative authority, with powers over epidemiology and veterinary medicine. He worked to set up a coherent medical training program, oriented towards public health and preventive measures. In economic policy, he proposed tax reforms and a national insurance program, and discussed the balance of trade. He even proposed something akin to what much later emerged as game theory. In sociology he laid the ground for communication theory.

===Technology===
In 1906, Garland published a volume of Leibniz&#x27;s writings bearing on his many practical inventions and engineering work. To date, few of these writings have been translated into English. Nevertheless, it is well understood that Leibniz was a serious inventor, engineer, and applied scientist, with great respect for practical life. Following the motto &quot;theoria cum praxi&quot;, he urged that theory be combined with practical application, and thus has been claimed as the father of applied science. He designed wind-driven propellers and water pumps, mining machines to extract ore, hydraulic presses, lamps, submarines, clocks, etc. With Denis Papin, he created a steam engine. He even proposed a method for desalinating water. From 1680 to 1685, he struggled to overcome the chronic flooding that afflicted the ducal silver mines in the Harz Mountains, but did not succeed.

====Computation====
Leibniz may have been the first computer scientist and information theorist. Early in life, he documented the binary numeral system (base 2), then revisited that system throughout his career. While Leibniz was examining other cultures to compare his metaphysical views, he encountered an ancient Chinese book &quot;I Ching&quot;. Leibniz interpreted a diagram which showed yin and yang and corresponded it to a zero and one. More information can be found in the Sinophology section. Leibniz had similarities with Juan Caramuel y Lobkowitz and Thomas Harriot, who independently developed the binary system, as he was familiar with their works on the binary system. Juan Caramuel y Lobkowitz worked extensively on logarithms including logarithms with base 2. Thomas Harriot&#x27;s manuscripts contained a table of binary numbers and their notation, which demonstrated that any number could be written on a base 2 system. Regardless, Leibniz simplified the binary system and articulated logical properties such as conjunction, disjunction, negation, identity, inclusion, and the empty set. He anticipated Lagrangian interpolation and algorithmic information theory. His calculus ratiocinator anticipated aspects of the universal Turing machine. In 1961, Norbert Wiener suggested that Leibniz should be considered the patron saint of cybernetics. Wiener is quoted with &quot;Indeed, the general idea of a computing machine is nothing but a mechanization of Leibniz&#x27;s Calculus Ratiocinator.&quot;

In 1671, Leibniz began to invent a machine that could execute all four arithmetic operations, gradually improving it over a number of years. This &quot;stepped reckoner&quot; attracted fair attention and was the basis of his election to the Royal Society in 1673. A number of such machines were made during his years in Hanover by a craftsman working under his supervision. They were not an unambiguous success because they did not fully mechanize the carry operation. Couturat reported finding an unpublished note by Leibniz, dated 1674, describing a machine capable of performing some algebraic operations. Leibniz also devised a (now reproduced) cipher machine, recovered by Nicholas Rescher in 2010. In 1693, Leibniz described a design of a machine which could, in theory, integrate differential equations, which he called &quot;integraph&quot;.

Leibniz was groping towards hardware and software concepts worked out much later by Charles Babbage and Ada Lovelace. In 1679, while mulling over his binary arithmetic, Leibniz imagined a machine in which binary numbers were represented by marbles, governed by a rudimentary sort of punched cards. Modern electronic digital computers replace Leibniz&#x27;s marbles moving by gravity with shift registers, voltage gradients, and pulses of electrons, but otherwise they run roughly as Leibniz envisioned in 1679.

===Librarian===
Later in Leibniz&#x27;s career (after the death of von Boyneburg), Leibniz moved to Paris and accepted a position as a librarian in the Hanoverian court of Johann Friedrich, Duke of Brunswick-Luneburg. Leibniz&#x27;s predecessor, Tobias Fleischer, had already created a cataloging system for the Duke&#x27;s library but it was a clumsy attempt. At this library, Leibniz focused more on advancing the library than on the cataloging. For instance, within a month of taking the new position, he developed a comprehensive plan to expand the library. He was one of the first to consider developing a core collection for a library and felt &quot;that a library for display and ostentation is a luxury and indeed superfluous, but a well-stocked and organized library is important and useful for all areas of human endeavor and is to be regarded on the same level as schools and churches&quot;. Leibniz lacked the funds to develop the library in this manner. After working at this library, by the end of 1690 Leibniz was appointed as privy-councilor and librarian of the Bibliotheca Augusta at Wolfenbüttel. It was an extensive library with at least 25,946 printed volumes. At this library, Leibniz sought to improve the catalog. He was not allowed to make complete changes to the existing closed catalog, but was allowed to improve upon it so he started on that task immediately. He created an alphabetical author catalog and had also created other cataloging methods that were not implemented. While serving as librarian of the ducal libraries in Hanover and Wolfenbüttel, Leibniz effectively became one of the founders of library science. Seemingly, Leibniz paid a good deal of attention to the classification of subject matter, favoring a well-balanced library covering a host of numerous subjects and interests. Leibniz, for example, proposed the following classification system in the &quot;Otivm Hanoveranvm Sive Miscellanea&quot; (1737):

* Theology
* Jurisprudence
* Medicine
* Intellectual Philosophy
* Philosophy of the Imagination or Mathematics
* Philosophy of Sensible Things or Physics
* Philology or Language
* Civil History
* Literary History and Libraries
* General and Miscellaneous

He also designed a book indexing system in ignorance of the only other such system then extant, that of the Bodleian Library at Oxford University. He also called on publishers to distribute abstracts of all new titles they produced each year, in a standard form that would facilitate indexing. He hoped that this abstracting project would eventually include everything printed from his day back to Gutenberg. Neither proposal met with success at the time, but something like them became standard practice among English language publishers during the 20th century, under the aegis of the Library of Congress and the British Library.

He called for the creation of an empirical database as a way to further all sciences. His &quot;characteristica universalis&quot;, calculus ratiocinator, and a &quot;community of minds&quot;—intended, among other things, to bring political and religious unity to Europe—can be seen as distant unwitting anticipations of artificial languages (e.g., Esperanto and its rivals), symbolic logic, even the World Wide Web.

===Advocate of scientific societies===
Leibniz emphasized that research was a collaborative endeavor. Hence he warmly advocated the formation of national scientific societies along the lines of the British Royal Society and the French Académie Royale des Sciences. More specifically, in his correspondence and travels he urged the creation of such societies in Dresden, Saint Petersburg, Vienna, and Berlin. Only one such project came to fruition; in 1700, the Berlin Academy of Sciences was created. Leibniz drew up its first statutes, and served as its first President for the remainder of his life. That Academy evolved into the German Academy of Sciences, the publisher of the ongoing critical edition of his works.

==Law and morality==
Leibniz&#x27;s writings on law, ethics, and politics were long overlooked by English-speaking scholars, but this has changed of late.

While Leibniz was no apologist for absolute monarchy like Hobbes, or for tyranny in any form, neither did he echo the political and constitutional views of his contemporary John Locke, views invoked in support of liberalism, in 18th-century America and later elsewhere. The following excerpt from a 1695 letter to Baron J. C. Boyneburg&#x27;s son Philipp is very revealing of Leibniz&#x27;s political sentiments:

In 1677, Leibniz called for a European confederation, governed by a council or senate, whose members would represent entire nations and would be free to vote their consciences; this is sometimes considered an anticipation of the European Union. He believed that Europe would adopt a uniform religion. He reiterated these proposals in 1715.

But at the same time, he arrived to propose an interreligious and multicultural project to create a universal system of justice, which required from him a broad interdisciplinary perspective. In order to propose it, he combined linguistics (especially sinology), moral and legal philosophy, management, economics, and politics.

===Law===
Leibniz trained as a legal academic, but under the tutelage of Cartesian-sympathiser Erhard Weigel we already see an attempt to solve legal problems by rationalist mathematical methods (Weigel&#x27;s influence being most explicit in the &quot;Specimen Quaestionum Philosophicarum ex Jure collectarum&quot; (&quot;An Essay of Collected Philosophical Problems of Right&quot;)). For example, the &quot;Disputatio Inauguralis de Casibus Perplexis in Jure&quot; (&quot;Inaugural Disputation on Ambiguous Legal Cases&quot;) uses early combinatorics to solve some legal disputes, while the 1666 &quot;De Arte Combinatoria&quot; (&quot;On the Art of Combination&quot;) includes simple legal problems by way of illustration.

The use of combinatorial methods to solve legal and moral problems seems, via Athanasius Kircher and Daniel Schwenter to be of Llullist inspiration: Ramón Llull attempted to solve ecumenical disputes through recourse to a combinatorial mode of reasoning he regarded as universal (a mathesis universalis).

In the late 1660s the enlightened Prince-Bishop of Mainz Johann Philipp von Schönborn announced a review of the legal system and made available a position to support his current law commissioner. Leibniz left Franconia and made for Mainz before even winning the role. On reaching Frankfurt am Main Leibniz penned The New Method of Teaching and Learning the Law, by way of application. The text proposed a reform of legal education and is characteristically syncretic, integrating aspects of Thomism, Hobbesianism, Cartesianism and traditional jurisprudence. Leibniz&#x27;s argument that the function of legal teaching was not to impress rules as one might train a dog, but to aid the student in discovering their own public reason, evidently impressed von Schönborn as he secured the job.

Leibniz&#x27;s next major attempt to find a universal rational core to law and so found a legal &quot;science of right&quot;, came when Leibniz worked in Mainz from 1667–72. Starting initially from Hobbes&#x27; mechanistic doctrine of power, Leibniz reverted to logico-combinatorial methods in an attempt to define justice. As Leibniz&#x27;s so-called Elementa Juris Naturalis advanced, he built in modal notions of right (possibility) and obligation (necessity) in which we see perhaps the earliest elaboration of his possible worlds doctrine within a deontic frame. While ultimately the Elementa remained unpublished, Leibniz continued to work on his drafts and promote their ideas to correspondents up until his death.

===Ecumenism===

Leibniz devoted considerable intellectual and diplomatic effort to what would now be called an ecumenical endeavor, seeking to reconcile the Roman Catholic and Lutheran churches. In this respect, he followed the example of his early patrons, Baron von Boyneburg and the Duke John Frederickboth cradle Lutherans who converted to Catholicism as adultswho did what they could to encourage the reunion of the two faiths, and who warmly welcomed such endeavors by others. (The House of Brunswick remained Lutheran, because the Duke&#x27;s children did not follow their father.) These efforts included corresponding with French bishop Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet, and involved Leibniz in some theological controversy. He evidently thought that the thoroughgoing application of reason would suffice to heal the breach caused by the Reformation.

==Philology ==
Leibniz the philologist was an avid student of languages, eagerly latching on to any information about vocabulary and grammar that came his way. In 1710, he applied ideas of gradualism and uniformitarianism to linguistics in a short essay. He refuted the belief, widely held by Christian scholars of the time, that Hebrew was the primeval language of the human race. At the same time, he rejected the idea of unrelated language groups and considered them all to have a common source. He also refuted the argument, advanced by Swedish scholars in his day, that a form of proto-Swedish was the ancestor of the Germanic languages. He puzzled over the origins of the Slavic languages and was fascinated by classical Chinese. Leibniz was also an expert in the Sanskrit language.

He published the &quot;princeps editio&quot; (first modern edition) of the late medieval &quot;Chronicon Holtzatiae&quot;, a Latin chronicle of the County of Holstein.

==Sinophology==

Leibniz was perhaps the first major European intellectual to take a close interest in Chinese civilization, which he knew by corresponding with, and reading other works by, European Christian missionaries posted in China. He apparently read &quot;Confucius Sinarum Philosophus&quot; in the first year of its publication. He came to the conclusion that Europeans could learn much from the Confucian ethical tradition. He mulled over the possibility that the Chinese characters were an unwitting form of his universal characteristic. He noted how the &quot;I Ching&quot; hexagrams correspond to the binary numbers from 000000 to 111111, and concluded that this mapping was evidence of major Chinese accomplishments in the sort of philosophical mathematics he admired. Leibniz communicated his ideas of the binary system representing Christianity to the Emperor of China, hoping it would convert him. Leibniz was one of the western philosophers of the time who attempted to accommodate Confucian ideas to prevailing European beliefs.

Leibniz&#x27;s attraction to Chinese philosophy originates from his perception that Chinese philosophy was similar to his own. The historian E.R. Hughes suggests that Leibniz&#x27;s ideas of &quot;simple substance&quot; and &quot;pre-established harmony&quot; were directly influenced by Confucianism, pointing to the fact that they were conceived during the period when he was reading &quot;Confucius Sinarum Philosophus&quot;.

== Polymath ==

While making his grand tour of European archives to research the Brunswick family history that he never completed, Leibniz stopped in Vienna between May 1688 and February 1689, where he did much legal and diplomatic work for the Brunswicks. He visited mines, talked with mine engineers, and tried to negotiate export contracts for lead from the ducal mines in the Harz mountains. His proposal that the streets of Vienna be lit with lamps burning rapeseed oil was implemented. During a formal audience with the Austrian Emperor and in subsequent memoranda, he advocated reorganizing the Austrian economy, reforming the coinage of much of central Europe, negotiating a Concordat between the Habsburgs and the Vatican, and creating an imperial research library, official archive, and public insurance fund. He wrote and published an important paper on mechanics.

==Posthumous reputation==
When Leibniz died, his reputation was in decline. He was remembered for only one book, the &quot;Théodicée&quot;, whose supposed central argument Voltaire lampooned in his popular book &quot;Candide&quot;, which concludes with the character Candide saying, &quot;Non liquet&quot; (it is not clear), a term that was applied during the Roman Republic to a legal verdict of &quot;not proven&quot;. Voltaire&#x27;s depiction of Leibniz&#x27;s ideas was so influential that many believed it to be an accurate description. Thus Voltaire and his &quot;Candide&quot; bear some of the blame for the lingering failure to appreciate and understand Leibniz&#x27;s ideas. Leibniz had an ardent disciple, Christian Wolff, whose dogmatic and facile outlook did Leibniz&#x27;s reputation much harm. Leibniz also influenced David Hume, who read his &quot;Théodicée&quot; and used some of his ideas. In any event, philosophical fashion was moving away from the rationalism and system building of the 17th century, of which Leibniz had been such an ardent proponent. His work on law, diplomacy, and history was seen as of ephemeral interest. The vastness and richness of his correspondence went unrecognized.

Leibniz&#x27;s reputation began to recover with the 1765 publication of the &quot;Nouveaux Essais&quot;. In 1768, Louis Dutens edited the first multi-volume edition of Leibniz&#x27;s writings, followed in the 19th century by a number of editions, including those edited by Erdmann, Foucher de Careil, Gerhardt, Gerland, Klopp, and Mollat. Publication of Leibniz&#x27;s correspondence with notables such as Antoine Arnauld, Samuel Clarke, Sophia of Hanover, and her daughter Sophia Charlotte of Hanover, began.

In 1900, Bertrand Russell published a critical study of Leibniz&#x27;s metaphysics. Shortly thereafter, Louis Couturat published an important study of Leibniz, and edited a volume of Leibniz&#x27;s heretofore unpublished writings, mainly on logic. They made Leibniz somewhat respectable among 20th-century analytical and linguistic philosophers in the English-speaking world (Leibniz had already been of great influence to many Germans such as Bernhard Riemann). For example, Leibniz&#x27;s phrase &quot;salva veritate&quot;, meaning interchangeability without loss of or compromising the truth, recurs in Willard Quine&#x27;s writings. Nevertheless, the secondary literature on Leibniz did not really blossom until after World War II. This is especially true of English speaking countries; in Gregory Brown&#x27;s bibliography fewer than 30 of the English language entries were published before 1946. American Leibniz studies owe much to Leroy Loemker (1900–1985) through his translations and his interpretive essays in LeClerc (1973). Leibniz&#x27;s philosophy was also highly regarded by Gilles Deleuze, who in 1988 published The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque. 

Nicholas Jolley has surmised that Leibniz&#x27;s reputation as a philosopher is now perhaps higher than at any time since he was alive. Analytic and contemporary philosophy continue to invoke his notions of identity, individuation, and possible worlds. Work in the history of 17th- and 18th-century ideas has revealed more clearly the 17th-century &quot;Intellectual Revolution&quot; that preceded the better-known Industrial and commercial revolutions of the 18th and 19th centuries.

In Germany, various important institutions were named after Leibniz. In Hanover in particular, he is the namesake for some of the most important institutions in the town:
* &quot;Leibniz University Hannover&quot;
* &quot;Leibniz-Akademie&quot;, Institution for academic and non-academic training and further education in the business sector
* &quot;Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Bibliothek – Niedersächsische Landesbibliothek&quot;, one of the largest regional and academic libraries in Germany and, alongside the Oldenburg State Library and the Herzog August Library in Wolfenbüttel, one of the three state libraries in Lower Saxony
* &quot;Gottfried-Wilhelm-Leibniz-Gesellschaft&quot;, Society for the cultivation and dissemination of Leibniz&#x27;s teachings

outside of Hanover:
* &quot;Leibniz Association&quot;, Berlin
* &quot;Leibniz-Sozietät der Wissenschaften zu Berlin&quot;, Association of scientists founded in Berlin in 1993 with the legal form of a registered association; It continues the activities of the Academy of Sciences of the GDR with personnel continuity
* &quot;Leibniz Kolleg&quot; of Tübingen University, central propaedeutic institution of the university, which aims to enable high school graduates to make a well-founded study decision through a ten-month, comprehensive general course of study and at the same time to introduce them to academic work
* Leibniz Supercomputing Centre, Munich
* more than 20 schools all over Germany

Awards:
* &quot;Leibniz-Ring-Hannover&quot;, Honor given since 1997 by the Hannover Press Club to personalities or institutions &quot;who have drawn attention to themselves through an outstanding performance or have made a special mark through their life&#x27;s work.&quot;
* &quot;Leibniz-Medaille&quot; of the Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences and Humanities, established in 1906 and awarded previously by the Prussian Academy of Sciences and later the German Academy of Sciences at Berlin
* &quot;Gottfried-Wilhelm-Leibniz-Medaille&quot; of the Leibniz-Sozietät
* &quot;Leibniz-Medaille der Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur Mainz&quot;

In 1985, the German government created the Leibniz Prize, offering an annual award of 1.55 million euros for experimental results and 770,000 euros for theoretical ones. It was the world&#x27;s largest prize for scientific achievement prior to the Fundamental Physics Prize.

The collection of manuscript papers of Leibniz at the Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Bibliothek – Niedersächische Landesbibliothek was inscribed on UNESCO&#x27;s Memory of the World Register in 2007.

===Cultural references===
Leibniz still receives popular attention. The Google Doodle for 1 July 2018 celebrated Leibniz&#x27;s 372nd birthday. Using a quill, his hand is shown writing &quot;Google&quot; in binary ASCII code.

One of the earliest popular but indirect expositions of Leibniz was Voltaire&#x27;s satire &quot;Candide&quot;, published in 1759. Leibniz was lampooned as Professor Pangloss, described as &quot;the greatest philosopher of the Holy Roman Empire&quot;.

Leibniz also appears as one of the main historical figures in Neal Stephenson&#x27;s series of novels &quot;The Baroque Cycle&quot;. Stephenson credits readings and discussions concerning Leibniz for inspiring him to write the series.

Leibniz also stars in Adam Ehrlich Sachs&#x27;s novel &quot;The Organs of Sense&quot;.

The German biscuit Choco Leibniz is named after Leibniz, a famous resident of Hanover where the manufacturer Bahlsen is based.

==Writings and publication==

Leibniz mainly wrote in three languages: scholastic Latin, French and German. During his lifetime, he published many pamphlets and scholarly articles, but only two &quot;philosophical&quot; books, the &quot;Combinatorial Art&quot; and the &quot;Théodicée&quot;. (He published numerous pamphlets, often anonymous, on behalf of the House of Brunswick-Lüneburg, most notably the &quot;De jure suprematum&quot; a major consideration of the nature of sovereignty.) One substantial book appeared posthumously, his &quot;Nouveaux essais sur l&#x27;entendement humain&quot;, which Leibniz had withheld from publication after the death of John Locke. Only in 1895, when Bodemann completed his catalogue of Leibniz&#x27;s manuscripts and correspondence, did the enormous extent of Leibniz&#x27;s &quot;Nachlass&quot; become clear: about 15,000 letters to more than 1000 recipients plus more than 40,000 other items. Moreover, quite a few of these letters are of essay length. Much of his vast correspondence, especially the letters dated after 1700, remains unpublished, and much of what is published has appeared only in recent decades. The more than 67,000 records of the Leibniz Edition&#x27;s Catalogue cover almost all of his known writings and the letters from him and to him. The amount, variety, and disorder of Leibniz&#x27;s writings are a predictable result of a situation he described in a letter as follows:

The extant parts of the critical edition of Leibniz&#x27;s writings are organized as follows:
* Series 1. &quot;Political, Historical, and General Correspondence&quot;. 25 vols., 1666–1706.
* Series 2. &quot;Philosophical Correspondence&quot;. 3 vols., 1663–1700.
* Series 3. &quot;Mathematical, Scientific, and Technical Correspondence&quot;. 8 vols., 1672–1698.
* Series 4. &quot;Political Writings&quot;. 9 vols., 1667–1702.
* Series 5. &quot;Historical and Linguistic Writings&quot;. In preparation.
* Series 6. &quot;Philosophical Writings&quot;. 7 vols., 1663–90, and &quot;Nouveaux essais sur l&#x27;entendement humain&quot;.
* Series 7. &quot;Mathematical Writings&quot;. 6 vols., 1672–76.
* Series 8. &quot;Scientific, Medical, and Technical Writings&quot;. 1 vol., 1668–76.

The systematic cataloguing of all of Leibniz&#x27;s &quot;Nachlass&quot; began in 1901. It was hampered by two world wars and then by decades of German division into two states, separating scholars and scattering portions of his literary estates. The ambitious project has had to deal with writings in seven languages, contained in some 200,000 written and printed pages. In 1985 it was reorganized and included in a joint program of German federal and state (&quot;Länder&quot;) academies. Since then the branches in Potsdam, Münster, Hanover and Berlin have jointly published 57 volumes of the critical edition, with an average of 870 pages, and prepared index and concordance works.

=== Selected works ===
The year given is usually that in which the work was completed, not of its eventual publication.
* 1666 (publ. 1690). &quot;De Arte Combinatoria&quot; (&quot;On the Art of Combination&quot;); partially translated in Loemker §1 and Parkinson (1966)
* 1667. &quot;Nova Methodus Discendae Docendaeque Iurisprudentiae&quot; (&quot;A New Method for Learning and Teaching Jurisprudence&quot;)
* 1667. &quot;Dialogus de connexione inter res et verba&quot;
* 1671. &quot;Hypothesis Physica Nova&quot; (&quot;New Physical Hypothesis&quot;); Loemker §8.I (part)
* 1673 &quot;&quot; (&quot;A Philosopher&#x27;s Creed&quot;); an English translation is online.
* Oct. 1684. &quot;Meditationes de cognitione, veritate et ideis&quot; (&quot;Meditations on Knowledge, Truth, and Ideas&quot;)
* Nov. 1684. &quot;Nova methodus pro maximis et minimis&quot; (&quot;New method for maximums and minimums&quot;); translated in Struik, D. J., 1969. &quot;A Source Book in Mathematics, 1200–1800&quot;. Harvard University Press: 271–81.
* 1686. &quot;Discours de métaphysique&quot;; Martin and Brown (1988), Ariew and Garber 35, Loemker §35, Wiener III.3, Woolhouse and Francks 1
* 1686. &quot;Generales inquisitiones de analysi notionum et veritatum&quot; (&quot;General Inquiries About the Analysis of Concepts and of Truths&quot;)
* 1694. &quot;De primae philosophiae Emendatione, et de Notione Substantiae&quot; (&quot;On the Correction of First Philosophy and the Notion of Substance&quot;)
* 1695. &quot;Système nouveau de la nature et de la communication des substances&quot; (&quot;New System of Nature&quot;)
* 1700. &quot;Accessiones historicae&quot;
* 1703. &quot;Explication de l&#x27;Arithmétique Binaire&quot; (&quot;Explanation of Binary Arithmetic&quot;); Carl Immanuel Gerhardt, &quot;Mathematical Writings&quot; VII.223. An English translation by Lloyd Strickland is available online.
* 1704 (publ. 1765). &quot;Nouveaux essais sur l&#x27;entendement humain&quot;. Translated in: Remnant, Peter, and Bennett, Jonathan, trans., 1996. &quot;New Essays on Human Understanding&quot; Langley translation 1896. Cambridge University Press. Wiener III.6 (part)
* 1707–1710. &quot;Scriptores rerum Brunsvicensium&quot; (3 Vols.)
* 1710. &quot;Théodicée&quot;; Farrer, A. M., and Huggard, E. M., trans., 1985 (1952). Wiener III.11 (part). An English translation is available online at Project Gutenberg.
* 1714. &quot;Principes de la nature et de la Grâce fondés en raison&quot;
* 1714. &quot;Monadologie&quot;; translated by Nicholas Rescher, 1991. &quot;The Monadology: An Edition for Students&quot;. University of Pittsburgh Press. Ariew and Garber 213, Loemker §67, Wiener III.13, Woolhouse and Francks 19. An English translation by Robert Latta is available online.

==== Posthumous works ====
* 1717. &quot;Collectanea Etymologica&quot;, edited by the secretary of Leibniz Johann Georg von Eckhart
* 1749. &quot;Protogaea&quot;
* 1750. &quot;Origines Guelficae&quot;

=== Collections ===
Six important collections of English translations are Wiener (1951), Parkinson (1966), Loemker (1969), Ariew and Garber (1989), Woolhouse and Francks (1998), and Strickland (2006). The ongoing critical edition of all of Leibniz&#x27;s writings is &quot;Sämtliche Schriften und Briefe&quot;.

== See also ==

* General Leibniz rule
* Leibniz Association
* Leibniz operator
* List of German inventors and discoverers
* List of pioneers in computer science
* List of things named after Gottfried Leibniz
* &quot;Mathesis universalis&quot;
* Scientific Revolution
* Leibniz University Hannover
* Bartholomew Des Bosses
* Joachim Bouvet
* Outline of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
* Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz bibliography

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
==== Bibliographies ====
* Bodemann, Eduard, &quot;Die Leibniz-Handschriften der Königlichen öffentlichen Bibliothek zu Hannover&quot;, 1895, (anastatic reprint: Hildesheim, Georg Olms, 1966).
* Bodemann, Eduard, &quot;Der Briefwechsel des Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz in der Königlichen öffentlichen Bibliothek zu Hannover&quot;, 1889, (anastatic reprint: Hildesheim, Georg Olms, 1966).
* Ravier, Émile, &quot;Bibliographie des œuvres de Leibniz&quot;, Paris: Alcan, 1937 (anastatic reprint Hildesheim: Georg Olms, 1966).
* Heinekamp, Albert and Mertens, Marlen. &quot;Leibniz-Bibliographie. Die Literatur über Leibniz bis 1980&quot;, Frankfurt: Vittorio Klostermann, 1984.
* Heinekamp, Albert and Mertens, Marlen. &quot;Leibniz-Bibliographie. Die Literatur über Leibniz. Band II: 1981–1990&quot;, Frankfurt: Vittorio Klostermann, 1996.

An updated bibliography of more than 25.000 titles is available at Leibniz Bibliographie.

==== Primary literature (chronologically) ====
* Wiener, Philip, (ed.), 1951. &quot;Leibniz: Selections&quot;. Scribner.
* Schrecker, Paul &amp; Schrecker, Anne Martin, (eds.), 1965. &quot;Monadology and other Philosophical Essays&quot;. Prentice-Hall.
* Parkinson, G. H. R. (ed.), 1966. &quot;Logical Papers&quot;. Clarendon Press.
* Mason, H. T. &amp; Parkinson, G. H. R. (eds.), 1967. &quot;The Leibniz-Arnauld Correspondence&quot;. Manchester University Press.
* Loemker, Leroy, (ed.), 1969 [1956]. &quot;Leibniz: Philosophical Papers and Letters&quot;. Reidel.
* Morris, Mary &amp; Parkinson, G. H. R. (eds.), 1973. &quot;Philosophical Writings&quot;. Everyman&#x27;s University Library.
* Riley, Patrick, (ed.), 1988. &quot;Leibniz: Political Writings&quot;. Cambridge University Press.
* Niall, R. Martin, D. &amp; Brown, Stuart (eds.), 1988. &quot;Discourse on Metaphysics and Related Writings&quot;. Manchester University Press.
* Ariew, Roger and Garber, Daniel. (eds.), 1989. &quot;Leibniz: Philosophical Essays&quot;. Hackett.
* Rescher, Nicholas (ed.), 1991. &quot;G. W. Leibniz&#x27;s Monadology. An Edition for Students&quot;, University of Pittsburgh Press.
* Rescher, Nicholas, &quot;On Leibniz&quot;, (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2013).
* Parkinson, G. H. R. (ed.) 1992. &quot;De Summa Rerum. Metaphysical Papers, 1675–1676&quot;. Yale University Press.
* Cook, Daniel, &amp; Rosemont, Henry Jr., (eds.), 1994. &quot;Leibniz: Writings on China&quot;. Open Court.
* Farrer, Austin (ed.), 1995. &quot;Theodicy&quot;, Open Court.
* Remnant, Peter, &amp; Bennett, Jonathan, (eds.), 1996 (1981). &quot;Leibniz: New Essays on Human Understanding&quot;. Cambridge University Press.
* Woolhouse, R. S., and Francks, R., (eds.), 1997. &quot;Leibniz&#x27;s &#x27;New System&#x27; and Associated Contemporary Texts&quot;. Oxford University Press.
* Woolhouse, R. S., and Francks, R., (eds.), 1998. &quot;Leibniz: Philosophical Texts&quot;. Oxford University Press.
* Ariew, Roger, (ed.), 2000. &quot;G. W. Leibniz and Samuel Clarke: Correspondence&quot;. Hackett.
* Richard T. W. Arthur, (ed.), 2001. &quot;The Labyrinth of the Continuum: Writings on the Continuum Problem, 1672–1686&quot;. Yale University Press.
* Richard T. W. Arthur, 2014. &quot;Leibniz&quot;. John Wiley &amp; Sons.
* Robert C. Sleigh Jr., (ed.), 2005. &quot;Confessio Philosophi: Papers Concerning the Problem of Evil, 1671–1678&quot;. Yale University Press.
* Dascal, Marcelo (ed.), 2006. &quot;G. W. Leibniz. The Art of Controversies&quot;, Springer.
* Strickland, Lloyd, 2006 (ed.). &quot;The Shorter Leibniz Texts: A Collection of New Translations&quot;. Continuum.
* Look, Brandon and Rutherford, Donald (eds.), 2007. &quot;The Leibniz-Des Bosses Correspondence&quot;, Yale University Press.
* Cohen, Claudine and Wakefield, Andre, (eds.), 2008. &quot;Protogaea&quot;. University of Chicago Press.
* Murray, Michael, (ed.) 2011. &quot;Dissertation on Predestination and Grace&quot;, Yale University Press.
* Strickand, Lloyd (ed.), 2011. &quot;Leibniz and the two Sophies. The Philosophical Correspondence&quot;, Toronto.
* Lodge, Paul (ed.), 2013. &quot;The Leibniz-De Volder Correspondence: With Selections from the Correspondence Between Leibniz and Johann Bernoulli&quot;, Yale University Press.
* Artosi, Alberto, Pieri, Bernardo, Sartor, Giovanni (eds.), 2014. &quot;Leibniz: Logico-Philosophical Puzzles in the Law&quot;, Springer.
* De Iuliis, Carmelo Massimo, (ed.), 2017. &quot;Leibniz: The New Method of Learning and Teaching Jurisprudence&quot;, Talbot, Clark NJ.

==== Secondary literature up to 1950 ====
* Du Bois-Reymond, Emil, 1912. &quot;Leibnizsche Gedanken in der neueren Naturwissenschaft&quot;, Berlin: Dummler, 1871 (reprinted in &quot;Reden&quot;, Leipzig: Veit, vol. 1).
* Couturat, Louis, 1901. &quot;La Logique de Leibniz&quot;. Paris: Felix Alcan.
* Heidegger, Martin, 1983. &quot;The Metaphysical Foundations of Logic&quot;. Indiana University Press (lecture course, 1928).
* Lovejoy, Arthur O., 1957 (1936). &quot;Plenitude and Sufficient Reason in Leibniz and Spinoza&quot; in his &quot;The Great Chain of Being&quot;. Harvard University Press: 144–182. Reprinted in Frankfurt, H. G., (ed.), 1972. &quot;Leibniz: A Collection of Critical Essays&quot;. Anchor Books 1972.
* Mackie, John Milton; Guhrauer, Gottschalk Eduard, 1845. &quot;Life of Godfrey William von &quot;. Gould, Kendall and Lincoln.
* Russell, Bertrand, 1900, &quot;A Critical Exposition of the Philosophy of Leibniz&quot;, Cambridge: The University Press.
* Trendelenburg, F. A., 1857, &quot;Über Leibnizens Entwurf einer allgemeinen Charakteristik,&quot; &quot;Philosophische Abhandlungen der Königlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin. Aus dem Jahr 1856&quot;, Berlin: Commission Dümmler, pp. 36–69.
* (lecture)

==== Secondary literature post-1950 ====
* Adams, Robert Merrihew. 1994. &quot;Leibniz: Determinist, Theist, Idealist&quot;. New York: Oxford, Oxford University Press.
* Aiton, Eric J., 1985. &quot;Leibniz: A Biography&quot;. Hilger (UK).
* Antognazza, Maria Rosa, 2008. &quot;Leibniz: An Intellectual Biography&quot;. Cambridge University Press.
* Antognazza, Maria Rosa, 2016. &quot;Leibniz: A Very Short Introduction&quot;. Oxford University Press.
* Antognazza, Maria Rosa, ed., 2018. &quot;Oxford Handbook of Leibniz&quot;. Oxford University Press.
* Borowski, Audrey, 2024. &quot;Leibniz in His World: The Making of a Savant&quot;. Princeton University Press.
* Brown, Stuart (ed.), 1999. &quot;The Young Leibniz and His Philosophy (1646–76)&quot;, Dordrecht, Kluwer.
* Connelly, Stephen, 2021. &quot;Leibniz: A Contribution to the Archaeology of Power&quot;, Edinburgh University Press .
* Davis, Martin, 2000. &quot;The Universal Computer: The Road from Leibniz to Turing&quot;. WW Norton.
* Deleuze, Gilles, 1993. &quot;The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque&quot;. University of Minnesota Press.
* Fahrenberg, Jochen, 2017. PsyDok ZPID The influence of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz on the Psychology, Philosophy, and Ethics of Wilhelm Wundt.
* Fahrenberg, Jochen, 2020. &quot;Wilhelm Wundt (1832–1920). Introduction, Quotations, Reception, Commentaries, Attempts at Reconstruction&quot;. Pabst Science Publishers, Lengerich 2020, .
* Finster, Reinhard &amp; van den Heuvel, Gerd 2000. &quot;Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz&quot;. Mit Selbstzeugnissen und Bilddokumenten. 4. Auflage. Rowohlt, Reinbek bei Hamburg (Rowohlts Monographien, 50481), .
* Grattan-Guinness, Ivor, 1997. &quot;The Norton History of the Mathematical Sciences&quot;. W W Norton.
* Hall, A. R., 1980. &quot;Philosophers at War: The Quarrel between Newton and Leibniz&quot;. Cambridge University Press.
* Hamza, Gabor, 2005. &quot;Le développement du droit privé européen&quot;. ELTE Eotvos Kiado Budapest.
* Hostler, John, 1975. &quot;Leibniz&#x27;s Moral Philosophy&quot;. UK: Duckworth.
* Ishiguro, Hidé 1990. &quot;Leibniz&#x27;s Philosophy of Logic and Language&quot;. Cambridge University Press.
* Jolley, Nicholas, (ed.), 1995. &quot;The Cambridge Companion to Leibniz&quot;. Cambridge University Press.
* Kaldis, Byron, 2011. &quot;Leibniz&#x27; Argument for Innate Ideas&quot;, in Bruce, Michael and Barbone, Steven, eds., &quot;Just the Arguments: 100 of the Most Important Arguments in Western Philosophy&quot;. Wiley-Blackwell.
* Kempe, Michael, 2024. &quot;The Best of All Possible Worlds: A Life of Leibniz in Seven Pivotal Days&quot;. W. W. Norton.
*Kromer, Ralf, and Yannick Chin-Drian. &quot;New Essays on Leibniz Reception: In Science and Philosophy of Science 1800-2000.&quot; 1st ed. 2012. Heidelberg: Birkhauser, 2012.
* LeClerc, Ivor (ed.), 1973. &quot;The Philosophy of Leibniz and the Modern World&quot;. Vanderbilt University Press.
* Mates, Benson, 1986. &quot;The Philosophy of Leibniz: Metaphysics and Language&quot;. Oxford University Press.
* Mercer, Christia, 2001. &quot;Leibniz&#x27;s Metaphysics: Its Origins and Development&quot;. Cambridge University Press.
* Perkins, Franklin, 2004. &quot;Leibniz and China: A Commerce of Light&quot;. Cambridge University Press.
* Riley, Patrick, 1996. &quot;Leibniz&#x27;s Universal Jurisprudence: Justice as the Charity of the Wise&quot;. Harvard University Press.
* Rutherford, Donald, 1998. &quot;Leibniz and the Rational Order of Nature&quot;. Cambridge University Press.
* Schulte-Albert, H. G. (1971). Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz and Library Classification. &quot;The Journal of Library History&quot; (1966–1972), (2). 133–152.
* Smith, Justin E. H., 2011. &quot;Divine Machines. Leibniz and the Sciences of Life&quot;, Princeton University Press.
* Wilson, Catherine, 1989. &quot;Leibniz&#x27;s Metaphysics: A Historical and Comparative Study&quot;. Princeton University Press.

== External links ==

* 
* 
* 
* Horn, Joshua. 
* Jorarti, Julia. 
* 
* Translations by Jonathan Bennett, of the &quot;New Essays&quot;, the exchanges with Bayle, Arnauld and Clarke, and about 15 shorter works.
* Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz: Texts and Translations, compiled by Donald Rutherford, UCSD
* Leibnitiana, links and resources edited by Gregory Brown, University of Houston
* Philosophical Works of Leibniz translated by G.M. Duncan (1890)
* The Best of All Possible Worlds: Nicholas Rescher Talks About Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibniz&#x27;s &quot;Versatility and Creativity&quot;
* &quot;Protogæa&quot; (1693, Latin, in &quot;Acta eruditorum&quot;) – Linda Hall Library
* &quot;Protogaea&quot; (1749, German) – full digital facsimile from Linda Hall Library
* Leibniz&#x27;s (1768, 6-volume) &quot;Opera omnia&quot; – digital facsimile
* Leibniz&#x27;s arithmetical machine, 1710, online and analyzed on &quot;BibNum &quot; 
* Leibniz&#x27;s binary numeral system, &#x27;De progressione dyadica&#x27;, 1679, online and analyzed on &quot;BibNum &quot; </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="0" end="25" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz" label="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="30" end="38" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz" label="Leibnitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q270141" start="73" end="81" title="polymath" label="polymath"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="94" end="107" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="109" end="120" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q901" start="122" end="131" title="scientist" label="scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q193391" start="136" end="144" title="diplomat" label="diplomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="172" end="188" title="Isaac Newton" label="Sir Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q149972" start="211" end="219" title="calculus" label="calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="258" end="269" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="301" end="311" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q27654" start="576" end="597" title="history of philosophy" label="history of philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q185264" start="606" end="628" title="history of mathematics" label="history of mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="648" end="658" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="660" end="668" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="670" end="676" title="ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="678" end="686" title="politics" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="688" end="691" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="693" end="700" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="702" end="711" title="philology" label="philology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11410" start="713" end="718" title="games" label="games"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="720" end="725" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="787" end="794" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="799" end="809" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5862903" start="863" end="881" title="probability theory" label="probability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="883" end="890" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="892" end="900" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="902" end="909" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="911" end="921" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="923" end="934" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="939" end="955" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q13420675" start="995" end="1010" title="library science" label="library science"/>
<link wikidata="Q663820" start="1067" end="1088" title="Herzog August Library" label="Herzog August Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122" start="1092" end="1104" title="Wolfenbüttel" label="Wolfenbüttel"/>
<link wikidata="Q737498" start="1255" end="1270" title="learned journal" label="learned journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="1474" end="1485" title="rationalism" label="rationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33442" start="1490" end="1498" title="idealism" label="idealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519096" start="1619" end="1632" title="Leibniz–Newton calculus controversy" label="independently"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069516" start="1680" end="1703" title="Leibniz&amp;#x27;s notation" label="Leibniz&amp;#x27;s notation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1853" end="1870" title="Computer#Digital computers" label="digital computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532114" start="1924" end="1946" title="combinatorial topology" label="combinatorial topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11108587" start="2017" end="2034" title="law of continuity" label="law of continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833870" start="2039" end="2072" title="transcendental law of homogeneity" label="transcendental law of homogeneity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503766" start="2129" end="2150" title="non-standard analysis" label="non-standard analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q211586" start="2190" end="2211" title="mechanical calculator" label="mechanical calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q873501" start="2279" end="2303" title="Pascal&amp;#x27;s calculator" label="Pascal&amp;#x27;s calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429194" start="2336" end="2355" title="pinwheel calculator" label="pinwheel calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q8713451" start="2381" end="2394" title="Leibniz wheel" label="Leibniz wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q669329" start="2414" end="2426" title="arithmometer" label="arithmometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="2480" end="2490" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="2495" end="2503" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q485446" start="2535" end="2543" title="Philosophical optimism" label="optimism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217908" start="2610" end="2629" title="Best of all possible worlds" label="best possible world"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="2635" end="2638" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139338" start="2650" end="2657" title="Creatio ex nihilo" label="created"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="2713" end="2721" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="2729" end="2738" title="Satire" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="2739" end="2746" title="novella" label="novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q215894" start="2753" end="2760" title="Candide" label="Candide"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="2788" end="2802" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35802" start="2807" end="2821" title="Baruch Spinoza" label="Baruch Spinoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="2869" end="2881" title="rationalism" label="rationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q41679" start="2931" end="2941" title="Scholasticism" label="scholastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="3131" end="3136" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183216" start="3171" end="3190" title="analytic philosophy" label="analytic philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088088" start="3234" end="3248" title="possible world" label="possible world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243600" start="3265" end="3270" title="Modality (natural language)" label="modal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="3358" end="3365" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q75925" start="3378" end="3395" title="Friedrich Leibniz" label="Friedrich Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q694286" start="3477" end="3505" title="St. Nicholas Church, Leipzig" label="St. Nicholas Church, Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="3529" end="3537" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q154804" start="3703" end="3724" title="University of Leipzig" label="University of Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033171" start="3994" end="3999" title="Canon (basic principle)" label="canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="4263" end="4268" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q109548" start="4390" end="4400" title="hexameters" label="hexameters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496542" start="4404" end="4415" title="Latin poetry" label="Latin verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q67323" start="4582" end="4597" title="Jakob Thomasius" label="Jakob Thomasius"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="4656" end="4678" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245158" start="4879" end="4905" title="principle of individuation" label="principle of individuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="4988" end="5008" title="master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266946" start="5088" end="5100" title="dissertation" label="dissertation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020291" start="5582" end="5602" title="De Arte Combinatoria" label="De Arte Combinatoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q308678" start="5686" end="5698" title="habilitation" label="habilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193660" start="5803" end="5814" title="Ramon Llull" label="Ramon Llull"/>
<link wikidata="Q193660" start="5828" end="5837" title="Ars Magna (Ramon Llull)" label="Ars Magna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699404" start="5860" end="5889" title="proof of the existence of God" label="proof of the existence of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q949648" start="5934" end="5954" title="argument from motion" label="argument from motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q880228" start="6295" end="6316" title="University of Altdorf" label="University of Altdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q300942" start="6863" end="6866" title="von" label="von"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338119" start="6981" end="6989" title="Freiherr" label="Freiherr"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="7132" end="7140" title="nobility" label="nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="7224" end="7234" title="alchemy" label="alchemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="7246" end="7255" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q95435" start="7363" end="7393" title="Johann Christian von Boyneburg" label="Johann Christian von Boyneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q22722" start="7443" end="7450" title="Prince-elector" label="Elector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720" start="7454" end="7459" title="Mainz" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q65766" start="7461" end="7489" title="Johann Philipp von Schönborn" label="Johann Philipp von Schönborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="8479" end="8498" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="8561" end="8583" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614050" start="8593" end="8615" title="German language in Europe" label="German-speaking Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="8782" end="8787" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="8844" end="8861" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Dutch East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q646322" start="9126" end="9142" title="Franco-Dutch War" label="Franco-Dutch War"/>
<link wikidata="Q253684" start="9182" end="9214" title="French campaign in Egypt and Syria" label="failed invasion of Egypt in 1798"/>
<link wikidata="Q39599" start="9495" end="9513" title="Christiaan Huygens" label="Christiaan Huygens"/>
<link wikidata="Q207650" start="9639" end="9649" title="self-study" label="self-study"/>
<link wikidata="Q149972" start="9786" end="9794" title="calculus" label="calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q309818" start="9803" end="9822" title="Nicolas Malebranche" label="Nicolas Malebranche"/>
<link wikidata="Q353887" start="9827" end="9842" title="Antoine Arnauld" label="Antoine Arnauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="9916" end="9925" title="Descartes" label="Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290" start="9930" end="9936" title="Blaise Pascal" label="Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q77288" start="10010" end="10044" title="Ehrenfried Walther von Tschirnhaus" label="Ehrenfried Walther von Tschirnhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q700422" start="10352" end="10367" title="Henry Oldenburg" label="Henry Oldenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279339" start="10372" end="10384" title="John Collins (mathematician)" label="John Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="10402" end="10415" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q62800" start="11010" end="11024" title="John Frederick, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="John Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q556263" start="11028" end="11037" title="Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="11422" end="11430" title="Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q188771" start="11488" end="11514" title="French Academy of Sciences" label="French Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="12089" end="12098" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q43522" start="12112" end="12127" title="van Leeuwenhoek" label="van Leeuwenhoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q35802" start="12217" end="12224" title="Baruch Spinoza" label="Spinoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q862816" start="12299" end="12305" title="Ethics (Spinoza)" label="Ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q166886" start="12627" end="12632" title="duke" label="ducal"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="12720" end="12731" title="theological" label="theological"/>
<link wikidata="Q57224" start="13145" end="13162" title="Sophia of Hanover" label="Sophia of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q57674" start="13189" end="13216" title="Sophia Charlotte of Hanover" label="Sophia Charlotte of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q76961" start="13280" end="13299" title="Caroline of Ansbach" label="Caroline of Ansbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="13341" end="13350" title="George II of Great Britain" label="George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="13504" end="13529" title="George I of Great Britain" label="George I of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q556263" start="13686" end="13695" title="Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="13896" end="13913" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q316537" start="13927" end="13949" title="Act of Settlement 1701" label="Act of Settlement 1701"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="14045" end="14056" title="William III of England" label="William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="14094" end="14104" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="14362" end="14380" title="British Parliament" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q64592" start="14955" end="14966" title="Otto Mencke" label="Otto Mencke"/>
<link wikidata="Q343161" start="14994" end="15009" title="Acta Eruditorum" label="Acta Eruditorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q372190" start="15203" end="15218" title="Ernest Augustus, Elector of Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="Ernest Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="15312" end="15323" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q47307" start="15975" end="15984" title="genealogy" label="genealogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q663820" start="16326" end="16347" title="Herzog August Library" label="Herzog August Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122" start="16351" end="16363" title="Wolfenbüttel" label="Wolfenbüttel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197" start="16365" end="16377" title="Lower Saxony" label="Lower Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747596" start="16398" end="16408" title="John Keill" label="John Keill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519096" start="16573" end="16598" title="Newton v. Leibniz calculus controversy" label="calculus priority dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="17070" end="17076" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q536989" start="17101" end="17126" title="Reichshofrat" label="Imperial Court Councillor"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="17134" end="17142" title="Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="17214" end="17239" title="George I of Great Britain" label="George I of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="18019" end="18023" title="Tsar" label="Tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="18024" end="18039" title="Peter I of Russia" label="Peter the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q556352" start="18051" end="18062" title="Bad Pyrmont" label="Bad Pyrmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="18192" end="18199" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q329464" start="18461" end="18487" title="Prussian Academy of Sciences" label="Berlin Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q310309" start="18616" end="18626" title="Bernard de Fontenelle" label="Fontenelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q188771" start="18639" end="18665" title="French Academy of Sciences" label="French Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q57221" start="18773" end="18791" title="Elizabeth Charlotte, Princess Palatine" label="Duchess of Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519096" start="19383" end="19403" title="Newton v. Leibniz calculus controversy" label="calculus controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="19550" end="19560" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186194" start="19567" end="19587" title="philosophical theism" label="philosophical theist"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="19619" end="19643" title="Trinitarian Christianity" label="Trinitarian Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030194" start="20103" end="20127" title="Discourse on Metaphysics" label="Discourse on Metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q309818" start="20206" end="20225" title="Nicolas Malebranche" label="Nicolas Malebranche"/>
<link wikidata="Q353887" start="20230" end="20245" title="Antoine Arnauld" label="Antoine Arnauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720221" start="20587" end="20620" title="New Essays on Human Understanding" label="New Essays on Human Understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="20652" end="20662" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q482438" start="20681" end="20720" title="An Essay Concerning Human Understanding" label="An Essay Concerning Human Understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211539" start="20881" end="20892" title="Monadology" label="Monadologie"/>
<link wikidata="Q20724" start="21082" end="21096" title="Louis Couturat" label="Louis Couturat"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="21144" end="21155" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q183216" start="21473" end="21494" title="analytic philosophy" label="analytic philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q35802" start="21705" end="21719" title="Baruch Spinoza" label="Baruch Spinoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="22131" end="22138" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q67323" start="22149" end="22164" title="Jakob Thomasius" label="Jakob Thomasius"/>
<link wikidata="Q316339" start="22233" end="22249" title="Francisco Suárez" label="Francisco Suárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="22261" end="22267" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="22286" end="22294" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q43393" start="22409" end="22414" title="Robert Boyle" label="Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q609647" start="22626" end="22634" title="Identity (mathematics)" label="Identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q363948" start="22635" end="22648" title="contradiction" label="contradiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q525506" start="22721" end="22747" title="Identity of indiscernibles" label="Identity of indiscernibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375963" start="23269" end="23277" title="converse (logic)" label="converse"/>
<link wikidata="Q636778" start="23421" end="23438" title="principle of sufficient reason" label="Sufficient reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741122" start="23560" end="23583" title="Pre-established harmony" label="Pre-established harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q11108587" start="23992" end="24009" title="Law of continuity" label="Law of continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303286" start="24017" end="24040" title="Natura non facit saltus" label="Natura non facit saltus"/>
<link wikidata="Q485446" start="24102" end="24110" title="Philosophical optimism" label="Optimism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356279" start="24165" end="24174" title="Principle of plenitude" label="Plenitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="24643" end="24654" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370437" start="24672" end="24678" title="Monad (philosophy)" label="monads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211539" start="24702" end="24713" title="Monadology" label="Monadologie"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103443" start="24883" end="24904" title="mechanical philosophy" label="mechanical philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11402" start="25285" end="25290" title="force" label="force"/>
<link wikidata="Q107" start="25318" end="25323" title="space" label="space"/>
<link wikidata="Q35758" start="25325" end="25331" title="matter" label="matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q79782" start="25337" end="25343" title="Motion (physics)" label="motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q107" start="25399" end="25404" title="space" label="space"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="25406" end="25410" title="time" label="time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390390" start="25741" end="25751" title="Max Jammer" label="Max Jammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43514" start="26027" end="26047" title="theory of relativity" label="theory of relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166858" start="26109" end="26118" title="Théodicée" label="Théodicée"/>
<link wikidata="Q868437" start="26152" end="26178" title="principle of contradiction" label="principle of contradiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q636778" start="26187" end="26217" title="principle of sufficient reason" label="principle of sufficient reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="26840" end="26851" title="ontology" label="ontological"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741122" start="27124" end="27147" title="pre-established harmony" label="pre-established harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q9476" start="27489" end="27498" title="free will" label="free will"/>
<link wikidata="Q450" start="27598" end="27602" title="mind" label="mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="27639" end="27648" title="Descartes" label="Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245158" start="27660" end="27673" title="Principle of individuation" label="individuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35802" start="27700" end="27707" title="Spinoza" label="Spinoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166858" start="27808" end="27816" title="Théodicée" label="Theodicy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217908" start="27903" end="27936" title="Best of all possible worlds" label="optimal among all possible worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="28848" end="28861" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050649" start="29537" end="29545" title="Omnibenevolence" label="all good"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424662" start="29547" end="29555" title="Omniscience" label="all wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141803" start="29561" end="29573" title="Omnipotence" label="all powerful"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062821" start="29588" end="29612" title="Problem of evil" label="evil come into the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q9476" start="29918" end="29927" title="free will" label="free will"/>
<link wikidata="Q11274284" start="33215" end="33258" title="Problem of why there is anything at all" label="Why is there something rather than nothing?"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="33398" end="33414" title="Martin Heidegger" label="Martin Heidegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q577001" start="33725" end="33746" title="calculus ratiocinator" label="calculus ratiocinator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166618" start="33764" end="33778" title="Mathematical logic" label="symbolic logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q20724" start="34091" end="34105" title="Louis Couturat" label="Louis Couturat"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="34208" end="34230" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Charles Sanders Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q60028" start="34238" end="34251" title="Gottlob Frege" label="Gottlob Frege"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="34270" end="34276" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q149972" start="34466" end="34474" title="calculus" label="calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q60195" start="34679" end="34688" title="semiotics" label="semiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545446" start="34750" end="34759" title="Grapheme" label="character"/>
<link wikidata="Q132659" start="35051" end="35073" title="Egyptian hieroglyphics" label="Egyptian hieroglyphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="35075" end="35092" title="Chinese character" label="Chinese character"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="35114" end="35123" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="35128" end="35137" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142306" start="35204" end="35231" title="characteristica universalis" label="characteristica universalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893330" start="35291" end="35316" title="alphabet of human thought" label="alphabet of human thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846249" start="35532" end="35551" title="prime factorization" label="prime factorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="35580" end="35593" title="prime numbers" label="prime numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451046" start="35654" end="35669" title="Gödel numbering" label="Gödel numbering"/>
<link wikidata="Q191062" start="35705" end="35713" title="mnemonic" label="mnemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968" start="35923" end="35930" title="algebra" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142306" start="35947" end="35965" title="universal characteristic" label="universal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q197970" start="36683" end="36702" title="Turing completeness" label="Turing completeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527413" start="36777" end="36790" title="Turing degree" label="Turing degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q60028" start="36911" end="36924" title="Gottlob Frege" label="Gottlob Frege"/>
<link wikidata="Q191081" start="36990" end="37001" title="logical conjunction" label="conjunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651704" start="37003" end="37014" title="disjunction" label="disjunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q190558" start="37016" end="37024" title="negation" label="negation"/>
<link wikidata="Q609647" start="37026" end="37034" title="Identity (mathematics)" label="identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="37040" end="37049" title="subset" label="inclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q226183" start="37059" end="37068" title="empty set" label="empty set"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893330" start="37253" end="37278" title="alphabet of human thought" label="alphabet of human thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882311" start="37496" end="37501" title="unary function" label="unary"/>
<link wikidata="Q592911" start="37515" end="37525" title="Quantification (logic)" label="quantified"/>
<link wikidata="Q50701" start="37526" end="37535" title="variable (mathematics)" label="variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228944" start="37554" end="37575" title="universe of discourse" label="universe of discourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q133740" start="37715" end="37744" title="A History of Western Philosophy" label="History of Western Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="37752" end="37768" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370437" start="38063" end="38069" title="Monad (philosophy)" label="monads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882311" start="38297" end="38302" title="unary function" label="unary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144319" start="38303" end="38313" title="Predicate (mathematical logic)" label="predicates"/>
<link wikidata="Q208448" start="38468" end="38477" title="Augustus De Morgan" label="De Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="38479" end="38485" title="Charles S. Peirce" label="Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q77297" start="38487" end="38495" title="Ernst Schröder (mathematician)" label="Schröder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055684" start="38533" end="38548" title="predicate logic" label="predicate logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q173183" start="38714" end="38729" title="Boolean algebra" label="Boolean algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000046" start="38794" end="38819" title="computational metaphysics" label="computational metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="38874" end="38882" title="Function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q58485726" start="39103" end="39111" title="abscissa" label="abscissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q58485726" start="39113" end="39121" title="ordinate" label="ordinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q131251" start="39123" end="39130" title="tangent" label="tangent"/>
<link wikidata="Q188191" start="39132" end="39137" title="chord (geometry)" label="chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q273176" start="39147" end="39160" title="Normal (geometry)" label="perpendicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870804" start="39166" end="39197" title="History of the function concept" label="History of the function concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128453" start="39319" end="39336" title="actuarial science" label="actuarial science"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39525" end="39542" title="#Formal logic" label="preceding section"/>
<link wikidata="Q622821" start="39704" end="39715" title="calculation" label="calculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q484637" start="39960" end="39975" title="linear equation" label="linear equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44337" start="40005" end="40011" title="Matrix (mathematics)" label="matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658" start="40099" end="40119" title="Gaussian elimination" label="Gaussian elimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q178546" start="40169" end="40181" title="determinants" label="determinants"/>
<link wikidata="Q470531" start="40219" end="40232" title="Seki Takakazu" label="Seki Takakazu"/>
<link wikidata="Q538557" start="40406" end="40421" title="Leibniz formula for determinants" label="Leibniz formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q322666" start="40686" end="40704" title="Cramer&amp;#x27;s rule" label="Cramer&amp;#x27;s rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q122331" start="40810" end="40824" title="Gabriel Cramer" label="Gabriel Cramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q833089" start="40993" end="41009" title="LU factorization" label="LU factorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q97226587" start="41031" end="41050" title="Leibniz formula for π" label="Leibniz formula for"/>
<link wikidata="Q207014" start="41462" end="41480" title="parallel postulate" label="parallel postulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="41717" end="41729" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q149972" start="41753" end="41761" title="calculus" label="calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665420" start="42063" end="42076" title="integral sign" label="integral sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130428" start="42175" end="42188" title="Differential (infinitesimal)" label="differentials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217677" start="42403" end="42434" title="fundamental theorem of calculus" label="fundamental theorem of calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q313906" start="42536" end="42549" title="James Gregory (mathematician)" label="James Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q207718" start="42614" end="42626" title="Isaac Barrow" label="Isaac Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="42676" end="42682" title="Isaac Newton" label="Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q466720" start="42816" end="42828" title="product rule" label="product rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q149999" start="42832" end="42853" title="differential calculus" label="differential calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996637" start="43006" end="43027" title="Leibniz integral rule" label="Leibniz integral rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q193885" start="43048" end="43061" title="infinitesimal" label="infinitesimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q483372" start="43138" end="43145" title="paradox" label="paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968" start="43150" end="43157" title="algebra" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q82049" start="43172" end="43187" title="George Berkeley" label="George Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3223788" start="43213" end="43224" title="The Analyst" label="The Analyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747596" start="43491" end="43501" title="John Keill" label="John Keill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519096" start="43527" end="43588" title="Leibniz–Newton calculus controversy" label="whether Leibniz had invented calculus independently of Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q57103" start="43665" end="43681" title="Karl Weierstrass" label="Karl Weierstrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130428" start="43812" end="43824" title="Differential (infinitesimal)" label="differential"/>
<link wikidata="Q330567" start="43845" end="43861" title="Abraham Robinson" label="Abraham Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q467606" start="43936" end="43948" title="model theory" label="model theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958543" start="43979" end="43995" title="hyperreal number" label="hyperreal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503766" start="44012" end="44033" title="non-standard analysis" label="non-standard analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157202" start="44129" end="44147" title="transfer principle" label="transfer principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11108587" start="44209" end="44226" title="law of continuity" label="law of continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439341" start="44238" end="44260" title="standard part function" label="standard part function"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833870" start="44287" end="44320" title="transcendental law of homogeneity" label="transcendental law of homogeneity"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="44468" end="44476" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q110634" start="44574" end="44591" title="Jacob Freudenthal" label="Jacob Freudenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q101740" start="44649" end="44659" title="Benoit Mandelbrot" label="Mandelbrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q81392" start="44671" end="44687" title="fractal" label="fractal geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q262372" start="44745" end="44760" title="self-similarity" label="self-similarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303286" start="44800" end="44823" title="Natura non facit saltus" label="Natura non facit saltus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532114" start="45508" end="45530" title="combinatorial topology" label="combinatorial topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="46221" end="46230" title="Descartes" label="Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="46235" end="46241" title="Isaac Newton" label="Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q79782" start="46270" end="46276" title="Motion (physics)" label="motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q128030" start="46278" end="46286" title="Dynamics (mechanics)" label="dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="46297" end="46311" title="kinetic energy" label="kinetic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q155640" start="46316" end="46332" title="potential energy" label="potential energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="46595" end="46612" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="46780" end="46795" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q107" start="46829" end="46834" title="space" label="space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142479" start="47105" end="47122" title="Relational theory" label="relational notion"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="47366" end="47380" title="space and time" label="space and time"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="47445" end="47463" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q212881" start="47491" end="47509" title="history of physics" label="history of physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1915536" start="47639" end="47652" title="Mechanical explanations of gravitation" label="vortex theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q216828" start="47826" end="47844" title="Cohesion (chemistry)" label="cohesion of matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q636778" start="47851" end="47881" title="principle of sufficient reason" label="principle of sufficient reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="47909" end="47918" title="cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q525506" start="47928" end="47954" title="identity of indiscernibles" label="identity of indiscernibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q286092" start="48258" end="48266" title="vis viva" label="vis viva"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="48332" end="48346" title="kinetic energy" label="kinetic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41273" start="48623" end="48647" title="conservation of momentum" label="conservation of momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="48687" end="48696" title="Descartes" label="Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q162633" start="48727" end="48735" title="academic" label="academic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41273" start="48881" end="48889" title="momentum" label="momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468684" start="48908" end="48922" title="closed systems" label="closed systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q131683" start="49065" end="49075" title="embryology" label="embryology"/>
<link wikidata="Q864928" start="49247" end="49260" title="life sciences" label="life sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="49265" end="49277" title="paleontology" label="paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q19654674" start="49432" end="49441" title="Protogaea" label="Protogaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656182" start="49560" end="49577" title="organismic theory" label="organismic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501338" start="50014" end="50023" title="attention" label="attention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="50028" end="50041" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="50043" end="50049" title="memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q133500" start="50051" end="50059" title="learning" label="learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q744778" start="50061" end="50072" title="Association (psychology)" label="association"/>
<link wikidata="Q644302" start="50075" end="50085" title="motivation" label="motivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q795052" start="50130" end="50143" title="individuality" label="individuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q219695" start="50182" end="50205" title="evolutionary psychology" label="evolutionary psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q620995" start="50638" end="50650" title="apperception" label="apperception"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580020" start="50656" end="50682" title="psychophysical parallelism" label="psychophysical parallelism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="51284" end="51294" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="51307" end="51317" title="empiricism" label="empiricism"/>
<link wikidata="Q651205" start="51319" end="51329" title="sensualism" label="sensualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="51708" end="51717" title="causality" label="causality"/>
<link wikidata="Q192121" start="51748" end="51757" title="teleology" label="teleology"/>
<link wikidata="Q75814" start="51809" end="51822" title="Wilhelm Wundt" label="Wilhelm Wundt"/>
<link wikidata="Q620995" start="52142" end="52154" title="apperception" label="apperception"/>
<link wikidata="Q167187" start="52601" end="52614" title="perspectivism" label="perspectivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35831" start="53441" end="53456" title="stages of sleep" label="stages of sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q192105" start="53575" end="53586" title="The unconscious" label="unconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q92345" start="53622" end="53635" title="Ernst Platner" label="Ernst Platner"/>
<link wikidata="Q310661" start="53740" end="53758" title="subliminal stimuli" label="subliminal stimuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q133805" start="54054" end="54066" title="epidemiology" label="epidemiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q170201" start="54071" end="54090" title="veterinary medicine" label="veterinary medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192796" start="54301" end="54317" title="balance of trade" label="balance of trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q44455" start="54381" end="54392" title="game theory" label="game theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q83966" start="54430" end="54450" title="communication theory" label="communication theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q28797" start="54962" end="54977" title="applied science" label="applied science"/>
<link wikidata="Q106208" start="55119" end="55130" title="Denis Papin" label="Denis Papin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12760" start="55145" end="55157" title="steam engine" label="steam engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186" start="55319" end="55333" title="Harz Mountains" label="Harz Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913" start="55487" end="55508" title="binary numeral system" label="binary numeral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q843684" start="55510" end="55514" title="radix" label="base"/>
<link wikidata="Q181937" start="55692" end="55699" title="I Ching" label="I Ching"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55839" end="55850" title="#Sinophology" label="Sinophology"/>
<link wikidata="Q689925" start="55890" end="55915" title="Juan Caramuel y Lobkowitz" label="Juan Caramuel y Lobkowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q315402" start="55920" end="55934" title="Thomas Harriot" label="Thomas Harriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q861606" start="56479" end="56503" title="Lagrange polynomial" label="Lagrangian interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757543" start="56508" end="56538" title="algorithmic information theory" label="algorithmic information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q577001" start="56544" end="56565" title="calculus ratiocinator" label="calculus ratiocinator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703890" start="56593" end="56617" title="universal Turing machine" label="universal Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q178577" start="56628" end="56642" title="Norbert Wiener" label="Norbert Wiener"/>
<link wikidata="Q123637" start="56707" end="56718" title="cybernetics" label="cybernetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968697" start="57027" end="57043" title="stepped reckoner" label="stepped reckoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="57116" end="57129" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="57195" end="57202" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333956" start="57327" end="57342" title="Carry (arithmetic)" label="carry operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q216170" start="57553" end="57569" title="Nicholas Rescher" label="Nicholas Rescher"/>
<link wikidata="Q46633" start="57810" end="57825" title="Charles Babbage" label="Charles Babbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259" start="57830" end="57842" title="Ada Lovelace" label="Ada Lovelace"/>
<link wikidata="Q663820" start="59317" end="59336" title="Herzog August Library" label="Bibliotheca Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="59795" end="59802" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122" start="59807" end="59819" title="Wolfenbüttel" label="Wolfenbüttel"/>
<link wikidata="Q13420675" start="59871" end="59886" title="library science" label="library science"/>
<link wikidata="Q48473" start="60473" end="60488" title="library classification" label="indexing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q82133" start="60557" end="60573" title="Bodleian Library" label="Bodleian Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="60577" end="60594" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8958" start="60847" end="60856" title="Johannes Gutenberg" label="Gutenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="61036" end="61055" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="61064" end="61079" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q83021" start="61115" end="61124" title="empirical" label="empirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="61125" end="61133" title="database" label="database"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142306" start="61178" end="61205" title="characteristica universalis" label="characteristica universalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q577001" start="61213" end="61234" title="calculus ratiocinator" label="calculus ratiocinator"/>
<link wikidata="Q143" start="61430" end="61439" title="Esperanto" label="Esperanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166618" start="61457" end="61471" title="Mathematical logic" label="symbolic logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="61482" end="61496" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="61697" end="61718" title="Royal Society" label="British Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="61869" end="61885" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q329464" start="61960" end="61986" title="Prussian Academy of Sciences" label="Berlin Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="62411" end="62428" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37621" start="62434" end="62440" title="Hobbes" label="Hobbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="62549" end="62559" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="63019" end="63033" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q73014" start="63555" end="63568" title="Erhard Weigel" label="Erhard Weigel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020291" start="64064" end="64084" title="De Arte Combinatoria" label="De Arte Combinatoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q76738" start="64265" end="64283" title="Athanasius Kircher" label="Athanasius Kircher"/>
<link wikidata="Q77509" start="64288" end="64304" title="Daniel Schwenter" label="Daniel Schwenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q193660" start="64336" end="64347" title="Ramón Llull" label="Ramón Llull"/>
<link wikidata="Q65766" start="64550" end="64578" title="Johann Philipp von Schönborn" label="Johann Philipp von Schönborn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="64773" end="64790" title="Frankfurt am Main" label="Frankfurt am Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="66118" end="66128" title="ecumenism" label="ecumenical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="66164" end="66178" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="66183" end="66191" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q62800" start="66298" end="66312" title="John Frederick, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="John Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q556263" start="66504" end="66513" title="Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q294100" start="66652" end="66675" title="Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet" label="Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="66844" end="66855" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="66885" end="66896" title="philologist" label="philologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q948814" start="67047" end="67057" title="gradualism" label="gradualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q208650" start="67062" end="67079" title="uniformitarianism" label="uniformitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="67188" end="67194" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="67449" end="67456" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="67481" end="67499" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="67536" end="67552" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q37041" start="67575" end="67592" title="classical Chinese" label="classical Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="67628" end="67636" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="67723" end="67736" title="Late Middle Ages" label="late medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114082" start="67743" end="67763" title="Chronicon Holtzatiae" label="Chronicon Holtzatiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q111224" start="67796" end="67814" title="County of Holstein" label="County of Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335343" start="68007" end="68038" title="Jesuit China missions" label="European Christian missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q774062" start="68081" end="68110" title="Philippe Couplet" label="Confucius Sinarum Philosophus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="68222" end="68231" title="Confucianism" label="Confucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="68291" end="68309" title="Chinese characters" label="Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142306" start="68340" end="68364" title="Characteristica universalis" label="universal characteristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181937" start="68389" end="68396" title="I Ching" label="I Ching"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913" start="68431" end="68444" title="binary number" label="binary number"/>
<link wikidata="Q184663" start="68895" end="68913" title="Chinese philosophy" label="Chinese philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741122" start="69096" end="69119" title="pre-established harmony" label="pre-established harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="69446" end="69452" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186" start="69676" end="69690" title="Harz mountains" label="Harz mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q697248" start="69758" end="69770" title="rapeseed oil" label="rapeseed oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="69822" end="69838" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Austrian Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q213541" start="69979" end="69988" title="Concordat" label="Concordat"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="70001" end="70009" title="Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="70019" end="70026" title="Holy See" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q41217" start="70161" end="70170" title="mechanics" label="mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166858" start="70296" end="70305" title="Théodicée" label="Théodicée"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="70345" end="70353" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q215894" start="70390" end="70397" title="Candide" label="Candide"/>
<link wikidata="Q830480" start="70462" end="70472" title="Non liquet" label="Non liquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q76510" start="70890" end="70905" title="Christian Wolff (philosopher)" label="Christian Wolff"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="71006" end="71016" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166858" start="71037" end="71046" title="Théodicée" label="Théodicée"/>
<link wikidata="Q947504" start="71504" end="71516" title="Louis Dutens" label="Louis Dutens"/>
<link wikidata="Q353887" start="71796" end="71811" title="Antoine Arnauld" label="Antoine Arnauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q381073" start="71813" end="71826" title="Samuel Clarke" label="Samuel Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q57224" start="71828" end="71845" title="Sophia of Hanover" label="Sophia of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q57674" start="71864" end="71891" title="Sophia Charlotte of Hanover" label="Sophia Charlotte of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="71910" end="71926" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="71972" end="71983" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q20724" start="72005" end="72019" title="Louis Couturat" label="Louis Couturat"/>
<link wikidata="Q183216" start="72207" end="72217" title="analytic philosophy" label="analytical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4217244" start="72222" end="72232" title="linguistic philosophy" label="linguistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42299" start="72345" end="72361" title="Bernhard Riemann" label="Bernhard Riemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q11892155" start="72405" end="72419" title="salva veritate" label="salva veritate"/>
<link wikidata="Q214969" start="72507" end="72520" title="Willard Quine" label="Willard Quine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131830343" start="72840" end="72853" title="Leroy Loemker" label="Leroy Loemker"/>
<link wikidata="" start="73030" end="73063" title="The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque" label="The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="73067" end="73082" title="Nicholas Jolley" label="Nicholas Jolley"/>
<link wikidata="Q254474" start="73274" end="73282" title="Identity (philosophy)" label="identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245158" start="73284" end="73297" title="Principle of individuation" label="individuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088088" start="73303" end="73318" title="possible worlds" label="possible worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195695" start="73366" end="73371" title="history of ideas" label="ideas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="73482" end="73492" title="industrial revolution" label="Industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q678982" start="73732" end="73759" title="Leibniz University Hannover" label="Leibniz University Hannover"/>
<link wikidata="Q680090" start="74340" end="74359" title="Leibniz Association" label="Leibniz Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q153978" start="74660" end="74679" title="University of Tübingen" label="Tübingen University"/>
<link wikidata="Q872555" start="74931" end="74960" title="Leibniz Supercomputing Centre" label="Leibniz Supercomputing Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q219989" start="75322" end="75375" title="Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences and Humanities" label="Berlin-Brandenburg Academy of Sciences and Humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q329464" start="75427" end="75455" title="Prussian Academy of Sciences" label="Prussian Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q49738" start="75470" end="75506" title="German Academy of Sciences at Berlin" label="German Academy of Sciences at Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q414163" start="75609" end="75660" title="Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur" label="Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q703205" start="75711" end="75724" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Prize" label="Leibniz Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="75767" end="75771" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314470" start="75916" end="75941" title="Fundamental Physics Prize" label="Fundamental Physics Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="76087" end="76093" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q473858" start="76101" end="76129" title="Memory of the World Register" label="Memory of the World Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q18156042" start="76212" end="76225" title="Google Doodle" label="Google Doodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4063215" start="76292" end="76297" title="quill" label="quill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="76354" end="76359" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="76435" end="76443" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q215894" start="76464" end="76471" title="Candide" label="Candide"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="76594" end="76611" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q312853" start="76682" end="76697" title="Neal Stephenson" label="Neal Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q808549" start="76728" end="76745" title="The Baroque Cycle" label="The Baroque Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094559" start="76963" end="76976" title="Choco Leibniz" label="Choco Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="77022" end="77029" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q315068" start="77053" end="77060" title="Bahlsen" label="Bahlsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="77154" end="77159" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166858" start="77347" end="77356" title="Théodicée" label="Théodicée"/>
<link wikidata="Q556263" start="77441" end="77459" title="Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="Brunswick-Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="77548" end="77559" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720221" start="77616" end="77661" title="Nouveaux essais sur l&amp;#x27;entendement humain" label="Nouveaux essais sur l&amp;#x27;entendement humain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="77732" end="77742" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827332" start="77894" end="77902" title="Nachlass" label="Nachlass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711" start="79817" end="79824" title="Potsdam" label="Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742" start="79826" end="79833" title="Münster" label="Münster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="79835" end="79842" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="79847" end="79853" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q839018" start="79966" end="79977" title="Concordance (publishing)" label="concordance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020291" start="80133" end="80153" title="De Arte Combinatoria" label="De Arte Combinatoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934224" start="80804" end="80840" title="Nova methodus pro maximis et minimis" label="Nova methodus pro maximis et minimis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030194" start="81035" end="81059" title="Discourse on Metaphysics (book)" label="Discours de métaphysique"/>
<link wikidata="Q59689064" start="81849" end="81865" title="Lloyd Strickland" label="Lloyd Strickland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720221" start="81914" end="81959" title="Nouveaux essais sur l&amp;#x27;entendement humain" label="Nouveaux essais sur l&amp;#x27;entendement humain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166858" start="82236" end="82245" title="Théodicée" label="Théodicée"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673" start="82377" end="82394" title="Project Gutenberg" label="Project Gutenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211539" start="82485" end="82496" title="Monadologie" label="Monadologie"/>
<link wikidata="Q216170" start="82518" end="82534" title="Nicholas Rescher" label="Nicholas Rescher"/>
<link wikidata="Q71289" start="82871" end="82895" title="Johann Georg von Eckhart" label="Johann Georg von Eckhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q19654674" start="82910" end="82919" title="Protogaea" label="Protogaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586745" start="83296" end="83316" title="General Leibniz rule" label="General Leibniz rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q680090" start="83319" end="83338" title="Leibniz Association" label="Leibniz Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519090" start="83341" end="83357" title="Leibniz operator" label="Leibniz operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6406985" start="83360" end="83400" title="List of German inventors and discoverers" label="List of German inventors and discoverers"/>
<link wikidata="Q82529" start="83403" end="83439" title="List of pioneers in computer science" label="List of pioneers in computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q394747" start="83442" end="83486" title="List of things named after Gottfried Leibniz" label="List of things named after Gottfried Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759788" start="83495" end="83515" title="Mathesis universalis" label="Mathesis universalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q214078" start="83524" end="83545" title="Scientific Revolution" label="Scientific Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q678982" start="83548" end="83575" title="Leibniz University Hannover" label="Leibniz University Hannover"/>
<link wikidata="Q809390" start="83578" end="83600" title="Bartholomew Des Bosses" label="Bartholomew Des Bosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088895" start="83603" end="83617" title="Joachim Bouvet" label="Joachim Bouvet"/>
<link wikidata="Q55628145" start="83620" end="83656" title="Outline of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz" label="Outline of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612846" start="83659" end="83697" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz bibliography" label="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz bibliography"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962724" start="84944" end="84963" title="George Henry Radcliffe Parkinson" label="Parkinson, G. H. R."/>
<link wikidata="Q20273989" start="86400" end="86416" title="Roger Woolhouse" label="Woolhouse, R. S."/>
<link wikidata="Q59689064" start="87240" end="87257" title="Lloyd Strickland" label="Strickland, Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q76571" start="88311" end="88332" title="Emil du Bois-Reymond" label="Du Bois-Reymond, Emil"/>
<link wikidata="Q20724" start="88488" end="88503" title="Louis Couturat" label="Couturat, Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="88568" end="88585" title="Martin Heidegger" label="Heidegger, Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16060057" start="88994" end="89013" title="John Milton Mackie" label="Mackie, John Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q110399" start="89015" end="89042" title="Gottschalk Eduard Guhrauer" label="Guhrauer, Gottschalk Eduard"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="89122" end="89139" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Russell, Bertrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q61280" start="89246" end="89266" title="Friedrich Adolf Trendelenburg" label="Trendelenburg, F. A."/>
<link wikidata="Q28925077" start="89751" end="89773" title="Maria Rosa Antognazza" label="Antognazza, Maria Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239172" start="90407" end="90420" title="Martin Davis (mathematician)" label="Davis, Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q184226" start="90510" end="90525" title="Gilles Deleuze" label="Deleuze, Gilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q108974" start="90613" end="90631" title="Jochen Fahrenberg" label="Fahrenberg, Jochen"/>
<link wikidata="Q108974" start="90756" end="90774" title="Jochen Fahrenberg" label="Fahrenberg, Jochen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252931" start="91154" end="91176" title="Ivor Grattan-Guinness" label="Grattan-Guinness, Ivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q818187" start="92436" end="92449" title="Benson Mates" label="Mates, Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147710" start="92779" end="92793" title="Patrick T. Riley" label="Riley, Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q74465491" start="92917" end="92935" title="Donald Rutherford (philosopher)" label="Rutherford, Donald"/>
<link wikidata="Q85776212" start="92949" end="92989" title="Leibniz and the Rational Order of Nature" label="Leibniz and the Rational Order of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708210" start="93404" end="93430" title="Princeton University Press" label="Princeton University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738153" start="93521" end="93537" title="Jonathan Bennett (philosopher)" label="Jonathan Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q622664" start="93728" end="93732" title="UCSD" label="UCSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472358" start="93793" end="93814" title="University of Houston" label="University of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551622" start="94092" end="94110" title="Linda Hall Library" label="Linda Hall Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551622" start="94180" end="94198" title="Linda Hall Library" label="Linda Hall Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12283" wikidata="Q5520309" url="?curid=12283" title="Gamma World">
<text>Gamma World is a post-apocalyptic science fantasy role-playing game in which player characters explore Earth centuries after the collapse of civilization, searching for artifacts from the time before &quot;The Great Upheaval&quot;. The game was originally designed by James M. Ward and Gary Jaquet, and first published by TSR in 1978. It borrows heavily from Ward&#x27;s earlier role-playing game, &quot;Metamorphosis Alpha&quot;.

==Setting==
&quot;Gamma World&quot; takes place in the mid-25th century, more than a century after a second nuclear war had destroyed human civilization. The war that destroyed civilization in &quot;Gamma World&quot; is only vaguely described in most editions of the game, and what details are provided change from version to version:
* The first two editions explained that ever-increasing material prosperity and leisure had led to ever-more radical and violent social movements, culminating in a final war in the years AD 2309–2322, and ascribe the final annihilation to a terrorist group called &quot;The Apocalypse&quot; and the ensuing retaliation by surviving factions.
Later versions altered the reason for the collapse.
* The 2000 Alternity version is due to alien arrival and nuclear response.
* The 2003 d20 Modern iteration is due to rampant use of nanotechnology and AI.
* The 2010 edition attributes the destruction of civilization to the activation of the Large Hadron Collider, which caused multiple realities to exchange features in an event known as &quot;The Big Mistake&quot;.
All editions, however, agree that the cataclysm destroyed all government and society beyond a village scale, plunging the world into a Dark Age. In many editions of the game, technology is at best quasi-medieval (in the first edition, the crossbow is described as &quot;the ultimate weapon&quot; for most Gamma World societies). Some, such as the 2003 and, to a lesser degree the 2010 edition, feature advanced technology that is well known and often easily available. In contrast, super-science artifacts in earlier editions were risky to use due to the average Gamma World character not knowing how to properly operate such devices, or possibly even what the device is at all. The post-apocalyptic inhabitants of Earth now refer to their planet as &quot;Gamma World&quot; (or &quot;Gamma Terra&quot; in later editions).

Gamma World is a chaotic, dangerous environment that little resembles pre-apocalyptic Earth. The weapons unleashed during the final war were strong enough to alter coastlines, level cities, and leave large areas of land lethally radioactive. These future weapons bathed the surviving life of Earth in unspecified forms of radiation and biochemical agents, producing widespread, permanent mutations among humans, animals, and plants. As a result, fantastic mutations such as extra limbs, super strength, and psychic powers are relatively common. (Random tables of such improbable mutations are a hallmark of every edition of &quot;Gamma World&quot;.) Many animals and plants are sentient, semi-civilized species competing with surviving humans. Both humans and non-humans have lost most knowledge of the pre-war humans, whom Gamma World&#x27;s inhabitants refer to as &quot;the Ancients&quot;. The only group with significant knowledge of the Ancients are isolated robots and other artificial intelligences that survived the war—though these machines tend to be damaged, in ill repair, or hostile to organic beings.

&quot;Gamma World&quot; player characters include unmutated humans (referred to as &quot;Pure Strain Humans&quot; in most editions), mutated humans, sentient animals or plants, and androids. Characters explore ruins and strange post-apocalyptic societies to gain knowledge of the Ancients and social status for themselves. Common adventure themes involve protecting fragile post-apocalypse societies, retrieving Ancient &quot;artifacts&quot; (science fiction gadgetry such as power armor, laser pistols, and anti-grav sleds), or mere survival against the multifarious dangers of the future (such as gun-toting mutant rabbits, rampaging ancient death machines, or other Gamma Worlders bent on mayhem).

A recurrent source of conflict on Gamma World is the rivalry among the &quot;Cryptic Alliances&quot;, semi-secret societies whose ideological agendas—usually verging on monomania—often bring them into conflict with the rest of the Gamma World. For example, the Pure Strain Human &quot;Knights of Genetic Purity&quot; seek to exterminate all mutants, while the all-mutant &quot;Iron Society&quot; wants to eliminate unmutated humans. Other rivalries involve attitudes towards Ancient technology, with some Alliances (such as &quot;The Restorationists&quot;) seeking to rebuild Ancient society, while others (such as &quot;The Seekers&quot;) want to destroy remaining artifacts.

==System==
Throughout the game&#x27;s many editions, &quot;Gamma World&quot; has almost always remained strongly compatible with the then-current edition of &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot; (&quot;D&amp;D&quot;). Attribute generation is much the same for instance with a range of 3 to 18, randomly generated by rolling three six-sided dice. The attributes themselves are the same, but with occasional name changes such as Physical Strength instead of Strength and Mental Strength instead of Wisdom. This allows Gamma World and D&amp;D characters to potentially cross over genres.

Character generation is mostly random, and features one of the game&#x27;s most distinctive mechanics, the mutation tables. Players who choose to play mutants roll dice to randomly determine their characters&#x27; mutations. All versions of &quot;Gamma World&quot; eschew a realistic portrayal of genetic mutation to one degree or another, instead giving characters fantastic abilities like psychic powers, laser beams, force fields, life draining and others. Other mutations are extensions or extremes of naturally existing features transposed from different species, such as electrical generation, infravision, quills, extra limbs, dual brains, carapaces, gills, etc. These were offset with defects that also ranged from the fantastical—such as skin that dissolves in water, or a scent that attracts monsters—to the mundane, such as seizures, madness and phobias.

Characters in most versions of &quot;Gamma World&quot; earn experience points during their adventures, which cause the character&#x27;s Rank (in some editions, Level) to increase. Unlike &quot;D&amp;D&quot;, however, the first two editions of &quot;Gamma World&quot; do not use a concept of true level or character class, and increases in Rank do not affect the character&#x27;s skills or combat abilities. In fact, in the first three editions of the game, character rank is primarily a measure of the character&#x27;s social prestige.

The game mechanics used for resolving character actions, on the other hand, greatly varied between &quot;Gamma World&quot; editions. The first two editions, like the early editions of &quot;D&amp;D&quot;, depend heavily on matrix-based mechanics, where two factors (one representing the actor or attacker, and one representing the opponent) are cross-referenced on a chart. For some actions, such as attacks, the number located on the matrix represents a number the acting player must roll. For other actions (such as determining the result of radiation exposure), the matrix result indicates a non-negotiable result. &quot;Gamma&quot; World&#x27;s first two editions had a variety of specialized matrices for different situations (again, closely resembling &quot;D&amp;D&quot;).

The third edition rules replace specialized matrices with the Action Control Table (ACT), a single, color-coded chart that allowed players to determine whether a character action succeeded, and the degree of success, with a single roll. (The ACT concept is drawn from the &quot;Marvel Super Heroes&quot; game published by TSR shortly before development of &quot;Gamma World&quot;&#x27;s third edition.) The ACT requires the referee to cross-reference the difficulty of a character action with the ability score used to complete that action, determining which column of the ACT is used for that action. The character&#x27;s player then rolls percentile dice; the result is compared to appropriate column, determining a degree of success or failure and eliminating the need for second result roll (e.g. the damage roll that many games require after a successful combat action).

The fourth edition was directly compatible with 2nd Edition AD&amp;D with some minor differences in mechanics. The fifth and sixth editions though would relegate Gamma World to that of a Campaign Setting and require the core books to play. 5th uses the Alternity system which is mostly represented in the book but required the core rules in order to resolve some factors. 6th Edition though was fully incomplete on its own and required the d20 Modern rulebook in order to play the game.

The seventh version uses a streamlined version of &quot;D&amp;D 4th edition&quot; mechanics. Character generation choice though was nearly fully removed. Instead of choosing a character class, a player had to roll a twenty-sided die two times and consult an accompanying character origin table. For example, a player might obtain the result &quot;Radioactive Yeti&quot; and gain the powers associated with the &quot;Radioactive&quot; and &quot;Yeti&quot; origins. Attributes, mutations, and skills were also randomly assigned. Two decks of cards comprising the core of a &quot;Collectible Card Game&quot; are included with the game. One deck represented random Alpha Mutations, which could be drawn to gain temporary powers, and the other contained various Omega Tech, powerful technological devices that could possibly backfire on those that used them. Some 4th edition rules enhancements for the setting include new damage types such as &quot;Radiation&quot;, Gamma World-specific skills, and increased lethality. Despite these differences, it is possible to use characters and monsters from a &quot;D&amp;D&quot; game in &quot;Gamma World&quot; and vice versa.

==History==
===First Edition (1978)===
The original &quot;Gamma World&quot; boxed set (containing a 56-page rulebook, a map of a devastated North America, and dice) was released in 1978. TSR went on to publish three accessories for the 1st edition of the game:

*GW1, &quot;Legion of Gold&quot; by Gary Gygax, Luke Gygax, and Paul Reiche III
*GW2, &quot;Famine in Far-Go&quot; by Michael Price
*&quot;Gamma World Referee&#x27;s Screen&quot;

Grenadier Miniatures also supported the game, with a line of licensed miniatures.

At least one other TSR product was announced -- &quot;Metamorphosis Alpha to Omega&quot;, an adaptation of &quot;Metamorphosis Alpha&#x27;s&quot; campaign setting to &quot;Gamma World&#x27;s&quot; rules (Anon 1981). Work on the adaptation was halted when a 2nd edition of &quot;Gamma World&quot; was announced. This was later released as &quot;Metamorphosis Alpha to Omega&quot; using the &quot;Amazing Engine&quot; Rules.

===Second Edition (1983)===
The second edition &quot;Gamma World&quot; boxed set (with rules designed by Ward, Jaquet, and David James Ritchie) was released in 1983. Two modules and two accessories were released for this version:

*GW3, &quot;The Cleansing War of Garik Blackhand&quot; by Michael Pierre Price and Garry Spiegle
*GW4, &quot;The Mind Masters&quot; by Philip Taterczynski
*GWAC1, &quot;Gamma World Referee&#x27;s Screen and Mini-Module&quot;
*GWAC2, &quot;Gamma World Character Sheets&quot;

TSR also produced four packs of &quot;Gamma World&quot; miniatures. TSR started production on a third adventure module, which was to be assigned the identification code GW5 and had the working title &quot;Rapture of the Deep&quot;. This module was not published. However, a &#x27;ghost&#x27; Second Edition GW5 &quot;Rapture of the Deep&quot; module was produced in 2007.

===Third Edition (1986)===
The 3rd edition of &quot;Gamma World&quot; was another boxed set, credited to James M. Ward. It introduced the Action Control Table, a color-coded table used to resolve nearly all actions in the game. (Color-coded tables were something of a trend at TSR in the mid-1980s. After 1984&#x27;s &quot;Marvel Super Heroes&quot; proved the viability of the concept, TSR revised &quot;Gamma World&quot;, &quot;Star Frontiers&quot;, and &quot;Top Secret&quot; to use similar tables.) Unfortunately for TSR, this version of the rules became notorious for the number of editorial mistakes, including cross-references to rules that didn&#x27;t appear in the boxed set. The errors were serious enough that TSR published a &quot;Gamma World Rules Supplement&quot; containing the &quot;missing&quot; rules. The &quot;Rules Supplement&quot; was sent to gamers who requested it by mail, and included in reprintings of the boxed set.

The five modules TSR published for &quot;Gamma World&#x27;s&quot; 3rd edition introduced the setting&#x27;s first multi-module metaplot, which involved rebuilding an ancient &#x27;sky chariot&#x27;:

*GW6, &quot;Alpha Factor&quot; by Kim Eastland
*GW7, &quot;Beta Principle&quot; by Bruce Nesmith
*GW8, &quot;Gamma Base&quot; by Kim Eastland
*GW9, &quot;Delta Fragment&quot; by Kim Eastland
*GW10, &quot;Epsilon Cyborgs&quot; by Kim Eastland

TSR dropped the 3rd edition of &quot;Gamma World&quot; from its product line before the multi-module storyline could be completed. In 2003 an unofficial conclusion to the series was published under the title GW11 &quot;Omega Project&quot;.

Despite its editorial issues, the 3rd edition rules were well-received enough to win the 1986/1987 Gamer&#x27;s Choice Award for &quot;Best Science-Fiction Roleplaying Game&quot;.

Scott Taylor of &quot;Black Gate&quot; in 2015 rated the GW6-GW10 series as #7 in &quot;The Top 10 Campaign Adventure Module Series of All Time, saying &quot;if you are ever in the mood to crack out &quot;Gamma World&quot;, or just have a great campaign setting for any post-apocalyptic campaign, this super series could be for you.&quot;

===Fourth Edition (1992)===
The 4th edition of &quot;Gamma World&quot; was a 192-page softcover book, written by Bruce Nesmith and James M. Ward, published in May 1992 by TSR. This version of the game abandoned the 3rd edition&#x27;s Action Control Table for mechanics resembling &quot;2nd Edition Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;. TSR published five accessories for the 4th edition:

*GWA1, &quot;Treasures of the Ancients&quot; by Dale &quot;Slade&quot; Henson ()
*GWA2, &quot;The Overlord of Bonparr&quot; by Jack A. Barker ()
*GWQ1, &quot;Mutant Master&quot; by Bruce Nesmith ()
*GWQ2, &quot;All Animals Are Equal&quot; by Dale &quot;Slade&quot; Henson ()
*GWQ3, &quot;Home Before the Sky Falls&quot; by Tim Beach, Paul Riegel, Drew Bittner, and Kim Eastland ()

TSR&#x27;s &quot;Gamma World&quot; development team announced at Gen Con 1993 that no further products would be released for the 4th edition. They also announced that TSR had restarted development of &quot;Metamorphosis Alpha to Omega&quot;, but that the manuscript would be completed using the &quot;Amazing Engine&quot; rules.

===Fifth Edition (2000)===
The 5th version of &quot;Gamma World&quot; was a supplement for the science-fiction game &quot;Alternity&quot;. (In a nod to &quot;Gamma World&quot;&#x27;s reputation for being repeatedly revised, the book&#x27;s back cover states &quot;That&#x27;s right, it&#x27;s the return of the &quot;Gamma World&quot;&quot;.) The &quot;Gamma World Campaign Setting&quot; () was a 192-page softcover book written by Andy Collins and Jeff Grubb, published in 2000 by Wizards of the Coast (WOTC), only a month after WOTC announced its cancellation of the &quot;Alternity&quot; line. This version of &quot;Gamma World&quot; is unique as the only one not to have accessories or supplements.

===Omega World (2002)===
In September 2002, &quot;Omega World&quot;, a &quot;d20 System&quot; mini-game based on &quot;Gamma World&quot; and written by Jonathan Tweet, was published in &quot;Dungeon&quot; 94/&quot;Polyhedron&quot; 153. Tweet does not plan any expansions for the game, although it received a warm reception from &quot;Gamma World&quot; fans and players new to the concept alike.

===Sixth Edition (2003)===
In November 2002, Sword &amp; Sorcery Studios (SSS) announced that it had licensed the &quot;Gamma World&quot; setting from WOTC in order to produce a sixth version of the game. SSS&#x27;s version of the game, which reached the market in 2003, used the &quot;d20 Modern&quot; system, and mimicked &quot;D&amp;D&quot;&#x27;s &quot;three core book&quot; model with three hardcover manuals:

*&quot;Gamma World Player&#x27;s Handbook&quot; by Bruce Baugh, Ian Eller, Mikko Rautalahti, and Geoff Skellams
*&quot;Gamma World Game Master&#x27;s Guide&quot; by Bruce Baugh, Werner Hager, Lizard, and Doug Oglesby
*&quot;Gamma World Machines and Mutants&quot; by David Bolack, Gareth Hanrahan, Patrick O&#x27;Duffy, and Chuck Wendig

Sword &amp; Sorcery Studios also published three paperback supplements for the d20 version of &quot;Gamma World&quot;:

*&quot;Gamma World Beyond the Horizon&quot; by Ellen Kiley
*&quot;Gamma World Cryptic Alliances and Unknown Enemies&quot; by Owen K.C. Stephens, Alejandro Melchor, and Geoff Skellams
*&quot;Gamma World Out of the Vaults&quot; by James Maliszewski, John Snead, and Ellen P. Kiley

This new version of the game presented a more sober and serious approach to the concept of a post-nuclear world, at odds with the more light-hearted and adventurous approach taken by previous editions; it was also the first edition of the game to include fantastical nanotechnology on a large scale. In August 2005, White Wolf announced that it was reverting the rights to publish &quot;Gamma World&quot; products back to Wizards of the Coast, putting the game out of print again. Several critics and fans considered Tweet&#x27;s &quot;Omega World&quot; to be a superior d20 System treatment of the &quot;Gamma World&quot; concept.

===Seventh Edition (2010)===
At the Dungeons &amp; Dragons Experience fan convention in early 2010, Wizards of the Coast announced a new version titled &quot;D&amp;D Gamma World&quot;, eventually released in October of that year. The game is compatible with the D&amp;D 4th Edition rules and the System Reference Document, but is not considered a separate D&amp;D setting.

The basic box included 80 non-random cards. In addition, random &quot;boosters&quot; of &quot;Alpha Mutation&quot; and &quot;Omega Tech&quot; cards for players are sold separately in packs of eight.

This edition of &quot;Gamma World&quot; includes the following three boxed sets (one core set and two expansion kits):
*&quot;D&amp;D Gamma World Roleplaying Game&quot; by Richard Baker and Bruce R. Cordell
*&quot;D&amp;D Gamma World Expansion Kit: Famine in Far-go&quot; by Robert J. Schwalb
*&quot;D&amp;D Gamma World Expansion Kit: Legion of Gold&quot; by Richard Baker and Bruce Cordell

Additional content was released for the 7th Edition of &quot;Gamma World&quot; at Game Day 2010 and at the 2010 Penny Arcade Expo, Trouble in Freesboro and Pax Extraterrestria respectively. In addition, a Christmas themed adventure and vehicular combat rules were released online.

Additionally, two novels were published in the setting. &quot;Sooner Dead&quot; by Mel Odom was published February 1, 2011, and &quot;Red Sails in the Fallout&quot; by Pauli Kidd, published July 5, 2011.

==Reception==
In Issue 41 of &quot;Moves&quot;, Steve List reviewed the first edition and commented, &quot;&quot;Gamma World&quot; is not a game for those who take their science fiction, science, or technology seriously, but it is a good set of rules for role-playing, provided an energetic referee can be found to run the show.&quot;

Don Turnbull reviewed the first edition of &quot;Gamma World&quot; for &quot;White Dwarf&quot; #10, giving it an overall rating of 9 out of 10, and stated that &quot;&quot;Gamma World&quot; is good quality - let there be no mistake. This has not been thrown together in haste by earnest amateurs over glasses of cheap booze. It is a thoroughly professional job which deserves a place on the shelf (and the playing table) of anyone remotely interested in the science fiction game-setting.&quot;

In the 1979 book &quot;The Playboy Winner&#x27;s Guide to Board Games, John Jackson reviewed the first edition, and noted that &quot;&quot;Gama World&quot; could draw on a hundred science-fiction novels for material. It seems to be better organized than its cousin [&quot;Metamorphosis Alpha&quot;], and the campaign map of an altered America is almost worth the cost of the game itself.&quot;

Ronald Pehr reviewed the first edition of &quot;Gamma World&quot; in &quot;The Space Gamer&quot; No. 32 and commented &quot;If you liked its progenitors, &quot;Gamma World&quot; is an interesting variant. Beginning players should find it easy to learn, and referees are challenged to create a playable, balanced world. It&#x27;s somewhat expensive and the sudden-death power of futuristic weaponry and the lack of character &#x27;levels&#x27; may put you off, but if the basic premise is appealing you&#x27;ll probably enjoy &quot;Gamma World&quot;.&quot;

In the July 1980 issue of &quot;Fantastic Science Fiction&quot;, Greg Costikyan called the rules of the first edition &quot;reasonably well written, if poorly organized; they are sufficient to base a campaign upon.&quot; However, Costikyan was appalled by the lack of hard science, calling the game &quot;idiotic pseudo-science&quot;. Costikyan concluded, &quot;I&#x27;m surprised that even TSR would attempt to foist junk like &quot;Gamma World&quot; off on an unsuspecting public.&quot;

In the 1980 book &quot;The Complete Book of Wargames&quot;, game designer Jon Freeman reviewed the first edition and commented, &quot;This is in every sense an improved version of &quot;Metamorphosis Alpha&quot;. Rules have been tightened and elaborated, and the organization is clearly superior.&quot; Freeman concluded, &quot;While it&#x27;s not quite as open-ended in scope as &quot;Dungeons &amp; Dragons&quot;, it has plenty of potential. It&#x27;s hardly flawless, but &quot;Gamma World&quot; is one of the best things TSR has produced.&quot;

In Issue 11 of the French games magazine &quot;Jeu et Stratégie&quot;, Michel Brassinne found the game mechanics only ordinary, but noted &quot;the mutation table is a gem worth its weight in gold, it is indeed sometimes hilarious.&quot; Brassinne pointed out that because of similarities in rules, this game could theoretically be combined with other TSR games such as &quot;AD&amp;D&quot;, but he warned, &quot;be careful, because this is not a walk of pleasure — I experienced it with characters from &quot;D&amp;D&quot; and I can assure you that I will not do it again soon.&quot; Brassinne concluded, &quot;Given dice, cards, modules, pencils and time, the result will be long, exciting sleepless nights.&quot;

Chris Baylis reviewed the second edition for &quot;Imagine&quot; magazine, and stated that &quot;For a post nuclear holocaust role-playing game, &quot;Gamma World&quot; game has just about all the right ingredients, in the correct proportions. It is a very good introduction into the fantasy world of role-playing, and should seriously rival all other RPGs.&quot;

In the August 1984 issue of &quot;Asimov&#x27;s Science Fiction&quot;, Dana Lombardy called the redesign of the 2nd edition &quot;so extensive it should be considered a new game ... &quot;Gamma World&quot; offers one of the more bizarre and hostile environments to role-play in.&quot; Lombardy did note that &quot;the technology is disjointed. You can have a dog-man with a spear fighting alongside a robot with a laser, allied against humanoids with pistols and swords.&quot; Lombardy concluded, &quot;If you prefer more straightforward science fiction with known and approximately equal abilities and weapons, then &quot;Gamma World&quot; may not be for you. It&#x27;s a topsy-turvy world, where the average pure-strain human is hard-pressed to exist among plants and animals mutated by humanity&#x27;s wars. But if you like a challenge, and want to role-play something really different — &quot;Gamma World&quot; could be it.&quot;

In Issue 37 of the French games magazine &quot;Casus Belli&quot;, Denis Beck found many improvements in the third edition, writing, &quot;Even if &quot;Gamma World&quot; sometimes reminds us of a transposition of &quot;AD&amp;D&quot; into the future, this new version — where we do not find the many problems that handicapped the previous editions — really looks good alongside other post-apocalypse games.&quot; Beck concluded, &quot;It may not be the game of the year, but fans of The Great Upheaval will find plenty to enjoy here.&quot;

In his 1990 book &quot;The Complete Guide to Role-Playing Games&quot;, game critic Rick Swan reviewed the 3rd edition and commented &quot;Though &quot;Gamma World&quot; may sound like a loony-bin version of &quot;&quot;, it makes for some exciting adventures as the PCs explore a high-tech wonderland of mysterious landmarks and artifacts&quot;. Swan concluded by giving the game a rating of 3 out of 4, saying, &quot;It&#x27;s a bang-up job [...] that is, if you don&#x27;t take your nuclear holocausts too seriously.&quot;

Gene Alloway reviewed the Complete 4th Edition Game of &quot;Gamma World&quot; in &quot;White Wolf&quot; #36 (1993), rating it a 3 out of 5 and stated that &quot;&quot;Gamma World&quot; has not undergone a massive overhaul from the third edition. But it does seem better to me and to those around me familiar with both versions. It is an enjoyable, entertaining trip through an America that isn&#x27;t quite what it used to be. If you like science fiction that takes some latitude with the laws of nature, you should visit &quot;Gamma World, Fourth Edition&quot;: it&#x27;ll be a fun &#x27;wahoo experience.&#x27;&quot;

Scott Taylor for &quot;Black Gate&quot; in 2013 rated &quot;Gamma World&quot; as #8 in the top ten role-playing games of all time, saying &quot;There seems to be an innate fascination with the end of the world, be it from a global thermal nuclear war, zombie outbreak, alien invasion, or super-bug and &quot;Gamma World&quot; finds a way to bring the fantastic to this type of setting. It has survived seven editions and three companies, but still, &quot;Gamma World&quot; remains a fun and functional game in the current RPG marketplace.&quot;

==Other reviews and commentary==
*&quot;Polyhedron&quot; #1

==Cancelled video game==
In 2011, a video game adaptation was announced at E3 called &quot;Gamma World: Alpha Mutation&quot; for the Xbox 360, PlayStation 3 and PC. It was to be developed by Bedlam Games and published by Atari. Unfortunately, due to unknown reasons, it was cancelled.

==Legacy==
The Swedish role playing game &quot;Mutant&quot;, released in 1984 by Äventyrsspel, was first pitched to its future writer as &quot;Gamma World, set in Sweden&quot;.

The post-apocalyptic premise of the 1997 computer game &quot;Fallout&quot; was inspired by &quot;Gamma World.&quot; Game creator Tim Cain said it was not the most balanced RPG but it had a good spirit to it.

&quot;Gamma World&quot; was cited as a source of inspiration for the procedurally generated world-building in Caves of Qud.

==See also==

*&quot;Aftermath!&quot;
*&quot;After The Bomb&quot;
*&quot;d20 Apocalypse&quot;
*&quot;d20 Future&quot;
*&quot;Darwin&#x27;s World&quot;
*&quot;Gammarauders&quot;
*&quot;Metamorphosis Alpha&quot;
*&quot;The Morrow Project&quot;
*&quot;Mutant (role-playing game)&quot;
*&quot;Mutant Future&quot;
*&quot;Rifts&quot;
*&quot;Road Hogs&quot;
*&quot;Traveller&quot;
*&quot;Torg&quot;
*&quot;Twilight 2000&quot;
*&quot;Wasteland&quot;
==References==
==Further reading==
*Anon 1981. &#x27;RPGA Interview with... Jim Ward.&#x27; &quot;RPGA News&quot;, 3:6-12 (Winter 1981–82).
*Anon 1982. &#x27;RPGA Interview with... &quot;Jake&quot; Jaquet.&#x27; &quot;Polyhedron&quot;, 4:6-10 (1982).
*
*Rabe, Jean 1987. &#x27;Notes from HQ,&#x27; &quot;Polyhedron&quot;, 38:3,23 (1987).
*Ward, James and Harold Johnson 1986. &#x27;Gamma III.&#x27; &quot;Dragon&quot;, 117:76-80 (Jan 1986).
*Williams, Skip 1989. &#x27;Advice for All Mutants.&#x27; &quot;Dragon&quot;, 149:28-30 (Sep 1989).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1080374" start="34" end="49" title="science fantasy" label="science fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="50" end="67" title="role-playing game" label="role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062345" start="77" end="94" title="player characters" label="player characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6198770" start="268" end="281" title="James M. Ward" label="James M. Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543201" start="322" end="325" title="TSR, Inc." label="TSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q17116228" start="404" end="423" title="Metamorphosis Alpha" label="Metamorphosis Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q201424" start="540" end="551" title="Nuclear warfare" label="nuclear war"/>
<link wikidata="Q40605" start="1403" end="1424" title="Large Hadron Collider" label="Large Hadron Collider"/>
<link wikidata="Q217192" start="1664" end="1672" title="Dark Age" label="Dark Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q181947" start="1768" end="1776" title="crossbow" label="crossbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335" start="2674" end="2683" title="radiation" label="radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062345" start="3492" end="3508" title="player character" label="player character"/>
<link wikidata="Q917061" start="4339" end="4348" title="monomania" label="monomania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="5011" end="5033" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q45089" start="5595" end="5599" title="dice" label="dice"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="5736" end="5744" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q604973" start="6358" end="6375" title="experience points" label="experience points"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062990" start="6603" end="6618" title="character class" label="character class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751513" start="6839" end="6853" title="game mechanics" label="game mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850395" start="7894" end="7913" title="Marvel Super Heroes (role-playing game)" label="Marvel Super Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843874" start="8257" end="8272" title="percentile dice" label="percentile dice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338719" start="9037" end="9056" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons 4th edition" label="D&amp;amp;D 4th edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q734698" start="9558" end="9579" title="Collectible Card Game" label="Collectible Card Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q48999671" start="10420" end="10434" title="Legion of Gold" label="Legion of Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379" start="10444" end="10454" title="Gary Gygax" label="Gary Gygax"/>
<link wikidata="Q14565174" start="10456" end="10466" title="Luke Gygax" label="Luke Gygax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376341" start="10472" end="10487" title="Paul Reiche III" label="Paul Reiche III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059801" start="10559" end="10580" title="Gamemaster&amp;#x27;s screen" label="Referee&amp;#x27;s Screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776619" start="10588" end="10608" title="Grenadier Miniatures" label="Grenadier Miniatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053894" start="10658" end="10668" title="Miniature figure (gaming)" label="miniatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q16018567" start="11218" end="11237" title="David James Ritchie" label="David James Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q105099180" start="11338" end="11374" title="The Cleansing War of Garik Blackhand" label="The Cleansing War of Garik Blackhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q65120552" start="11435" end="11451" title="The Mind Masters" label="The Mind Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q56274669" start="11495" end="11544" title="Gamma World Referee&amp;#x27;s Screen and Mini-Module" label="Gamma World Referee&amp;#x27;s Screen and Mini-Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850395" start="12297" end="12316" title="Marvel Super Heroes (role-playing game)" label="Marvel Super Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600723" start="12403" end="12417" title="Star Frontiers" label="Star Frontiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824606" start="12435" end="12445" title="Top Secret (role-playing game)" label="Top Secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q11777662" start="13045" end="13053" title="metaplot" label="metaplot"/>
<link wikidata="Q106754812" start="13152" end="13164" title="Kim Eastland" label="Kim Eastland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733272" start="13201" end="13214" title="Bruce Nesmith" label="Bruce Nesmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q106754812" start="13247" end="13259" title="Kim Eastland" label="Kim Eastland"/>
<link wikidata="Q106754812" start="13296" end="13308" title="Kim Eastland" label="Kim Eastland"/>
<link wikidata="Q106754812" start="13347" end="13359" title="Kim Eastland" label="Kim Eastland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666226" start="13805" end="13815" title="Black Gate (magazine)" label="Black Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733272" start="14236" end="14249" title="Bruce Nesmith" label="Bruce Nesmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6198770" start="14254" end="14267" title="James M. Ward" label="James M. Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q131620664" start="14526" end="14551" title="Treasures of the Ancients" label="Treasures of the Ancients"/>
<link wikidata="Q16225734" start="14561" end="14590" title="Dale &amp;quot;Slade&amp;quot; Henson" label="Dale &amp;quot;Slade&amp;quot; Henson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520309" start="14607" end="14630" title="The Overlord of Bonparr" label="The Overlord of Bonparr"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520309" start="14671" end="14684" title="Mutant Master (Gamma World)" label="Mutant Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733272" start="14694" end="14707" title="Bruce Nesmith" label="Bruce Nesmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520309" start="14724" end="14745" title="All Animals Are Equal" label="All Animals Are Equal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16225734" start="14755" end="14784" title="Dale &amp;quot;Slade&amp;quot; Henson" label="Dale &amp;quot;Slade&amp;quot; Henson"/>
<link wikidata="Q106754812" start="14878" end="14890" title="Kim Eastland" label="Kim Eastland"/>
<link wikidata="Q550430" start="14960" end="14967" title="Gen Con" label="Gen Con"/>
<link wikidata="Q17116228" start="15101" end="15129" title="Metamorphosis Alpha" label="Metamorphosis Alpha to Omega"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841425" start="15196" end="15210" title="Amazing Engine" label="Amazing Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q764265" start="15347" end="15356" title="Alternity" label="Alternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q780739" start="15674" end="15684" title="Jeff Grubb" label="Jeff Grubb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135204" start="15707" end="15727" title="Wizards of the Coast" label="Wizards of the Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q284471" start="16006" end="16016" title="d20 System" label="d20 System"/>
<link wikidata="Q706412" start="16081" end="16095" title="Jonathan Tweet" label="Jonathan Tweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q971884" start="16120" end="16127" title="Dungeon magazine" label="Dungeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3907748" start="16143" end="16153" title="Polyhedron magazine" label="Polyhedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659287" start="16370" end="16397" title="Sword &amp;amp; Sorcery Studios" label="Sword &amp;amp; Sorcery Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266754" start="16611" end="16621" title="d20 Modern" label="d20 Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q124784936" start="16792" end="16803" title="Bruce Baugh" label="Bruce Baugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q18921858" start="17021" end="17036" title="Gareth Hanrahan" label="Gareth Hanrahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21512147" start="17064" end="17076" title="Chuck Wendig" label="Chuck Wendig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114533" start="17323" end="17341" title="Owen K.C. Stephens" label="Owen K.C. Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258429" start="17446" end="17456" title="John Snead" label="John Snead"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="17745" end="17759" title="nanotechnology" label="nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091693" start="18407" end="18432" title="System Reference Document" label="System Reference Document"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029392" start="18857" end="18870" title="Richard Baker (game designer)" label="Richard Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977305" start="18875" end="18891" title="Bruce R. Cordell" label="Bruce R. Cordell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345972" start="18960" end="18977" title="Robert J. Schwalb" label="Robert J. Schwalb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029392" start="19044" end="19057" title="Richard Baker (game designer)" label="Richard Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977305" start="19062" end="19075" title="Bruce Cordell" label="Bruce Cordell"/>
<link wikidata="Q588487" start="19189" end="19206" title="Penny Arcade Expo" label="Penny Arcade Expo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813679" start="19527" end="19537" title="Pauli Kidd" label="Pauli Kidd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926801" start="19599" end="19604" title="Moves (magazine)" label="Moves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293634" start="19900" end="19912" title="Don Turnbull (game designer)" label="Don Turnbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q682202" start="19977" end="19988" title="White Dwarf (magazine)" label="White Dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q55642325" start="20418" end="20464" title="The Playboy Winner&amp;#x27;s Guide to Board Games" label="The Playboy Winner&amp;#x27;s Guide to Board Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118748" start="20865" end="20880" title="The Space Gamer" label="The Space Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434174" start="21379" end="21404" title="Fantastic Science Fiction" label="Fantastic Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699601" start="21412" end="21426" title="Greg Costikyan" label="Greg Costikyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18393393" start="21860" end="21889" title="The Complete Book of Wargames" label="The Complete Book of Wargames"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270735" start="21911" end="21922" title="Jon Freeman (game designer)" label="Jon Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q17116228" start="22023" end="22042" title="Metamorphosis Alpha" label="Metamorphosis Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="22223" end="22245" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338719" start="22763" end="22771" title="Advanced Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="AD&amp;amp;D"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002663" start="23155" end="23162" title="Imagine (AD&amp;amp;D magazine)" label="Imagine"/>
<link wikidata="Q144949" start="23503" end="23532" title="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Science Fiction" label="Asimov&amp;#x27;s Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q19519464" start="23540" end="23553" title="Dana Lombardy" label="Dana Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q515818" start="24451" end="24462" title="Casus Belli (magazine)" label="Casus Belli"/>
<link wikidata="Q122850319" start="24968" end="25008" title="The Complete Guide to Role-Playing Games" label="The Complete Guide to Role-Playing Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154713" start="25028" end="25037" title="Rick Swan" label="Rick Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q85815399" start="25559" end="25569" title="White Wolf (magazine)" label="White Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666226" start="26115" end="26125" title="Black Gate (magazine)" label="Black Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3907748" start="26678" end="26688" title="Polyhedron (magazine)" label="Polyhedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q336168" start="26774" end="26776" title="E3" label="E3"/>
<link wikidata="Q48263" start="26832" end="26840" title="Xbox 360" label="Xbox 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q10683" start="26842" end="26855" title="PlayStation 3" label="PlayStation 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q207922" start="26920" end="26925" title="Atari" label="Atari"/>
<link wikidata="Q10590827" start="27032" end="27038" title="Mutant (role-playing game 1984)" label="Mutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685864" start="27066" end="27078" title="Äventyrsspel" label="Äventyrsspel"/>
<link wikidata="Q60102" start="27224" end="27231" title="Fallout (video game)" label="Fallout"/>
<link wikidata="Q129618" start="27292" end="27300" title="Tim Cain" label="Tim Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q68208636" start="27482" end="27494" title="Caves of Qud" label="Caves of Qud"/>
<link wikidata="Q727958" start="27518" end="27528" title="Aftermath!" label="Aftermath!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826313" start="27542" end="27556" title="After the Bomb (game)" label="After The Bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204014" start="27570" end="27584" title="d20 Apocalypse" label="d20 Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204015" start="27598" end="27608" title="d20 Future" label="d20 Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225908" start="27622" end="27641" title="Darwin&amp;#x27;s World" label="Darwin&amp;#x27;s World"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520332" start="27655" end="27667" title="Gammarauders" label="Gammarauders"/>
<link wikidata="Q17116228" start="27681" end="27700" title="Metamorphosis Alpha" label="Metamorphosis Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521919" start="27714" end="27732" title="The Morrow Project" label="The Morrow Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q10590826" start="27746" end="27772" title="Mutant (role-playing game)" label="Mutant (role-playing game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6943678" start="27786" end="27799" title="Mutant Future" label="Mutant Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336480" start="27813" end="27818" title="Rifts (role-playing game)" label="Rifts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339340" start="27832" end="27841" title="Road Hogs" label="Road Hogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164069" start="27855" end="27864" title="Traveller (role-playing game)" label="Traveller"/>
<link wikidata="Q600643" start="27878" end="27882" title="Torg" label="Torg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566951" start="27896" end="27909" title="Twilight 2000" label="Twilight 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q737653" start="27923" end="27932" title="Wasteland (video game)" label="Wasteland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12284" wikidata="Q913554" url="?curid=12284" title="Grimoire">
<text>A grimoire () (also known as a book of spells, magic book, or a spellbook) is a textbook of magic, typically including instructions on how to create magical objects like talismans and amulets, how to perform magical spells, charms, and divination, and how to summon or invoke supernatural entities such as angels, spirits, deities, and demons. In many cases, the books themselves are believed to be imbued with magical powers. The only contents found in a grimoire would be information on spells, rituals, the preparation of magical tools, and lists of ingredients and their magical correspondences. In this manner, while all &quot;books on magic&quot; could be thought of as grimoires, not all &quot;magical books&quot; should be thought of as grimoires.

While the term &quot;grimoire&quot; is originally European—and many Europeans throughout history, particularly ceremonial magicians and cunning folk, have used grimoires—the historian Owen Davies has noted that similar books can be found all around the world, ranging from Jamaica to Sumatra. He also noted that in this sense, the world&#x27;s first grimoires were created in Europe and the ancient Near East.

==Etymology==
The etymology of &quot;grimoire&quot; is unclear. It is most commonly believed that the term &quot;grimoire&quot; originated from the Old French word &quot;grammaire&quot; &#x27;grammar&#x27;, which had initially been used to refer to all books written in Latin. By the 18th century, the term had gained its now common usage in France and had begun to be used to refer purely to books of magic. Owen Davies presumed this was because &quot;many of them continued to circulate in Latin manuscripts&quot;.

However, the term &quot;grimoire&quot; later developed into a figure of speech among the French indicating something that was hard to understand. In the 19th century, with the increasing interest in occultism among the British following the publication of Francis Barrett&#x27;s &quot;The Magus&quot; (1801), the term entered English in reference to books of magic.

==History==

===Ancient period===
The earliest known written magical incantations come from ancient Mesopotamia (modern Iraq), where they have been found inscribed on cuneiform clay tablets that archaeologists excavated from the city of Uruk and dated to between the 5th and 4th centuries BC. The ancient Egyptians also employed magical incantations, which have been found inscribed on amulets and other items. The Egyptian magical system, known as heka, was greatly altered and expanded after the Macedonians, led by Alexander the Great, invaded Egypt in 332 BC.

Under the next three centuries of Hellenistic Egypt, the Coptic writing system evolved, and the Library of Alexandria was opened. This likely had an influence upon books of magic, with the trend on known incantations switching from simple health and protection charms to more specific things, such as financial success and sexual fulfillment. Around this time the legendary figure of Hermes Trismegistus developed as a conflation of the Egyptian god Thoth and the Greek Hermes; this figure was associated with writing and magic and, therefore, of books on magic.

The ancient Greeks and Romans believed that books on magic were invented by the Persians. The 1st-century AD writer Pliny the Elder stated that magic had been first discovered by the ancient philosopher Zoroaster around the year 647 BC but that it was only written down in the 5th century BC by the magician Osthanes. His claims are not, however, supported by modern historians.

The ancient Jewish people were often viewed as being knowledgeable in magic, which, according to legend, they had learned from Moses, who had learned it in Egypt. Among many ancient writers, Moses was seen as an Egyptian rather than a Jew. Two manuscripts likely dating to the 4th century, both of which purport to be the legendary eighth Book of Moses (the first five being the initial books in the Biblical Old Testament), present him as a polytheist who explained how to conjure gods and subdue demons.

Meanwhile, there is definite evidence of grimoires being used by certain—particularly Gnostic—sects of early Christianity. In the &quot;Book of Enoch&quot; found within the Dead Sea Scrolls, for instance, there is information on astrology and the angels. In possible connection with the &quot;Book of Enoch&quot;, the idea of Enoch and his great-grandson Noah having some involvement with books of magic given to them by angels continued through to the medieval period.

Israelite King Solomon was a Biblical figure associated with magic and sorcery in the ancient world. The 1st-century Romano-Jewish historian Josephus mentioned a book circulating under the name of Solomon that contained incantations for summoning demons and described how a Jew called Eleazar used it to cure cases of possession. The book may have been the &quot;Testament of Solomon&quot; but was more probably a different work. The pseudepigraphic &quot;Testament of Solomon&quot; is one of the oldest magical texts. It is a Greek manuscript attributed to Solomon and was likely written in either Babylonia or Egypt sometime in the first five centuries AD; over 1,000 years after Solomon&#x27;s death.

The work tells of the building of The Temple and relates that construction was hampered by demons until the archangel Michael gave the King a magical ring. The ring, engraved with the Seal of Solomon, had the power to bind demons from doing harm. Solomon used it to lock demons in jars and commanded others to do his bidding, although eventually, according to the &quot;Testament&quot;, he was tempted into worshiping &quot;false gods&quot;, such as Moloch, Baal, and Rapha. Subsequently, after losing favour with God, King Solomon wrote the work as a warning and a guide to the reader.

When Christianity became the dominant faith of the Roman Empire, the early Church frowned upon the propagation of books on magic, connecting it with paganism, and burned books of magic. The New Testament records that after the unsuccessful exorcism by the seven sons of Sceva became known, many converts decided to burn their own magic and pagan books in the city of Ephesus; this advice was adopted on a large scale after the Christian ascent to power.

===Medieval period===
In the medieval period, the production of grimoires continued in Christendom, as well as amongst Jews and the followers of the newly founded Islamic faith. As the historian Owen Davies noted, &quot;while the [Christian] Church was ultimately successful in defeating pagan worship it never managed to demarcate clearly and maintain a line of practice between religious devotion and magic.&quot; The use of such books on magic continued. In Christianised Europe, the Church divided books of magic into two kinds: those that dealt with &quot;natural magic&quot; and those that dealt in &quot;demonic magic&quot;.

The former was acceptable because it was viewed as merely taking note of the powers in nature that were created by God; for instance, the Anglo-Saxon leechbooks, which contained simple spells for medicinal purposes, were tolerated. Demonic magic was not acceptable, because it was believed that such magic did not come from God, but from the Devil and his demons. These grimoires dealt in such topics as necromancy, divination and demonology. Despite this, &quot;there is ample evidence that the mediaeval clergy were the main practitioners of magic and therefore the owners, transcribers, and circulators of grimoires,&quot; while several grimoires were attributed to Popes.
One such Arabic grimoire devoted to astral magic, the 10th-century &quot;Ghâyat al-Hakîm&quot;, was later translated into Latin and circulated in Europe during the 13th century under the name of the &quot;Picatrix&quot;. However, not all such grimoires of this era were based upon Arabic sources. The 13th-century &quot;Sworn Book of Honorius&quot;, for instance, was (like the ancient &quot;Testament of Solomon&quot; before it) largely based on the supposed teachings of the Biblical king Solomon and included ideas such as prayers and a ritual circle, with the mystical purpose of having visions of God, Hell, and Purgatory and gaining much wisdom and knowledge as a result. Another was the Hebrew &quot;Sefer Raziel Ha-Malakh&quot;, translated in Europe as the &quot;Liber Razielis Archangeli&quot;.

A later book also claiming to have been written by Solomon was originally written in Greek during the 15th century, where it was known as the &quot;Magical Treatise of Solomon&quot; or the &quot;Little Key of the Whole Art of Hygromancy, Found by Several Craftsmen and by the Holy Prophet Solomon&quot;. In the 16th century, this work had been translated into Latin and Italian, being renamed the &quot;Clavicula Salomonis&quot;, or the &quot;Key of Solomon&quot;.

In Christendom during the medieval age, grimoires were written that were attributed to other ancient figures, thereby supposedly giving them a sense of authenticity because of their antiquity. The German abbot and occultist Trithemius (1462–1516) supposedly had a &quot;Book of Simon the Magician&quot;, based upon the New Testament figure of Simon Magus.

Similarly, it was commonly believed by medieval people that other ancient figures, such as the poet Virgil, astronomer Ptolemy, and philosopher Aristotle, had been involved in magic, and grimoires claiming to have been written by them were circulated. However, there were those who did not believe this; for instance, the Franciscan friar Roger Bacon (c. 1214–94) stated that books falsely claiming to be by ancient authors &quot;ought to be prohibited by law.&quot;

===Early modern period===
As the early modern period commenced in the late 15th century, many changes began to shock Europe that would have an effect on the production of grimoires. Historian Owen Davies classed the most important of these as the Protestant Reformation, and subsequent Catholic Counter-Reformation; The Witch-hunts, and the advent of printing. The Renaissance saw the continuation of interest in magic that had been found in the medieval period, and in this period, there was an increased interest in Hermeticism among occultists and ceremonial magicians in Europe, largely fueled by the 1471 translation of the ancient &quot;Corpus hermeticum&quot; into Latin by Marsilio Ficino (1433–99).

Alongside this, there was a rise in interest in the Jewish mysticism known as the Kabbalah, which was spread across the continent by Pico della Mirandola and Johannes Reuchlin. The most important magician of the Renaissance was Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa (1486–1535), who widely studied occult topics and earlier grimoires and eventually published his own, the &quot;Three Books of Occult Philosophy&quot;, in 1533. A similar figure was the Swiss magician known as Paracelsus (1493–1541), who published &quot;Of the Supreme Mysteries of Nature&quot;, in which he emphasised the distinction between good and bad magic. A third such individual was Johann Georg Faust, upon whom several pieces of later literature were written, such as Christopher Marlowe&#x27;s &quot;Doctor Faustus&quot;, that portrayed him as consulting with demons.

The idea of demonology had remained strong in the Renaissance, and several demonological grimoires were published, including &quot;The Fourth Book of Occult Philosophy&quot;, which falsely claimed to having been authored by Cornelius Agrippa, and the &quot;Pseudomonarchia Daemonum&quot;, which listed 69 demons. To counter this, the Roman Catholic Church authorised the production of many works of exorcism, the rituals of which were often very similar to those of demonic conjuration. Alongside these demonological works, grimoires on natural magic continued to be produced, including &quot;Magia Naturalis&quot;, written by Giambattista Della Porta (1535–1615).

Iceland held magical traditions in regional work as well, most remarkably the Galdrabók, where numerous symbols of mystic origin are dedicated to the practitioner. These pieces give a perfect fusion of Germanic pagan and Christian influence, seeking splendid help from the Norse gods and referring to the titles of demons.

The advent of printing in Europe meant that books could be mass-produced for the first time and could reach an ever-growing literate audience. Among the earliest books to be printed were magical texts. The &quot;nóminas&quot; were one example, consisting of prayers to the saints used as talismans. It was particularly in Protestant countries, such as Switzerland and the German states, which were not under the domination of the Roman Catholic Church, where such grimoires were published.

Despite the advent of print, however, handwritten grimoires remained highly valued, as they were believed to contain inherent magical powers, and they continued to be produced. With increasing availability, people lower down the social scale and women began to have access to books on magic; this was often incorporated into the popular folk magic of the average people and, in particular, that of the cunning folk, who were professionally involved in folk magic. These works left Europe and were imported to the parts of Latin America controlled by the Spanish and Portuguese empires and the parts of North America controlled by the British and French empires.

Throughout this period, the Inquisition, a Roman Catholic organisation, had organised the mass suppression of peoples and beliefs that they considered heretical. In many cases, grimoires were found in the heretics&#x27; possessions and destroyed. In 1599, the church published the &quot;Indexes of Prohibited Books&quot;, in which many grimoires were listed as forbidden, including several mediaeval ones, such as the &quot;Key of Solomon&quot;, which were still popular.

In Christendom, there also began to develop a widespread fear of witchcraft, which was believed to be Satanic in nature. The subsequent hysteria, known as The Witch-hunts, caused the death of around 40,000 people, most of whom were women. Sometimes, those found with grimoires—particularly demonological ones—were prosecuted and dealt with as witches but, in most cases, those accused had no access to such books. Iceland—which had a relatively high literacy rate—proved an exception to this, with a third of the 134 witch trials held involving people who had owned grimoires. By the end of the Early Modern period, and the beginning of the Enlightenment, many European governments brought in laws prohibiting many superstitious beliefs in an attempt to bring an end to the Witch Hunts; this would invariably affect the release of grimoires.

Meanwhile, Hermeticism and the Kabbalah would influence the creation of a mystical philosophy known as Rosicrucianism, which first appeared in the early 17th century, when two pamphlets detailing the existence of the mysterious Rosicrucian group were published in Germany. These claimed that Rosicrucianism had originated with a medieval figure known as Christian Rosenkreuz, who had founded the Brotherhood of the Rosy Cross; however, there was no evidence for the existence of Rosenkreuz or the Brotherhood.

===18th and 19th centuries===
The 18th century saw the rise of the Enlightenment, a movement devoted to science and rationalism, predominantly amongst the ruling classes. However, amongst much of Europe, belief in magic and witchcraft persisted, as did the witch trials in certain areas. Governments tried to crack down on magicians and fortune tellers, particularly in France, where the police viewed them as social pests who took money from the gullible, often in a search for treasure. In doing so, they confiscated many grimoires.

Beginning in the 17th century, a new, ephemeral form of printed literature developed in France; the &quot;Bibliothèque bleue&quot;. Many grimoires published through this circulated among a growing percentage of the populace; in particular, the &quot;Grand Albert&quot;, the &quot;Petit Albert&quot; (1782), the &quot;Grimoire du Pape Honorius&quot;, and the &quot;Enchiridion Leonis Papae&quot;. The &quot;Petit Albert&quot; contained a wide variety of magic; for instance, dealing in simple charms for ailments, along with more complex things, such as the instructions for making a Hand of Glory.

In the late 18th and early 19th centuries, following the French Revolution of 1789, a hugely influential grimoire was published under the title of the &quot;Grand Grimoire&quot;, which was considered particularly powerful, because it involved conjuring and making a pact with the devil&#x27;s chief minister, Lucifugé Rofocale, to gain wealth from him. A new version of this grimoire was later published under the title of the &quot;Dragon rouge&quot; and was available for sale in many Parisian bookstores. Similar books published in France at this time included the &quot;Black Pullet&quot; and the &quot;Grimoirium Verum&quot;. The &quot;Black Pullet&quot;, probably authored in late-18th-century Rome or France, differs from the typical grimoires in that it does not claim to be a manuscript from antiquity, but told by a man who was a member of Napoleon&#x27;s armed expeditionary forces in Egypt.

The widespread availability of printed grimoires in France—despite the opposition of both the rationalists and the church—soon spread to neighbouring countries, such as Spain and Germany. In Switzerland, Geneva was commonly associated with the occult at the time, particularly by Catholics, because it had been a stronghold of Protestantism. Many of those interested in the esoteric traveled from Roman Catholic nations to Switzerland to purchase grimoires or to study with occultists. Soon, grimoires appeared that involved Catholic saints; one example that appeared during the 19th century, and became relatively popular—particularly in Spain—was the &quot;Libro de San Cipriano&quot;, or &quot;The Book of St. Ciprian&quot;, which falsely claimed to date from c. 1000. As with most grimoires of this period, it dealt with (among other things) how to discover treasure.

In Germany, with the increased interest in folklore during the 19th century, many historians took an interest in magic and in grimoires. Several published extracts of such grimoires in their own books on the history of magic, thereby helping to further propagate them. Perhaps the most notable of these was the Protestant pastor Georg Conrad Horst (1779–1832) who, from 1821 to 1826, published a six-volume collection of magical texts in which he studied grimoires as a peculiarity of the medieval mindset.

Another scholar of the time interested in grimoires, the antiquarian bookseller Johann Scheible first published the &quot;Sixth and Seventh Books of Moses&quot;; two influential magical texts that claimed to have been written by the ancient Jewish figure Moses. &quot;The Sixth and Seventh Books of Moses&quot; were among the works which later spread to the countries of Scandinavia, where—in Danish and Swedish—grimoires were known as black books and were commonly found among members of the army.

In Britain, new grimoires continued to be produced throughout the 18th century, such as Ebenezer Sibly&#x27;s &quot;A New and Complete Illustration of the Celestial Science of Astrology&quot;. In the last decades of that century, London experienced a revival of interest in the occult which was further propagated by Francis Barrett&#x27;s publication of &quot;The Magus&quot; in 1801. &quot;The Magus&quot; contained many things taken from older grimoires—particularly those of Cornelius Agrippa—and, while not achieving initial popularity upon release, it gradually became an influential text.

One of Barrett&#x27;s pupils, John Parkin, created his own handwritten grimoire &quot;The Grand Oracle of Heaven, or, The Art of Divine Magic&quot;, although it was never published, largely because Britain was at war with France, and grimoires were commonly associated with the French. The only writer to publish British grimoires widely in the early 19th century was Robert Cross Smith, who released &quot;The Philosophical Merlin&quot; (1822) and &quot;The Astrologer of the Nineteenth Century&quot; (1825), but neither sold well.

In the late 19th century, several of these texts (including &quot;The Book of Abramelin&quot; and the &quot;Key of Solomon&quot;) were reclaimed by para-Masonic magical organisations, such as the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn and Ordo Templi Orientis.

===20th and 21st centuries===
&quot;The Secret Grimoire of Turiel&quot; claims to have been written in the 16th century, but no copy older than 1927 has been produced.

A modern grimoire, the &quot;Simon Necronomicon&quot;, takes its name from a fictional book of magic in the stories of H. P. Lovecraft which was inspired by Babylonian mythology and the &quot;Ars Goetia&quot;—one of the five books that make up &quot;The&quot; &quot;Lesser Key of Solomon&quot;—concerning the summoning of demons. &quot;The Azoëtia&quot; of Andrew D. Chumbley has been described by Gavin Semple as a modern grimoire.

The neopagan religion of Wicca publicly appeared in the 1940s, and Gerald Gardner introduced the &quot;Book of Shadows&quot; as a Wiccan grimoire.

The term grimoire commonly serves as an alternative name for a spell book or tome of magical knowledge in fantasy fiction and role-playing games. The most famous fictional grimoire is the &quot;Necronomicon&quot;, a creation of H. P. Lovecraft.

==See also==
* Table of magical correspondences, a type of reference work used in ceremonial magic
* Cyprianus, a name for Scandinavian grimoires
* Codex
* Key of Solomon
* Lesser Key of Solomon
* Manuscript

==References==
==Bibliography==

==External links==
* 
* Internet Sacred Text Archives: Grimoires
* Digitized Grimoires
* Scandinavian folklore </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q913554" start="2" end="10" title="Grimoire" label="grimoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q913554" start="31" end="45" title="Grimoire" label="book of spells"/>
<link wikidata="Q913554" start="47" end="57" title="Grimoire" label="magic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q913554" start="64" end="73" title="Grimoire" label="spellbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q83790" start="80" end="88" title="textbook" label="textbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="92" end="97" title="Magic (supernatural)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44506" start="170" end="178" title="talisman" label="talisman"/>
<link wikidata="Q131557" start="184" end="190" title="amulet" label="amulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999796" start="216" end="221" title="Incantation" label="spell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="236" end="246" title="divination" label="divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q829697" start="259" end="265" title="Evocation" label="summon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671839" start="269" end="275" title="Invocation" label="invoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q235113" start="306" end="311" title="angel" label="angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q45529" start="314" end="321" title="Ghost" label="spirits"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="323" end="330" title="Deity" label="deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q177413" start="336" end="341" title="demon" label="demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q189819" start="497" end="503" title="ritual" label="ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673224" start="575" end="598" title="Table of magical correspondences" label="magical correspondences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155334" start="868" end="884" title="ceremonial magic" label="ceremonial magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194294" start="893" end="905" title="cunning folk" label="cunning folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114446" start="941" end="952" title="Owen Davies (historian)" label="Owen Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="1030" end="1037" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="1041" end="1048" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q269678" start="1148" end="1165" title="ancient Near East" label="ancient Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="1316" end="1326" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1438" end="1443" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690215" start="1748" end="1764" title="figure of speech" label="figure of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="1885" end="1891" title="occult" label="occult"/>
<link wikidata="Q463195" start="1942" end="1957" title="Francis Barrett (occultist)" label="Francis Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749605" start="1971" end="1980" title="The Magus (Barrett book)" label="The Magus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="2153" end="2164" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="2173" end="2177" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q401" start="2220" end="2229" title="cuneiform" label="cuneiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="2248" end="2262" title="Archaeology" label="archaeologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q168518" start="2290" end="2294" title="Uruk" label="Uruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="2350" end="2363" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q846113" start="2502" end="2506" title="heka (god)" label="heka"/>
<link wikidata="Q576065" start="2551" end="2562" title="Macedonians (ancient)" label="Macedonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="2571" end="2590" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="2652" end="2669" title="Hellenistic Egypt" label="Hellenistic Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q321083" start="2675" end="2681" title="Coptic alphabet" label="Coptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q435" start="2714" end="2735" title="Library of Alexandria" label="Library of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q192358" start="3002" end="3021" title="Hermes Trismegistus" label="Hermes Trismegistus"/>
<link wikidata="Q146921" start="3068" end="3073" title="Thoth" label="Thoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="3088" end="3094" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="3186" end="3200" title="Ancient Greece" label="ancient Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="3205" end="3211" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3262" end="3270" title="History of Iran#Classical antiquity" label="Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="3298" end="3313" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q35811" start="3385" end="3394" title="Zoroaster" label="Zoroaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q740989" start="3490" end="3498" title="Osthanes" label="Osthanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q570868" start="3574" end="3580" title="Hebrews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="3689" end="3694" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="3971" end="3984" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q9163" start="4004" end="4014" title="polytheism" label="polytheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="4155" end="4162" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="4172" end="4190" title="early Christianity" label="early Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q220890" start="4205" end="4218" title="Book of Enoch" label="Book of Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q145780" start="4242" end="4258" title="Dead Sea Scrolls" label="Dead Sea Scrolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="4298" end="4307" title="astrology" label="astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q690175" start="4312" end="4322" title="Angels in Judaism" label="the angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q213027" start="4395" end="4400" title="Enoch (ancestor of Noah)" label="Enoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q81422" start="4424" end="4428" title="Noah" label="Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q37085" start="4555" end="4562" title="Solomon" label="Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="4681" end="4689" title="Josephus" label="Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q172663" start="4844" end="4868" title="Exorcism in Judaism" label="cure cases of possession"/>
<link wikidata="Q684055" start="4903" end="4923" title="Testament of Solomon" label="Testament of Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q827597" start="4974" end="4989" title="pseudepigrapha" label="pseudepigraphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="5139" end="5148" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906600" start="5279" end="5289" title="Temple in Jerusalem" label="The Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q178342" start="5353" end="5362" title="archangel" label="archangel"/>
<link wikidata="Q45581" start="5363" end="5370" title="Michael (archangel)" label="Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594210" start="5429" end="5444" title="Seal of Solomon" label="Seal of Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q275010" start="5695" end="5701" title="Moloch" label="Moloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q590467" start="5703" end="5707" title="Baal" label="Baal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5713" end="5718" title="Rapha (god)" label="Rapha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="5884" end="5896" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="5982" end="5990" title="paganism" label="paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22702" start="5996" end="6008" title="Book burning" label="burned books"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="6023" end="6036" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q172663" start="6073" end="6081" title="exorcism" label="exorcism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430863" start="6103" end="6108" title="Sceva" label="Sceva"/>
<link wikidata="Q30682782" start="6148" end="6184" title="Book burning at Ephesus" label="burn their own magic and pagan books"/>
<link wikidata="Q47611" start="6200" end="6207" title="Ephesus" label="Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="6317" end="6332" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval period"/>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="6375" end="6386" title="Christendom" label="Christendom"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="6451" end="6456" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980728" start="6849" end="6862" title="natural magic" label="natural magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="7059" end="7070" title="Anglo-Saxon" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6674" start="7263" end="7268" title="Devil" label="Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q337935" start="7325" end="7335" title="necromancy" label="necromancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="7337" end="7347" title="divination" label="divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q323996" start="7352" end="7362" title="demonology" label="demonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="7590" end="7595" title="Popes" label="Popes"/>
<link wikidata="Q596932" start="7802" end="7810" title="Picatrix" label="Picatrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121506" start="7911" end="7945" title="The Sworn Book of Honorius" label="&amp;quot;Sworn Book of Honorius&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211147" start="8137" end="8150" title="ritual circle" label="ritual circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="8161" end="8169" title="mysticism" label="mystical"/>
<link wikidata="Q564" start="8204" end="8208" title="Hell" label="Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q566" start="8214" end="8223" title="Purgatory" label="Purgatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815036" start="8304" end="8326" title="Sefer Raziel Ha-Malakh" label="Sefer Raziel Ha-Malakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931875" start="8550" end="8577" title="Magical Treatise of Solomon" label="Magical Treatise of Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081549" start="8845" end="8859" title="Key of Solomon" label="Key of Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q60178" start="9092" end="9102" title="Trithemius" label="Trithemius"/>
<link wikidata="Q294795" start="9211" end="9222" title="Simon Magus" label="Simon Magus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="9325" end="9331" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="9344" end="9351" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="9369" end="9378" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="9547" end="9557" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q548320" start="9558" end="9563" title="friar" label="friar"/>
<link wikidata="Q171677" start="9564" end="9575" title="Roger Bacon" label="Roger Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="9726" end="9745" title="early modern period" label="early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="9940" end="9962" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="9988" end="10007" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147871" start="10009" end="10024" title="Witch-hunts in Early Modern Europe" label="The Witch-hunts"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="10034" end="10052" title="The Printing Revolution" label="advent of printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="10058" end="10069" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q192933" start="10211" end="10222" title="Hermeticism" label="Hermeticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155334" start="10244" end="10260" title="ceremonial magic" label="ceremonial magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192374" start="10374" end="10389" title="Marsilio Ficino" label="Marsilio Ficino"/>
<link wikidata="Q12409136" start="10454" end="10470" title="Jewish mysticism" label="Jewish mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="10484" end="10492" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q182128" start="10535" end="10555" title="Pico della Mirandola" label="Pico della Mirandola"/>
<link wikidata="Q61067" start="10560" end="10577" title="Johannes Reuchlin" label="Johannes Reuchlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q76568" start="10630" end="10656" title="Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa" label="Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939470" start="10769" end="10801" title="Three Books of Occult Philosophy" label="Three Books of Occult Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83428" start="10867" end="10877" title="Paracelsus" label="Paracelsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q30716455" start="10911" end="10945" title="Of the Supreme Mysteries of Nature" label="Of the Supreme Mysteries of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q76918" start="11048" end="11066" title="Johann Georg Faust" label="Johann Georg Faust"/>
<link wikidata="Q28975" start="11135" end="11153" title="Christopher Marlow" label="Christopher Marlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q50919" start="11168" end="11182" title="Doctor Faustus (play)" label="Doctor Faustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297909" start="11494" end="11518" title="Pseudomonarchia Daemonum" label="Pseudomonarchia Daemonum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843167" start="11830" end="11845" title="Magia Naturalis" label="Magia Naturalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q334154" start="11864" end="11888" title="Giambattista Della Porta" label="Giambattista Della Porta"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="11903" end="11910" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557351" start="11981" end="11990" title="Galdrabók" label="Galdrabók"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122452" start="12105" end="12119" title="Germanic pagan" label="Germanic pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q170358" start="12176" end="12186" title="Norse gods" label="Norse gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194294" start="13120" end="13132" title="cunning folk" label="cunning folk"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="13272" end="13279" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="13284" end="13294" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="13352" end="13359" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="13364" end="13370" title="French colonial empire" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q43173" start="13409" end="13420" title="Inquisition" label="Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="13532" end="13541" title="heresy" label="heretical"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="13919" end="13929" title="witchcraft" label="witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13941" end="13963" title="Theistic Satanism#Historical mentions of Satanism" label="believed to be Satanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147871" start="14009" end="14024" title="European witch-hunts" label="The Witch-hunts"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="14491" end="14508" title="the Enlightenment" label="the Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q194267" start="14800" end="14814" title="Rosicrucianism" label="Rosicrucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q841173" start="15051" end="15071" title="Christian Rosenkreuz" label="Christian Rosenkreuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="15271" end="15288" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="the Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="15324" end="15335" title="rationalism" label="rationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011595" start="15545" end="15560" title="fortune tellers" label="fortune tellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q856635" start="15850" end="15868" title="Bibliothèque bleue" label="Bibliothèque bleue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113493" start="15994" end="16006" title="Grand Albert" label="Grand Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3377087" start="16024" end="16036" title="Petit Albert" label="Petit Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738301" start="16055" end="16092" title="The Grimoire of Pope Honorius" label="&amp;quot;Grimoire du Pape Honorius&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502701" start="16108" end="16132" title="Grimoire of Pope Leo" label="Enchiridion Leonis Papae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087293" start="16327" end="16340" title="Hand of Glory" label="Hand of Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="16400" end="16417" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469208" start="16500" end="16514" title="Grand Grimoire" label="Grand Grimoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469208" start="16652" end="16669" title="Lucifuge Rofocale" label="Lucifugé Rofocale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993356" start="16917" end="16929" title="Black Pullet" label="Black Pullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184260" start="16950" end="16966" title="Grimoirium Verum" label="Grimoirium Verum"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="17193" end="17201" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="17451" end="17457" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17772" end="17787" title="Saint#Christianity" label="Catholic saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="18163" end="18171" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q152002" start="18442" end="18448" title="pastor" label="pastor"/>
<link wikidata="Q476777" start="18750" end="18782" title="Sixth and Seventh Books of Moses" label="Sixth and Seventh Books of Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="18999" end="19010" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="19021" end="19027" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="19032" end="19039" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798063" start="19064" end="19075" title="Cyprianus" label="black books"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331733" start="19216" end="19230" title="Ebenezer Sibly" label="Ebenezer Sibly"/>
<link wikidata="Q463195" start="19445" end="19460" title="Francis Barrett (occultist)" label="Francis Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749605" start="19489" end="19498" title="The Magus (Barrett book)" label="The Magus"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="19931" end="19953" title="Napoleonic wars" label="was at war with France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343213" start="20093" end="20111" title="Robert Cross Smith" label="Robert Cross Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q22257011" start="20325" end="20346" title="The Book of Abramelin" label="The Book of Abramelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="20412" end="20419" title="Masonic" label="Masonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q368173" start="20455" end="20488" title="Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn" label="Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q33237" start="20493" end="20513" title="Ordo Templi Orientis" label="Ordo Templi Orientis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7854938" start="20552" end="20581" title="The Secret Grimoire of Turiel" label="The Secret Grimoire of Turiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975177" start="20714" end="20732" title="Simon Necronomicon" label="Simon Necronomicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q169566" start="20804" end="20819" title="H. P. Lovecraft" label="H. P. Lovecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q797944" start="20842" end="20862" title="Babylonian mythology" label="Babylonian mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992642" start="20877" end="20887" title="Ars Goetia" label="Ars Goetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992642" start="20929" end="20978" title="The Lesser Key of Solomon" label="&amp;quot;The&amp;quot; &amp;quot;Lesser Key of Solomon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756747" start="21021" end="21032" title="Azoetia" label="The Azoëtia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756747" start="21042" end="21060" title="Andrew D. Chumbley" label="Andrew D. Chumbley"/>
<link wikidata="Q189753" start="21123" end="21131" title="neopagan" label="neopagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q59774" start="21144" end="21149" title="Wicca" label="Wicca"/>
<link wikidata="Q350708" start="21186" end="21200" title="Gerald Gardner" label="Gerald Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q745760" start="21222" end="21237" title="Book of Shadows" label="Book of Shadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="21373" end="21388" title="fantasy fiction" label="fantasy fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="21393" end="21411" title="role-playing games" label="role-playing games"/>
<link wikidata="Q2802" start="21461" end="21473" title="Necronomicon" label="Necronomicon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21495" end="21510" title="H. P. Lovecraft" label="H. P. Lovecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7673224" start="21528" end="21560" title="Table of magical correspondences" label="Table of magical correspondences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155334" start="21595" end="21611" title="ceremonial magic" label="ceremonial magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798063" start="21614" end="21623" title="Cyprianus" label="Cyprianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q213924" start="21661" end="21666" title="Codex" label="Codex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081549" start="21669" end="21683" title="Key of Solomon" label="Key of Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992642" start="21686" end="21707" title="Lesser Key of Solomon" label="Lesser Key of Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q87167" start="21710" end="21720" title="Manuscript" label="Manuscript"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12285" wikidata="Q751317" url="?curid=12285" title="Grand Guignol">
<text>The Théâtre du Grand-Guignol () was a theater in the Pigalle district of Paris (7, cité Chaptal). From its opening in 1897 until its closing in 1962, it specialized in horror shows. Its name is often used as a general term for graphic, amoral horror entertainment, a genre popular from Elizabethan and Jacobean theater (for instance Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Titus Andronicus&quot;, and Webster&#x27;s &quot;The Duchess of Malfi&quot; and &quot;The White Devil&quot;), to today&#x27;s splatter films.

==Theater==

The Théâtre du Grand-Guignol was founded in 1897 by Oscar Méténier, who planned it as a space for naturalist performance. With 293 seats, the venue was the smallest in Paris.

A former chapel, the theater&#x27;s previous life was evident in the which looked like and in the angels over the orchestra. Although the architecture created frustrating obstacles, the design that was initially a predicament ultimately became beneficial to the marketing of the theater. The opaque furniture and gothic structures placed sporadically on the walls of the building exude a feeling of eeriness from the moment of entrance. People came to this theater for an experience, not only to see a show. The audience at Grand Guignol endured the terror of the shows because they wanted to be filled with strong &quot;feelings&quot; of something. Many attended the shows to get a feeling of sexual arousal. Underneath the balcony were boxes (originally built for nuns to watch church services) that were available for theater-goers to rent during performances because they would get so aroused by the action happening on stage. It has been said that audience members would get so boisterous in the boxes, that actors would sometimes break character and yell something such as &quot;Keep it down in there!&quot; Conversely, there were audience members who could not physically handle the brutality of the actions taking place on stage. Frequently, the &quot;special effects&quot; would be too realistic and often an audience member would faint or vomit during performances. Theater director Max Maurey used the goriness to his advantage by hiring doctors to be at performances as a marketing ploy.

The theater owed its name to Guignol, a traditional Lyonnaise puppet character, joining political commentary with the style of Punch and Judy.

The theater&#x27;s peak was between World War I and World War II, when it was frequented by royalty and celebrities in evening dress.

==Important people==

Oscar Méténier was the Grand Guignol&#x27;s founder and original director. Under his direction, the theater produced plays about a class of people who were not considered appropriate subjects in other venues: prostitutes, criminals, street urchins and others at the lower end of Paris&#x27;s social echelon.

André Antoine was the founder of the Théâtre Libre and a collaborator of Méténier. His theater gave Méténier a basic model to use for The Grand Guignol theater.

Max Maurey served as director from 1898 to 1914. Maurey shifted the theater&#x27;s emphasis to the horror plays it would become famous for and judged the success of a performance by the number of patrons who passed out from shock; the average was two faintings each evening. Maurey discovered André de Lorde, who would become the most important playwright for the theater.

De Lorde was the theater&#x27;s principal playwright from 1901 to 1926. He wrote at least 100 plays for the Grand Guignol, such as &quot;The Old Woman&quot;, &quot;The Ultimate Torture&quot;, &quot;A Crime in the Mad House&quot; and more. He collaborated with experimental psychologist Alfred Binet to create plays about insanity, one of the theater&#x27;s favorite and frequently recurring themes.

Camille Choisy served as director from 1914 to 1930. He contributed his expertise in special effects and scenery to the theater&#x27;s distinctive style.

 was one of the Grand Guignol&#x27;s best-known performers. From 1917 to the 1930s, she performed most frequently as a victim and was known as &quot;the most assassinated woman in the world.&quot; During her career at the Grand Guignol, Maxa&#x27;s characters were murdered more than 10,000 times in at least 60 different ways and raped at least 3,000 times.

Jack Jouvin served as director from 1930 to 1937. He shifted the theater&#x27;s subject matter, focusing performances not on gory horror but psychological drama. Under his leadership, the theater&#x27;s popularity waned and, after World War II, it was not well-attended.

Charles Nonon was the theater&#x27;s last director.

==Plays==
In a typical Grand Guignol performance patrons would see five or six short plays, all in a style that attempted to be brutally true to the theater&#x27;s naturalistic ideals. The most popular and best-known were the horror plays, which featured a distinctly bleak worldview and gory special effects, particularly in their climaxes. The horrors depicted at Grand Guignol were generally not supernatural; rather these plays often explored altered states like insanity, hypnosis, or panic. To heighten the effect, the horror plays were often alternated with comedies, a lineup referred to as &quot;hot and cold showers.&quot;

Examples of Grand Guignol horror shows included:

* &quot;Le Laboratoire des Hallucinations&quot;, by André de Lorde: When a doctor finds his wife&#x27;s lover in his operating room, he performs a graphic brain surgery, rendering the adulterer a hallucinating semi-zombie. Now insane, the lover/patient hammers a chisel into the doctor&#x27;s brain.
* &quot;Un Crime dans une Maison de Fous&quot;, by André de Lorde: Two hags in an insane asylum use scissors to blind a pretty young fellow inmate out of jealousy.
* &quot;L&#x27;Horrible Passion&quot;, by André de Lorde: A nanny strangles the children in her care.
* &quot;Le Baiser dans la Nuit&quot;, by Maurice Level: A young woman visits the man whose face she horribly disfigured with acid, and he obtains his revenge.

==Closure==
Audiences waned in the years following World War II, and the Grand Guignol closed its doors in 1962. Management attributed the closure in part to the fact that the theater&#x27;s faux horrors had been eclipsed by the actual events of the Holocaust two decades earlier. &quot;We could never equal Buchenwald,&quot; said its final director, Charles Nonon. &quot;Before the war, everyone felt that what was happening onstage was impossible. Now we know that these things, and worse, are possible in reality.&quot;

The Grand Guignol building still exists. It is occupied by the , a company devoted to presenting plays in sign language.

==Thematic and structural analysis==

While the original Grand Guignol attempted to present naturalistic horror, the performances would seem melodramatic and heightened to today&#x27;s audiences. For this reason, the term is often applied to films and plays of a stylized nature with heightened acting, melodrama and theatrical effects such as &quot;Sweeney Todd&quot;, &quot;Sleepy Hollow&quot;, &quot;Quills&quot;, and the Hammer Horror films that went before them. &quot;What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?&quot;; &quot;Hush...Hush, Sweet Charlotte&quot;; &quot;What Ever Happened to Aunt Alice?&quot;; &quot;What&#x27;s the Matter with Helen?&quot;; &quot;Night Watch&quot; and &quot;Whoever Slew Auntie Roo?&quot; form a sub-branch of the genre called Grande Dame Guignol for its use of aging A-list actresses in sensational horror films.

Audiences had strong reactions to the new disturbing themes the horror plays presented. One of the most prevalent themes staged at the Grand-Guignol was the demoralization and corruption of science. The &quot;evil doctor&quot; was a recurring trope in the horror shows performed. The popular show &quot;The System of Doctor Goudron and Professor Plume&quot; by André de Lorde displays a depiction of a doctor typical of the theater. Dr. Goudron is portrayed as manic, insane, unreliable. He is seen &quot;pac[ing] nervously&quot; and &quot;jumping on [a] desk and gesticulating&quot;. Later Lorde depicts the scientist as violent, with Goudron attempting to carve out an eye and then bite the hands of guards. During the time, curiosity and skepticism ravaged science and medicine. The depiction of scientists at the Grand-Guignol reflected the public attitude of fear and disdain. Medical science held a reputation of &quot;terror and peculiar infamy&quot;. Middle-class Parisian society believed science existed in a world of frivolity and falsehood, whereas art existed in a world of honesty. Poet Matthew Arnold is an exemplary lens to use in order to understand these sympathies.

The themes the Grand-Guignol introduced into the horror genre affected how the genre exists today. The Grand-Guignol&#x27;s introduction of naturalism into horror &quot;unmasked brutality of contemporary culture&quot;. Previously, horror served as escapism, dealing with the supernatural and unrelatable. After the theater introduced relatable topics into the genre, the audience could visualize the plots taking place and thus experienced greater fear - the Grand-Guignol transformed the horror plot into something the audience could feel personally. Horror became a vehicle for ideas and philosophy where deep &quot;insights gave way to spectacle, and spectacle to violence and gore, until in the end little was left but the gore&quot;. Today the horror genre begins with &quot;optimism and hope&quot;, which &quot;wither before random, chaotic, and inevitable violence&quot;.

==Legacy and revivals==

Grand Guignol flourished briefly in London in the early 1920s under the direction of Jose Levy, where it attracted the talents of Sybil Thorndike, Noël Coward, and Richard Hughes (whose one-act play &quot;The Sisters&#x27; Tragedy&quot; was said to outshine even Coward&#x27;s), and a series of short English &quot;Grand Guignol&quot; films (using original screenplays, not play adaptations) was made at the same time, directed by Fred Paul. Several of the films exist at the BFI National Archive.

The Grand Guignol was revived once again in London in 1945, under the direction of Frederick Witney, where it ran for two seasons at the Granville theater. These included premiers of Witney&#x27;s own work as well as adaptations of French originals.

In 2010, English director-writer, Richard Mazda, re-introduced New York audiences to the Grand Guignol. His acting troupe, The Queens Players, did six mainstage productions of Grand Guignol plays, and Mazda wrote new plays in the classic Guignol style. The sixth production, &quot;theater of Fear&quot;, included De Lorde&#x27;s famous adaptation of Poe&#x27;s &quot;The System of Doctor Tarr and Professor Fether&quot; (&quot;Le Systéme du Dr Goudron et Pr Plume&quot;) as well as two original plays, &quot;Double Crossed&quot; and &quot;The Good Death&quot; alongside &quot;The Tell Tale Heart&quot;.

The 1963 mondo film &quot;Ecco&quot; (Original title: &quot;Il mondo di notte numero 3&quot;, directed by
Gianni Proia) includes a scene which may have been filmed at the Grand Guignol theater during its final years.

The Swiss theater company Compagnie Pied de Biche has revisited the Grand Guignol genre in contemporary contexts since 2008. The company staged in 2010 a diptych &quot;Impact &amp; Dr. Incubis&quot;, based on original texts by Nicolas Yazgi and directed by Frédéric Ozier. More than literal adaptations, the plays address violence, death, crime and fear in contemporary contexts, while revisiting many trope of the original Grand Guignol corpus, often with humor.

Recently formed London-based Grand Guignol company theater of the Damned, brought their first production to the Camden Fringe in 2010 and produced the award nominated &quot;Grand Guignol&quot; in November of that year. In 2011, they staged &quot;Revenge of the Grand Guignol&quot; at the Courtyard theater, London, as part of the London Horror Festival.

Between 2011 and 2016, Baltimore-based Yellow Sign theater performed Grand Guignol productions (including a heavily updated version of &quot;Le Systéme du Dr Goudron et Pr Plume&quot;) as well as integrating Guignol elements into other performance forms.

In November 2014, 86 years after the last show of Alfredo Sainati&#x27;s &quot;La Compagnia del Grand-Guignol&quot;, founded in 1908 and which had been the only example of Grand Guignol in Italy, the Convivio d&#x27;Arte Company presented in Milan &quot;Grand Guignol de Milan: Le Cabaret des Vampires&quot;. The show was an original tribute to Grand Guignol, a horror vaudeville with various horror and grotesque performances such as monologues, live music and burlesque, with a satirical black humor conduction.

Since 2022 Yorkshire-based theater company Contortium have been touring &quot;Tales of the Bizarre&quot;, a modern revival of the Grand Guignol, presenting a mixture of new pieces by various writers, and adapted originals.

==Further reading==
*Antona-Traversi, Cammillo. &quot;L&#x27;Histoire du Grand Guignol: theater de L&#x27;Epouvante et du Rire.&quot; Librarie theatrale, 1933.
*Brown, Frederick. &quot;Theater and Revolution: The Culture of the French Stage.&quot; New York, The Viking Press, 1980.
*Gordon, Mel. &quot;The Grand Guignol: theater of Fear and Terror.&quot; Da Capo Press, 1997.
*Fahy, Thomas. &quot;The Philosophy of Horror.&quot; University Press of Kentucky, 2010.
*Hand, Richard, and Michael Wilson. &quot;Grand-Guignol: The French theater of Horror.&quot; University of Exeter Press, 2002. 
*Hand, Richard, and Michael Wilson. &quot;London&#x27;s Grand-Guignol and the theater of Horror&quot; University of Exeter Press, 2007. 
*Hand, Richard J., and Michael Wilson. &quot;Transatlantic Terror! French Horror Theater and American Pre-Code Comics.&quot; &quot;The Journal of Popular Culture&quot;, vol. 45, no. 2, 2012.
*Negovan, Thomas. &quot;Grand Guignol: An Exhibition of Artworks Celebrating the Legendary Theater of Terror.&quot; Olympian Publishing, 2010.
*Ruff, Felicia J. &quot;The Laugh Factory? Humor and Horror at Le Théâtre du Grand Guignol.&quot; theater Symposium: A Journal of the Southeastern theater Conference, vol. 16, 2008, pp. 65–74.
*Skal, David J. &quot;The Monster Show: A Cultural History of Horror&quot;. New York-London, Faber &amp; Faber, 2001 (Revised edition).

==Footnotes==

Sources
*
*

==External links==
*
*Aboutface theater Company, New York City; series of Grand Guignol plays and adaptations
*Compagnie Pied de Biche, Swiss-based theater company that revisits the Grand Guignol genre in contemporary contexts
*Contortium theater Company, UK based Grand Guignol company.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q751317" start="4" end="28" title="Grand Guignol" label="Théâtre du Grand-Guignol"/>
<link wikidata="Q576507" start="53" end="60" title="Quartier Pigalle" label="Pigalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543778" start="168" end="174" title="Horror and terror" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q474046" start="236" end="242" title="Amorality" label="amoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134718" start="286" end="310" title="English Renaissance theatre" label="Elizabethan and Jacobean"/>
<link wikidata="Q272169" start="358" end="374" title="Titus Andronicus" label="Titus Andronicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408612" start="407" end="427" title="The Duchess of Malfi" label="The Duchess of Malfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117565" start="444" end="459" title="The White Devil" label="The White Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q909586" start="484" end="497" title="splatter film" label="splatter film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651513" start="566" end="580" title="Oscar Méténier" label="Oscar Méténier"/>
<link wikidata="Q56001" start="612" end="622" title="naturalism (theatre)" label="naturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302224" start="2083" end="2093" title="Max Maurey" label="Max Maurey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179" start="2220" end="2227" title="Guignol" label="Guignol"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="2243" end="2247" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250832" start="2318" end="2332" title="Punch and Judy" label="Punch and Judy"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2371" end="2382" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2387" end="2399" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651513" start="2492" end="2506" title="Oscar Méténier" label="Oscar Méténier"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="2771" end="2776" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q529001" start="2801" end="2814" title="André Antoine" label="André Antoine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317415" start="2838" end="2851" title="Théâtre Libre" label="Théâtre Libre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302224" start="2963" end="2973" title="Max Maurey" label="Max Maurey"/>
<link wikidata="Q523569" start="3256" end="3270" title="André de Lorde" label="André de Lorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q207478" start="3623" end="3635" title="Alfred Binet" label="Alfred Binet"/>
<link wikidata="Q505619" start="3658" end="3666" title="insanity" label="insanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4483" end="4495" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q56001" start="4741" end="4753" title="naturalism (theatre)" label="naturalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="4976" end="4988" title="supernatural" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q8609" start="5054" end="5062" title="hypnosis" label="hypnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q208450" start="5067" end="5072" title="panic" label="panic"/>
<link wikidata="Q523569" start="5313" end="5327" title="André de Lorde" label="André de Lorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301073" start="5868" end="5881" title="Maurice Level" label="Maurice Level"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="6237" end="6246" title="The Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q152802" start="6295" end="6305" title="Buchenwald concentration camp" label="Buchenwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q34228" start="6617" end="6630" title="sign language" label="sign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q191489" start="6774" end="6783" title="melodrama" label="melodrama"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6983" end="6995" title="Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street" label="Sweeney Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q72309" start="7009" end="7022" title="The Legend of Sleepy Hollow" label="Sleepy Hollow"/>
<link wikidata="Q761302" start="7036" end="7042" title="Quills (film)" label="Quills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433745" start="7058" end="7071" title="Hammer Film Productions" label="Hammer Horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q26644" start="7107" end="7139" title="What Ever Happened to Baby Jane? (1962 film)" label="What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?"/>
<link wikidata="Q631947" start="7153" end="7181" title="Hush...Hush, Sweet Charlotte" label="Hush...Hush, Sweet Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q569881" start="7195" end="7228" title="What Ever Happened to Aunt Alice?" label="What Ever Happened to Aunt Alice?"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567621" start="7242" end="7276" title="What&amp;#x27;s the Matter with Helen?" label="What&amp;#x27;s the Matter with Helen?"/>
<link wikidata="Q669324" start="7290" end="7301" title="Night Watch (1973 film)" label="Night Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774771" start="7318" end="7342" title="Whoever Slew Auntie Roo?" label="Whoever Slew Auntie Roo?"/>
<link wikidata="Q17154970" start="7387" end="7406" title="Grande Dame Guignol" label="Grande Dame Guignol"/>
<link wikidata="Q271032" start="8576" end="8590" title="Matthew Arnold" label="Matthew Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279417" start="9651" end="9660" title="Jose Levy" label="Jose Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q177248" start="9696" end="9711" title="Sybil Thorndike" label="Sybil Thorndike"/>
<link wikidata="Q298388" start="9713" end="9724" title="Noël Coward" label="Noël Coward"/>
<link wikidata="Q302433" start="9730" end="9744" title="Richard Hughes (British writer)" label="Richard Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496050" start="9997" end="10006" title="Fred Paul" label="Fred Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835525" start="10042" end="10062" title="BFI National Archive" label="BFI National Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327718" start="10350" end="10363" title="Richard Mazda" label="Richard Mazda"/>
<link wikidata="Q641842" start="10683" end="10729" title="The System of Doctor Tarr and Professor Fether" label="The System of Doctor Tarr and Professor Fether"/>
<link wikidata="Q762206" start="10892" end="10911" title="The Tell-Tale Heart" label="The Tell Tale Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474387" start="10929" end="10939" title="mondo film" label="mondo film"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11026" end="11038" title="Gianni Proia" label="Gianni Proia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025770" start="11715" end="11728" title="Camden Fringe" label="Camden Fringe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178796" start="11891" end="11916" title="Courtyard Theatre, London" label="Courtyard theater, London"/>
</links>
</doc>
