<doc id="13772" wikidata="Q199569" url="?curid=13772" title="History of Poland">
<text>The history of Poland spans over a thousand years, from medieval tribes, Christianization and monarchy; through Poland&#x27;s Golden Age, expansionism and becoming one of the largest European powers; to its collapse and partitions, two world wars, communism, and the restoration of democracy.

The roots of Polish history can be traced to ancient times, when the territory of present-day Poland was inhabited by diverse ethnic groups, including Celts, Scythians, Sarmatians, Slavs, Balts and Germanic peoples. However, it was the West Slavic Lechites, the closest ancestors of ethnic Poles, who established permanent settlements during the Early Middle Ages. The Lechitic Western Polans, a tribe whose name denotes &quot;people living in open fields&quot;, dominated the region and gave Poland - which lies in the North-Central European Plain - its name. The first ruling dynasty, the Piasts, emerged in the 10th century AD. Duke Mieszko I, regarded as the creator of Polish statehood, adopted Western Christianity in 966 CE. Mieszko&#x27;s dominion was formally reconstituted as a medieval kingdom in 1025 by his son Bolesław I the Brave, known for his military expansions. The most successful and the last Piast monarch, Casimir III the Great, presided over a period of economic prosperity and territorial aggrandizement before his death in 1370 without male heirs. 

The period of the Jagiellonian dynasty in the 14th–16th centuries brought close ties with the Lithuania, a cultural Renaissance in Poland and continued territorial expansion as well as Polonization that culminated in the establishment of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1569, one of Europe&#x27;s great powers. The Commonwealth was able to sustain centuries-long prosperity, while its political system matured as a unique noble democracy with an elective monarchy. From the mid-17th century, however, the huge state entered a period of decline caused by devastating wars and the deterioration of its political system. Significant internal reforms were introduced in the late 18th century, such as Europe&#x27;s first Constitution of 3 May 1791. The existence of the Commonwealth ended in 1795 after a series of invasions and partitions carried out by the Russian Empire, the Kingdom of Prussia and the Habsburg monarchy. From 1795 until 1918, no truly independent Polish state existed, although strong resistance movements operated. The opportunity to regain sovereignty only materialized after World War I, when the three partitioning powers were fatally weakened in the wake of war and revolution.

The Second Polish Republic was established in 1918 and existed as an independent state until 1939, when Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union invaded Poland, marking the beginning of World War II. Millions of Polish citizens of different faiths or identities perished under Nazi occupation between 1939 and 1945 through planned genocide and extermination. A Polish government-in-exile functioned throughout the war, and the Poles contributed to the Allied victory through participation in military campaigns on both the eastern and western fronts. The westward advances of the Soviet Red Army in 1944 and 1945 compelled Nazi Germany&#x27;s forces to retreat from Poland, which led to the establishment of a satellite communist country, known from 1952 as the Polish People&#x27;s Republic. The territorial adjustments mandated by the Allies at the end of World War II in 1945 shifted Poland&#x27;s geographic centre of gravity towards the west, and the re-defined Polish lands largely lost their historic multi-ethnic character. By the late 1980s, the Polish reform movement Solidarity contributed to a peaceful transition from a planned communist economy to capitalism and a liberal parliamentary democracy. This process resulted in the creation of the modern Polish state, the Third Polish Republic, founded in 1989.
==Prehistory and protohistory==

In prehistoric and protohistoric times, over a period of approximately 500,000 years, the area of present-day Poland was intermittently inhabited by members of the genus &quot;Homo&quot;. The earliest evidence of &quot;Homo erectus&quot; activity in the form of microlith artifacts was discovered at Trzebnica, in Lower Silesia. It remains the oldest archeological site in the country, dating back to the Lower Paleolithic period of the Stone Age. The southern regions of Poland were subsequently penetrated by sporadic groups of Neanderthals. Their presence was confirmed by the stone tools unearthed in caves of the Kraków-Częstochowa Upland, a limestone formation with hills, cliffs and valleys that came to be known as the Polish Jura. 

The arrival of &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; and anatomically modern humans coincided with the climatic discontinuity at the end of the Last Glacial Period (Weichselian glaciation) around 10,000 BC, when Poland became warmer and habitable. It allowed various groups of early humans to pass the Sudeten Mountains through the Moravian Gate and the Kłodzko Valley into Lower Silesia. The Neolithic period ushered in the Linear Pottery culture, whose founders belonged to the Danubian culture and migrated from the Danube River area beginning about 5500 BC. This culture was distinguished by the establishment of the first settled agricultural communities in modern Polish territory. Later, between about 4400 and 2000 BC, the native post-Mesolithic populations would also adopt and further develop the agricultural way of life. 

Excavations indicated broad-ranging development in the New Stone Age. Most notably, the oldest samples of European cheese (5500 BC) were found in the region of Kuyavia, and a pot from Bronocice is incised with what is now believed to be the earliest-known portrayal of a wheeled vehicle (3400 BC). Toolmaking became more advanced and material was primarily sourced from quarries and mines in the Świętokrzyskie (Holy Cross) Mountains. Artifacts that originated in this mountain region were excavated as far as Moravia and near the Baltic Sea. It is estimated that the UNESCO-protected neolithic flint mines at Krzemionki, one of Europe&#x27;s largest, were utilised by the Funnelbeaker and Globular Amphora cultures from 3900 BC to 1600 BC. The only surviving example of ancient parietal art in Poland is at a flint shaft in Krzemionki and features a linear charcoal pictogram of a female figure or deity that has been since associated with fertility. 

Poland&#x27;s Early Bronze Age began around 2400–2300 BC, whereas its Iron Age commenced c. 750–700 BC. One of the many cultures that have been uncovered, the Lusatian culture, spanned the Bronze and Iron Ages and left notable settlement sites. Around 400 BC, Poland was settled by Celts of the La Tène culture. They were soon followed by emerging cultures with a strong Germanic component, influenced first by the Celts and then by the Roman Empire. The Germanic peoples migrated out of the area by about 500 AD during the great Migration Period of the European Dark Ages. Wooded regions to the north and east were settled by Balts. 

According to some archaeological research, Slavs have resided in modern Polish territories for only 1,500 years. However, recent genetic studies determined that the inhabitants of Poland are also the descendants of people from before the Migration Period. According to other archaeological and linguistic research, early Slavic peoples were likely present in parts of Poland much earlier, and may have been associated with the ancient Przeworsk culture of the 3rd century BC, though some Slavic groups may have arrived from the east in later periods. The West Slavic and Lechitic peoples as well as any remaining minority clans were organized into tribal units (Polish tribes), as outlined by the anonymous Bavarian Geographer in the 9th century. Largely divided, it was the Western Polans in the Greater Poland region who began a process of unification and created a lasting political structure in the 10th century that subsequently became the state of Poland.

==Piast period (10th century–1385)==

===Mieszko I===

Poland was established as a state under the Piast dynasty, which ruled the country between the 10th and 14th centuries. Historical records referring to the Polish state begin with the rule of Duke Mieszko I, whose reign commenced sometime before 963 and continued until his death in 992. Mieszko converted to Christianity in 966, following his marriage to Princess Doubravka of Bohemia, a fervent Christian. The event is known as the &quot;baptism of Poland&quot;, and its date is often used to mark a symbolic beginning of Polish statehood. Mieszko completed a unification of the Lechitic tribal lands that was fundamental to the new country&#x27;s existence. Following its emergence, Poland was led by a series of rulers who converted the population to Christianity, created a strong kingdom and fostered a distinctive Polish culture that was integrated into the broader European culture.

===Bolesław I the Brave===

Mieszko&#x27;s son, Duke Bolesław I the Brave (r. 992–1025), established a Polish Church structure, pursued territorial conquests and was officially crowned the first king of Poland in 1025, near the end of his life. Bolesław also sought to spread Christianity to parts of eastern Europe that remained pagan, but suffered a setback when his greatest missionary, Adalbert of Prague, was killed in Prussia in 997. During the Congress of Gniezno in the year 1000, Holy Roman Emperor Otto III recognized the Archbishopric of Gniezno, an institution crucial for the continuing existence of the sovereign Polish state. During the reign of Otto&#x27;s successor, Holy Roman Emperor Henry II, Bolesław fought prolonged wars with the Kingdom of Germany between 1002 and 1018.

===Piast monarchy under Casimir I, Bolesław II and Bolesław III===

Bolesław I&#x27;s expansive rule overstretched the resources of the early Polish state, and it was followed by a collapse of the monarchy. Recovery took place under Casimir I the Restorer (r. 1039–58). Casimir&#x27;s son Bolesław II the Generous (r. 1058–79) became involved in a conflict with Bishop Stanislaus of Szczepanów that ultimately caused his downfall. Bolesław had the bishop murdered in 1079 after being excommunicated by the Polish church on charges of adultery. This act sparked a revolt of Polish nobles that led to Bolesław&#x27;s deposition and expulsion from the country. Around 1116, Gallus Anonymus wrote a seminal chronicle, the &quot;Gesta principum Polonorum&quot;, intended as a glorification of his patron Bolesław III Wrymouth (r. 1107–38), a ruler who revived the tradition of military prowess of Bolesław I&#x27;s time. Gallus&#x27; work remains a paramount written source for the early history of Poland.

===Fragmentation===

After Bolesław III divided Poland among his sons in his Testament of 1138, internal fragmentation eroded the Piast monarchical structures in the 12th and 13th centuries. In 1180, Casimir II the Just, who sought papal confirmation of his status as a senior duke, granted immunities and additional privileges to the Polish Church at the Congress of Łęczyca. Around 1220, Wincenty Kadłubek wrote his &quot;Chronica seu originale regum et principum Poloniae&quot;, another major source for early Polish history. In 1226, one of the regional Piast dukes, Konrad I of Masovia, invited the Teutonic Knights to help him fight the Baltic Prussian pagans. The Teutonic Order destroyed the Prussians but kept their lands, which resulted in centuries of warfare between Poland and the Teutonic Knights, and later between Poland and the German Prussian state. The first Mongol invasion of Poland began in 1240; it culminated in the defeat of Polish and allied Christian forces and the death of the Silesian Piast Duke Henry II the Pious at the Battle of Legnica in 1241. In 1242, Wrocław became the first Polish municipality to be incorporated, as the period of fragmentation brought economic development and growth of towns. New cities were founded and existing settlements were granted town status per Magdeburg Law. In 1264, Bolesław the Pious granted Jewish liberties in the Statute of Kalisz.

===Late Piast monarchy under Władysław I and Casimir III===

Attempts to reunite the Polish lands gained momentum in the 13th century, and in 1295, Duke Przemysł II of Greater Poland managed to become the first ruler since Bolesław II to be crowned king of Poland. He ruled over a limited territory and was soon killed. In 1300–05 King Wenceslaus II of Bohemia also reigned as king of Poland. The Piast Kingdom was effectively restored under Władysław I the Elbow-high (r. 1306–33), who became king in 1320. In 1308, the Teutonic Knights seized Gdańsk and the surrounding region of Pomerelia.

King Casimir III the Great (r. 1333–70), Władysław&#x27;s son and the last of the Piast rulers, strengthened and expanded the restored Kingdom of Poland, but the western provinces of Silesia (formally ceded by Casimir in 1339) and most of Polish Pomerania were lost to the Polish state for centuries to come. Progress was made in the recovery of the separately governed central province of Mazovia, however, and in 1340, the conquest of Red Ruthenia began, marking Poland&#x27;s expansion to the east. The Congress of Kraków, a vast convocation of central, eastern, and northern European rulers probably assembled to plan an anti-Turkish crusade, took place in 1364, the same year that the future Jagiellonian University, one of the oldest European universities, was founded. On 9 October 1334, Casimir III confirmed the privileges granted to Jews in 1264 by Bolesław the Pious and allowed them to settle in Poland in great numbers.

===Angevin transition===

After the Polish royal line and Piast junior branch died out in 1370, Poland came under the rule of Louis I of Hungary of the Capetian House of Anjou, who presided over a union of Hungary and Poland that lasted until 1382. In 1374, Louis granted the Polish nobility the Privilege of Koszyce to assure the succession of one of his daughters in Poland. His youngest daughter Jadwiga (d. 1399) assumed the Polish throne in 1384.

==Jagiellonian dynasty (1385–1572)==

===Dynastic union with Lithuania, Władysław II Jagiełło===

In 1386, Grand Duke Jogaila of Lithuania converted to Catholicism and married Queen Jadwiga of Poland. This act enabled him to become a king of Poland himself, and he ruled as Władysław II Jagiełło until his death in 1434. The marriage established a personal Polish–Lithuanian union ruled by the Jagiellonian dynasty. The first in a series of formal &quot;unions&quot; was the Union of Krewo of 1385, whereby arrangements were made for the marriage of Jogaila and Jadwiga. The Polish–Lithuanian partnership brought vast areas of Ruthenia controlled by the Grand Duchy of Lithuania into Poland&#x27;s sphere of influence and proved beneficial for the nationals of both countries, who coexisted and cooperated in one of the largest political entities in Europe for the next four centuries. When Queen Jadwiga died in 1399, the Kingdom of Poland fell to her husband&#x27;s sole possession.
In the Baltic Sea region, Poland&#x27;s struggle with the Teutonic Knights continued and culminated in the Battle of Grunwald (1410), a great victory that the Poles and Lithuanians were unable to follow up with a decisive strike against the main seat of the Teutonic Order at Malbork Castle. The Union of Horodło of 1413 further defined the evolving relationship between the Kingdom of Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania.

The privileges of the &quot;szlachta&quot; (nobility) kept expanding and in 1425 the rule of &quot;Neminem captivabimus&quot;, which protected the noblemen from arbitrary royal arrests, was formulated.

===Władysław III and Casimir IV Jagiellon===

The reign of the young Władysław III (1434–44), who succeeded his father Władysław II Jagiełło and ruled as king of Poland and Hungary, was cut short by his death at the Battle of Varna, during a crusade against the Ottoman Empire. This disaster led to an interregnum of three years that ended with the accession of Władysław&#x27;s brother Casimir IV Jagiellon in 1447.

Critical developments of the Jagiellonian period were concentrated during Casimir IV&#x27;s long reign, which lasted until 1492. In 1454, Royal Prussia was incorporated by Poland and the Thirteen Years&#x27; War of 1454–66 with the Teutonic state ensued. In 1466, the milestone Peace of Thorn was concluded. This treaty divided Prussia to create East Prussia, the future Duchy of Prussia, a separate entity that functioned as a fief of Poland under the administration of the Teutonic Knights. Poland also confronted the Ottoman Empire and the Crimean Tatars in the south, and in the east helped Lithuania fight the Grand Duchy of Moscow. The country was developing as a feudal state, with a predominantly agricultural economy and an increasingly dominant landed nobility. Kraków, the royal capital, was turning into a major academic and cultural center, and in 1473 the first printing press began operating there. With the growing importance of &quot;szlachta&quot; (middle and lower nobility), the king&#x27;s council evolved to become by 1493 a bicameral General Sejm (parliament) that no longer represented exclusively top dignitaries of the realm.

The &quot;Nihil novi&quot; act, adopted in 1505 by the Sejm, transferred most of the legislative power from the monarch to the Sejm. This event marked the beginning of the period known as &quot;Golden Liberty&quot;, when the state was ruled in principle by the &quot;free and equal&quot; Polish nobility. In the 16th century, the massive development of folwark agribusinesses operated by the nobility led to increasingly abusive conditions for the peasant serfs who worked them. The political monopoly of the nobles also stifled the development of cities, some of which were thriving during the late Jagiellonian era, and limited the rights of townspeople, effectively holding back the emergence of the middle class.

===Early modern Poland under Sigismund I and Sigismund II===

In the 16th century, Protestant Reformation movements made deep inroads into Polish Christianity and the resulting Reformation in Poland involved a number of different denominations. The policies of religious tolerance that developed in Poland were nearly unique in Europe at that time and many who fled regions torn by religious strife found refuge in Poland. The reigns of King Sigismund I the Old (1506–1548) and King Sigismund II Augustus (1548–1572) witnessed an intense cultivation of culture and science (a Golden Age of the Renaissance in Poland), of which the astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus (1473–1543) is the best known representative. Jan Kochanowski (1530–1584) was a poet and the premier artistic personality of the period. In 1525, during the reign of Sigismund I, the Teutonic Order was secularized and Duke Albert performed an act of homage before the Polish king (the Prussian Homage) for his fief, the Duchy of Prussia. Mazovia was finally fully incorporated into the Polish Crown in 1529.

The reign of Sigismund II ended the Jagiellonian period, but gave rise to the Union of Lublin (1569), an ultimate fulfillment of the union with Lithuania. This agreement transferred Ukraine from the Grand Duchy of Lithuania to Poland and transformed the Polish–Lithuanian polity into a real union, preserving it beyond the death of the childless Sigismund II, whose active involvement made the completion of this process possible.

Livonia in the far northeast was incorporated by Poland in 1561 and Poland entered the Livonian War against Russia. The executionist movement, which attempted to check the progressing domination of the state by the magnate families of Poland and Lithuania, peaked at the Sejm in Piotrków in 1562–63. On the religious front, the Polish Brethren split from the Calvinists, and the Protestant Brest Bible was published in 1563. The Jesuits, who arrived in 1564, were destined to make a major impact on Poland&#x27;s history.

==Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth==


===Establishment (1569–1648)===

====Union of Lublin====

The Union of Lublin of 1569 established the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, a federal state more closely unified than the earlier political arrangement between Poland and Lithuania. The union was run largely by the nobility through the system of central parliament and local assemblies, but was headed by elected kings. The formal rule of the nobility, who were proportionally more numerous than in other European countries, constituted an early democratic system (&quot;a sophisticated noble democracy&quot;), in contrast to the absolute monarchies prevalent at that time in the rest of Europe.

The beginning of the Commonwealth coincided with a period in Polish history when great political power was attained and advancements in civilization and prosperity took place. The Polish–Lithuanian Union became an influential participant in European affairs and a vital cultural entity that spread Western culture (with Polish characteristics) eastward. In the second half of the 16th century and the first half of the 17th century, the Commonwealth was one of the largest and most populous states in contemporary Europe, with an area approaching and a population of about ten million. Its economy was dominated by export-focused agriculture. Nationwide religious toleration was guaranteed at the Warsaw Confederation in 1573.

====First elective kings====

After the rule of the Jagiellonian dynasty ended in 1572, Henry of Valois (later King Henry III of France) was the winner of the first &quot;free election&quot; by the Polish nobility, held in 1573. He had to agree to the restrictive &quot;pacta conventa&quot; obligations and fled Poland in 1574 when news arrived of the vacancy of the French throne, to which he was the heir presumptive. From the start, the royal elections increased foreign influence in the Commonwealth as foreign powers sought to manipulate the Polish nobility to place candidates amicable to their interests. The reign of Stephen Báthory of Hungary followed (r. 1576–1586). He was militarily and domestically assertive and is revered in Polish historical tradition as a rare case of a successful elective king. The establishment of the legal Crown Tribunal in 1578 meant a transfer of many appellate cases from the royal to noble jurisdiction.

====First kings of the Vasa dynasty====

A period of rule under the Swedish House of Vasa began in the Commonwealth in the year 1587. The first two kings from this dynasty, Sigismund III (r. 1587–1632) and Władysław IV (r. 1632–1648), repeatedly attempted to intrigue for accession to the throne of Sweden, which was a constant source of distraction for the affairs of the Commonwealth. At that time, the Catholic Church embarked on an ideological counter-offensive and the Counter-Reformation claimed many converts from Polish and Lithuanian Protestant circles. In 1596, the Union of Brest split the Eastern Christians of the Commonwealth to create the Uniate Church of the Eastern Rite, but subject to the authority of the pope. The Zebrzydowski rebellion against Sigismund III unfolded in 1606–1608.

Seeking supremacy in Eastern Europe, the Commonwealth fought wars with Russia between 1605 and 1618 in the wake of Russia&#x27;s Time of Troubles; the series of conflicts is referred to as the Polish–Russian War or the &quot;Dymitriads&quot;. The efforts resulted in expansion of the eastern territories of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, but the goal of taking over the Russian throne for the Polish ruling dynasty was not achieved. Sweden sought supremacy in the Baltic during the Polish–Swedish wars of 1617–1629, and the Ottoman Empire pressed from the south in the Battles at Cecora in 1620 and Khotyn in 1621. The agricultural expansion and serfdom policies in Polish Ukraine resulted in a series of Cossack uprisings. Allied with the Habsburg monarchy, the Commonwealth did not directly participate in the Thirty Years&#x27; War. Władysław&#x27;s IV reign was mostly peaceful, with a Russian invasion in the form of the Smolensk War of 1632–1634 successfully repelled. The Orthodox Church hierarchy, banned in Poland after the Union of Brest, was re-established in 1635.

===Decline (1648–1764)===

====Deluge of wars====

During the reign of John II Casimir Vasa (r. 1648–1668), the third and last king of his dynasty, the nobles&#x27; democracy fell into decline as a result of foreign invasions and domestic disorder. These calamities multiplied rather suddenly and marked the end of the Polish Golden Age. Their effect was to render the once powerful Commonwealth increasingly vulnerable to foreign intervention.

The Cossack Khmelnytsky Uprising of 1648–1657 engulfed the south-eastern regions of the Polish crown; its long-term effects were disastrous for the Commonwealth. The first &quot;liberum veto&quot; (a parliamentary device that allowed any member of the Sejm to dissolve a current session immediately) was exercised by a deputy in 1652. This practice would eventually weaken Poland&#x27;s central government critically. In the Treaty of Pereyaslav (1654), the Ukrainian rebels declared themselves subjects of the Tsar of Russia. The Second Northern War raged through the core Polish lands in 1655–1660; it included a brutal and devastating invasion of Poland referred to as the Swedish Deluge. The war ended in 1660 with the Treaty of Oliva, which resulted in the loss of some of Poland&#x27;s northern possessions. In 1657 the Treaty of Bromberg established the independence of the Duchy of Prussia. The Commonwealth forces did well in the Russo-Polish War (1654–1667), but the result was the permanent division of Ukraine between Poland and Russia, as agreed to in the Truce of Andrusovo (1667). Towards the end of the war, the Lubomirski&#x27;s rebellion, a major magnate revolt against the king, destabilized and weakened the country. The large-scale slave raids of the Crimean Tatars also had highly deleterious effects on the Polish economy. &quot;Merkuriusz Polski&quot;, the first Polish newspaper, was published in 1661.

In 1668, grief-stricken at the recent death of his wife and frustrated by the disastrous political setbacks of his reign, John II Casimir abdicated the throne and fled to France.

====John III Sobieski and last military victories====

King Michał Korybut Wiśniowiecki, a native Pole, was elected to replace John II Casimir in 1669. The Polish–Ottoman War (1672–76) broke out during his reign, which lasted until 1673, and continued under his successor, John III Sobieski (r. 1674–1696). Sobieski intended to pursue Baltic area expansion (and to this end he signed the secret Treaty of Jaworów with France in 1675), but was forced instead to fight protracted wars with the Ottoman Empire. By doing so, Sobieski briefly revived the Commonwealth&#x27;s military might. He defeated the expanding Muslims at the Battle of Khotyn in 1673 and decisively helped deliver Vienna from a Turkish onslaught at the Battle of Vienna in 1683. Sobieski&#x27;s reign marked the last high point in the history of the Commonwealth: in the first half of the 18th century, Poland ceased to be an active player in international politics. The Treaty of Perpetual Peace (1686) with Russia was the final border settlement between the two countries before the First Partition of Poland in 1772.

The Commonwealth, subjected to almost constant warfare until 1720, suffered enormous population losses and massive damage to its economy and social structure. The government became ineffective in the wake of large-scale internal conflicts, corrupted legislative processes and manipulation by foreign interests. The nobility fell under the control of a handful of feuding magnate families with established territorial domains. The urban population and infrastructure fell into ruin, together with most peasant farms, whose inhabitants were subjected to increasingly extreme forms of serfdom. The development of science, culture and education came to a halt or regressed.

====Saxon kings====

The royal election of 1697 brought a ruler of the Saxon House of Wettin to the Polish throne: Augustus II the Strong (r. 1697–1733), who was able to assume the throne only by agreeing to convert to Roman Catholicism. He was succeeded by his son Augustus III (r. 1734–1763). The reigns of the Saxon kings (who were both simultaneously prince-electors of Saxony) were disrupted by competing candidates for the throne and witnessed further disintegration of the Commonwealth.

The Great Northern War of 1700–1721, a period seen by the contemporaries as a temporary eclipse, may have been the fatal blow that brought down the Polish political system. Stanisław Leszczyński was installed as king in 1704 under Swedish protection, but lasted only a few years. The Silent Sejm of 1717 marked the beginning of the Commonwealth&#x27;s existence as a Russian protectorate: the Tsardom would guarantee the reform-impeding Golden Liberty of the nobility from that time on in order to cement the Commonwealth&#x27;s weak central authority and a state of perpetual political impotence. In a resounding break with traditions of religious tolerance, Protestants were executed during the Tumult of Thorn in 1724. In 1732, Russia, Austria and Prussia, Poland&#x27;s three increasingly powerful and scheming neighbors, entered into the secret Treaty of the Three Black Eagles with the intention of controlling the future royal succession in the Commonwealth. The War of the Polish Succession was fought in 1733–1735 to assist Leszczyński in assuming the throne of Poland for a second time. Amidst considerable foreign involvement, his efforts were unsuccessful. The Kingdom of Prussia became a strong regional power and succeeded in wresting the historically Polish province of Silesia from the Habsburg monarchy in the Silesian Wars; .

The personal union between the Commonwealth and the Electorate of Saxony did give rise to the emergence of a reform movement in the Commonwealth and the beginnings of the Polish Enlightenment culture, the major positive developments of this era. The first Polish public library was the Załuski Library in Warsaw, opened to the public in 1747.

===Reforms and loss of statehood (1764–1795)===

====Czartoryski reforms and Stanisław August Poniatowski====

During the later part of the 18th century, fundamental internal reforms were attempted in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth as it slid into extinction. The reform activity, initially promoted by the magnate Czartoryski family faction known as the &quot;Familia&quot;, provoked a hostile reaction and military response from neighboring powers, but it did create conditions that fostered economic improvement. The most populous urban center, the capital city of Warsaw, replaced Danzig (Gdańsk) as the leading trade center, and the importance of the more prosperous urban social classes increased. The last decades of the independent Commonwealth&#x27;s existence were characterized by aggressive reform movements and far-reaching progress in the areas of education, intellectual life, art and the evolution of the social and political system.

The royal election of 1764 resulted in the elevation of Stanisław August Poniatowski, a refined and worldly aristocrat connected to the Czartoryski family, but hand-picked and imposed by Empress Catherine the Great of Russia, who expected him to be her obedient follower. Stanisław August ruled the Polish–Lithuanian state until its dissolution in 1795. The king spent his reign torn between his desire to implement reforms necessary to save the failing state and the perceived necessity of remaining in a subordinate relationship to his Russian sponsors.

The Bar Confederation (1768–1772) was a rebellion of nobles directed against Russia&#x27;s influence in general and Stanisław August, who was seen as its representative, in particular. It was fought to preserve Poland&#x27;s independence and the nobility&#x27;s traditional interests. After several years, it was brought under control by forces loyal to the king and those of the Russian Empire.

Following the suppression of the Bar Confederation, parts of the Commonwealth were divided up among Prussia, Austria and Russia in 1772 at the instigation of Frederick the Great of Prussia, an action that became known as the First Partition of Poland: the outer provinces of the Commonwealth were seized by agreement among the country&#x27;s three powerful neighbors and only a rump state remained. In 1773, the &quot;Partition Sejm&quot; ratified the partition under duress as a &quot;fait accompli&quot;. However, it also established the Commission of National Education, a pioneering in Europe education authority often called the world&#x27;s first ministry of education.

====The Great Sejm of 1788–1791 and the Constitution of 3 May 1791====

The long-lasting session of parliament convened by King Stanisław August is known as the Great Sejm or Four-Year Sejm; it first met in 1788. Its landmark achievement was the passing of the Constitution of 3 May 1791, the first singular pronouncement of a supreme law of the state in modern Europe. A moderately reformist document condemned by detractors as sympathetic to the ideals of the French Revolution, it soon generated strong opposition from the conservative circles of the Commonwealth&#x27;s upper nobility and from Empress Catherine of Russia, who was determined to prevent the rebirth of a strong Commonwealth. The nobility&#x27;s Targowica Confederation, formed in Russian imperial capital of Saint Petersburg, appealed to Catherine for help, and in May 1792, the Russian army entered the territory of the Commonwealth. The Polish–Russian War of 1792, a defensive war fought by the forces of the Commonwealth against Russian invaders, ended when the Polish king, convinced of the futility of resistance, capitulated by joining the Targowica Confederation. The Russian-allied confederation took over the government, but Russia and Prussia in 1793 arranged for the Second Partition of Poland anyway. The partition left the country with a critically reduced territory that rendered it essentially incapable of an independent existence. The Commonwealth&#x27;s Grodno Sejm of 1793, the last Sejm of the state&#x27;s existence, was compelled to confirm the new partition.

====The Kościuszko Uprising of 1794 and the end of Polish–Lithuanian state====

Radicalized by recent events, Polish reformers (whether in exile or still resident in the reduced area remaining to the Commonwealth) were soon working on preparations for a national insurrection. Tadeusz Kościuszko, a popular general and a veteran of the American Revolution, was chosen as its leader. He returned from abroad and issued Kościuszko&#x27;s proclamation in Kraków on March 24, 1794. It called for a national uprising under his supreme command. Kościuszko emancipated many peasants in order to enroll them as &quot;kosynierzy&quot; in his army, but the hard-fought insurrection, despite widespread national support, proved incapable of generating the foreign assistance necessary for its success. In the end, it was suppressed by the combined forces of Russia and Prussia, with Warsaw captured in November 1794 in the aftermath of the Battle of Praga.

In 1795, a Third Partition of Poland was undertaken by Russia, Prussia and Austria as a final division of territory that resulted in the effective dissolution of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth. King Stanisław August Poniatowski was escorted to Grodno, forced to abdicate, and retired to Saint Petersburg. Tadeusz Kościuszko, initially imprisoned, was allowed to emigrate to the United States in 1796.

The response of the Polish leadership to the last partition is a matter of historical debate. Literary scholars found that the dominant emotion of the first decade was despair that produced a moral desert ruled by violence and treason. On the other hand, historians have looked for signs of resistance to foreign rule. Apart from those who went into exile, the nobility took oaths of loyalty to their new rulers and served as officers in their armies.

==Partitioned Poland (1795–1918)==

===Armed resistance (1795–1864)===

====Napoleonic wars====

Although no sovereign Polish state existed between 1795 and 1918, the idea of Polish independence was kept alive throughout the 19th century. There were a number of uprisings and other armed undertakings waged against the partitioning powers. Military efforts after the partitions were first based on the alliances of Polish émigrés with post-revolutionary France. Jan Henryk Dąbrowski&#x27;s Polish Legions fought in French campaigns outside of Poland between 1797 and 1802 in hopes that their involvement and contribution would be rewarded with the liberation of their Polish homeland. The Polish national anthem, &quot;Poland Is Not Yet Lost&quot;, or &quot;Dąbrowski&#x27;s Mazurka&quot;, was written in praise of his actions by Józef Wybicki in 1797.

The Duchy of Warsaw, a small, semi-independent Polish state, was created in 1807 by Napoleon in the wake of his defeat of Prussia and the signing of the Treaties of Tilsit with Emperor Alexander I of Russia. The Army of the Duchy of Warsaw, led by Józef Poniatowski, participated in numerous campaigns in alliance with France, including the successful Austro-Polish War of 1809, which, combined with the outcomes of other theaters of the War of the Fifth Coalition, resulted in an enlargement of the duchy&#x27;s territory. The French invasion of Russia in 1812 and the German Campaign of 1813 saw the duchy&#x27;s last military engagements. The Constitution of the Duchy of Warsaw abolished serfdom as a reflection of the ideals of the French Revolution, but it did not promote land reform.

====The Congress of Vienna====

After Napoleon&#x27;s defeat, a new European order was established at the Congress of Vienna, which met in the years 1814 and 1815. Adam Jerzy Czartoryski, a former close associate of Emperor Alexander I, became the leading advocate for the Polish national cause. The Congress implemented a new partition scheme, which took into account some of the gains realized by the Poles during the Napoleonic period.

The Duchy of Warsaw was replaced in 1815 with a new Kingdom of Poland, unofficially known as Congress Poland. The residual Polish kingdom was joined to the Russian Empire in a personal union under the Russian tsar and it was allowed its own constitution and military. East of the kingdom, large areas of the former Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth remained directly incorporated into the Russian Empire as the Western Krai. These territories, along with Congress Poland, are generally considered to form the Russian Partition. The Russian, Prussian, and Austrian &quot;partitions&quot; are informal names for the lands of the former Commonwealth, not actual units of administrative division of Polish–Lithuanian territories after partitions. The Prussian Partition included a portion separated as the Grand Duchy of Posen. Peasants under the Prussian administration were gradually enfranchised under the reforms of 1811 and 1823. The limited legal reforms in the Austrian Partition were overshadowed by its rural poverty. The Free City of Cracow was a tiny republic created by the Congress of Vienna under the joint supervision of the three partitioning powers. Despite the bleak political situation (from the standpoint of Polish patriots), economic progress was made in the lands taken over by foreign powers because the period after the Congress of Vienna witnessed a significant development in the building of early industry.

Economic historians have made new estimates on GDP per capita, 1790–1910. They confirm the hypothesis of semi-peripheral development of Polish territories in the 19th century and the slow process of catching-up with the core economies.

====The Uprising of November 1830====

The increasingly repressive policies of the partitioning powers led to resistance movements in partitioned Poland, and in 1830 Polish patriots staged the November Uprising. This revolt developed into a full-scale war with Russia, but the leadership was taken over by Polish conservatives who were reluctant to challenge the empire and hostile to broadening the independence movement&#x27;s social base through measures such as land reform. Despite the significant resources mobilized, a series of errors by several successive chief commanders appointed by the insurgent Polish National Government led to the defeat of its forces by the Russian army in 1831. Congress Poland lost its constitution and military, but formally remained a separate administrative unit within the Russian Empire.

After the defeat of the November Uprising, thousands of former Polish combatants and other activists emigrated to Western Europe. This phenomenon, known as the Great Emigration, soon dominated Polish political and intellectual life. Together with the leaders of the independence movement, the Polish community abroad included the greatest Polish literary and artistic minds, including the Romantic poets Adam Mickiewicz, Juliusz Słowacki, Cyprian Norwid, and the composer Frédéric Chopin. In occupied and repressed Poland, some sought progress through nonviolent activism focused on education and economy, known as organic work; others, in cooperation with the emigrant circles, organized conspiracies and prepared for the next armed insurrection.

====Revolts of the era of the Spring of Nations====

The planned national uprising failed to materialize because the authorities in the partitions found out about secret preparations. The Greater Poland uprising ended in a fiasco in early 1846. In the Kraków uprising of February 1846, patriotic action was combined with revolutionary demands, but the result was the incorporation of the Free City of Cracow into the Austrian Partition. The Austrian officials took advantage of peasant discontent and incited villagers against the noble-dominated insurgent units. This resulted in the Galician slaughter of 1846, a large-scale rebellion of serfs seeking relief from their post-feudal condition of mandatory labor as practiced in &quot;folwarks&quot;. The uprising freed many from bondage and hastened decisions that led to the abolition of Polish serfdom in the Austrian Empire in 1848. A new wave of Polish involvement in revolutionary movements soon took place in the partitions and in other parts of Europe in the context of the Spring of Nations revolutions of 1848 (e.g. Józef Bem&#x27;s participation in the revolutions in Austria and Hungary). The 1848 German revolutions precipitated the Greater Poland uprising of 1848, in which peasants in the Prussian Partition, who were by then largely enfranchised, played a prominent role.

====The Uprising of January 1863====

As a matter of continuous policy, the Russian autocracy kept assailing Polish national core values of language, religion and culture. In consequence, despite the limited liberalization measures allowed in Congress Poland under the rule of Tsar Alexander II of Russia, a renewal of popular liberation activities took place in 1860–1861. During large-scale demonstrations in Warsaw, Russian forces inflicted numerous casualties on the civilian participants. The &quot;Red&quot;, or left-wing faction of Polish activists, which promoted peasant enfranchisement and cooperated with Russian revolutionaries, became involved in immediate preparations for a national uprising. The &quot;White&quot;, or right-wing faction, was inclined to cooperate with the Russian authorities and countered with partial reform proposals. In order to cripple the manpower potential of the Reds, Aleksander Wielopolski, the conservative leader of the government of Congress Poland, arranged for a partial selective conscription of young Poles for the Russian army in the years 1862 and 1863. This action hastened the outbreak of hostilities. The January Uprising, joined and led after the initial period by the Whites, was fought by partisan units against an overwhelmingly advantaged enemy. The uprising lasted from January 1863 to the spring of 1864, when Romuald Traugutt, the last supreme commander of the insurgency, was captured by the tsarist police.

On 2 March 1864, the Russian authority, compelled by the uprising to compete for the loyalty of Polish peasants, officially published an enfranchisement decree in Congress Poland along the lines of an earlier land reform proclamation of the insurgents. The act created the conditions necessary for the development of the capitalist system on central Polish lands. At the time when most Poles realized the futility of armed resistance without external support, the various sections of Polish society were undergoing deep and far-reaching evolution in the areas of social, economic and cultural development.

===Formation of modern Polish society under foreign rule (1864–1914)===

====Repression and organic work====


The failure of the January Uprising in Poland caused a major psychological trauma and became a historic watershed; indeed, it sparked the development of modern Polish nationalism. The Poles, subjected within the territories under the Russian and Prussian administrations to still stricter controls and increased persecution, sought to preserve their identity in non-violent ways. After the uprising, Congress Poland was downgraded in official usage from the &quot;Kingdom of Poland&quot; to the &quot;Vistula Land&quot; and was more fully integrated into Russia proper, but not entirely obliterated. The Russian and German languages were imposed in all public communication, and the Catholic Church was not spared from severe repression. Public education was increasingly subjected to Russification and Germanisation measures. Illiteracy was reduced, most effectively in the Prussian partition, but education in the Polish language was preserved mostly through unofficial efforts. The Prussian government pursued German colonization, including the purchase of Polish-owned land. On the other hand, the region of Galicia (western Ukraine and southern Poland) experienced a gradual relaxation of authoritarian policies and even a Polish cultural revival. Economically and socially backward, it was under the milder rule of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy and from 1867 was increasingly allowed limited autonomy. &quot;Stańczycy&quot;, a conservative Polish pro-Austrian faction led by great land owners, dominated the Galician government. The Polish Academy of Learning (an academy of sciences) was founded in Kraków in 1872.

Social activities termed &quot;organic work&quot; consisted of self-help organizations that promoted economic advancement and work on improving the competitiveness of Polish-owned businesses, industrial, agricultural or other. New commercial methods of generating higher productivity were discussed and implemented through trade associations and special interest groups, while Polish banking and cooperative financial institutions made the necessary business loans available. The other major area of effort in organic work was educational and intellectual development of the common people. Many libraries and reading rooms were established in small towns and villages, and numerous printed periodicals manifested the growing interest in popular education. Scientific and educational societies were active in a number of cities. Such activities were most pronounced in the Prussian Partition.

Positivism in Poland replaced Romanticism as the leading intellectual, social and literary trend. It reflected the ideals and values of the emerging urban bourgeoisie. Around 1890, the urban classes gradually abandoned the positivist ideas and came under the influence of modern pan-European nationalism.

====Economic development and social change====

Under the partitioning powers, economic diversification and progress, including large-scale industrialisation, were introduced in the traditionally agrarian Polish lands, but this development turned out to be very uneven. Advanced agriculture was practiced in the Prussian Partition, except for Upper Silesia, where the coal-mining industry created a large labor force. The densest network of railroads was built in German-ruled western Poland. In Russian Congress Poland, a striking growth of industry, railways and towns took place, all against the background of an extensive, but less productive agriculture. The industrial initiative, capital and know-how were provided largely by entrepreneurs who were not ethnic Poles. Warsaw (a metallurgical center) and Łódź (a textiles center) grew rapidly, as did the total proportion of urban population, making the region the most economically advanced in the Russian Empire (industrial production exceeded agricultural production there by 1909). The coming of the railways spurred some industrial growth even in the vast Russian Partition territories outside of Congress Poland. The Austrian Partition was rural and poor, except for the industrialized Cieszyn Silesia area. Galician economic expansion after 1890 included oil extraction and resulted in the growth of Lemberg (Lwów, Lviv) and Kraków.

Economic and social changes involving land reform and industrialization, combined with the effects of foreign domination, altered the centuries-old social structure of Polish society. Among the newly emergent strata were wealthy industrialists and financiers, distinct from the traditional, but still critically important landed aristocracy. The intelligentsia, an educated, professional or business middle class, often originated from lower gentry, landless or alienated from their rural possessions, and from urban people. Many smaller agricultural enterprises based on serfdom did not survive the land reforms. The industrial proletariat, a new underprivileged class, was composed mainly of poor peasants or townspeople forced by deteriorating conditions to migrate and search for work in urban centers in their countries of origin or abroad. Millions of residents of the former Commonwealth of various ethnic groups worked or settled in Europe and in North and South America.

Social and economic changes were partial and gradual. The degree of industrialisation, relatively fast-paced in some areas, lagged behind the advanced regions of Western Europe. The three partitions developed different economies and were more economically integrated with their mother states than with each other. In the Prussian Partition, for example, agricultural production depended heavily on the German market, whereas the industrial sector of Congress Poland relied more on the Russian market.

====Nationalism, socialism and other movements====
In the 1870s–1890s, large-scale socialist, nationalist, agrarian and other political movements of great ideological fervor became established in partitioned Poland and Lithuania, along with corresponding political parties to promote them. Of the major parties, the socialist First Proletariat was founded in 1882, the Polish League (precursor of National Democracy) in 1887, the Polish Social Democratic Party of Galicia and Silesia in 1890, the Polish Socialist Party in 1892, the Marxist Social Democracy of the Kingdom of Poland and Lithuania in 1893, the agrarian People&#x27;s Party of Galicia in 1895 and the Jewish socialist Bund in 1897. Christian democracy regional associations allied with the Catholic Church were also active; they united into the Polish Christian Democratic Party in 1919.

The main minority ethnic groups of the former Commonwealth, including Ukrainians, Lithuanians, Belarusians and Jews, were getting involved in their own national movements and plans, which met with disapproval on the part of those Polish independence activists who counted on an eventual rebirth of the Commonwealth or the rise of a Commonwealth-inspired federal structure (a political movement referred to as Prometheism).

Around the start of the 20th century, the Young Poland cultural movement, centered in Austrian Galicia, took advantage of a milieu conducive to liberal expression in that region and was the source of Poland&#x27;s finest artistic and literary productions. In this same era, Marie Skłodowska Curie, a pioneer radiation scientist, performed her groundbreaking research in Paris.

====The Revolution of 1905====

The Revolution of 1905–1907 in Russian Poland, the result of many years of pent-up political frustrations and stifled national ambitions, was marked by political maneuvering, strikes and rebellion. The revolt was part of much broader disturbances throughout the Russian Empire associated with the general Revolution of 1905. In Poland, the principal revolutionary figures were Roman Dmowski and Józef Piłsudski. Dmowski was associated with the right-wing nationalist movement National Democracy, whereas Piłsudski was associated with the Polish Socialist Party. As the authorities re-established control within the Russian Empire, the revolt in Congress Poland, placed under martial law, withered as well, partially as a result of tsarist concessions in the areas of national and workers&#x27; rights, including Polish representation in the newly created Russian Duma. The collapse of the revolt in the Russian Partition, coupled with intensified Germanization in the Prussian Partition, left Austrian Galicia as the territory where Polish patriotic action was most likely to flourish.

In the Austrian Partition, Polish culture was openly cultivated, and in the Prussian Partition, there were high levels of education and living standards, but the Russian Partition remained of primary importance for the Polish nation and its aspirations. About 15.5 million Polish-speakers lived in the territories most densely populated by Poles: the western part of the Russian Partition, the Prussian Partition and the western Austrian Partition. Ethnically Polish settlement spread over a large area further to the east, including its greatest concentration in the Vilnius Region, amounted to only over 20% of that number.
Polish paramilitary organizations oriented toward independence, such as the Union of Active Struggle, were formed in 1908–1914, mainly in Galicia. The Poles were divided and their political parties fragmented on the eve of World War I, with Dmowski&#x27;s National Democracy (pro-Entente) and Piłsudski&#x27;s faction assuming opposing positions.

===World War I and the issue of Poland&#x27;s independence===

The outbreak of World War I in the Polish lands offered Poles unexpected hopes for achieving independence as a result of the turbulence that engulfed the empires of the partitioning powers. All three of the monarchies that had benefited from the partition of Polish territories (Germany, Austria and Russia) were dissolved by the end of the war, and many of their territories were dispersed into new political units. At the start of the war, the Poles found themselves conscripted into the armies of the partitioning powers in a war that was not theirs. Furthermore, they were frequently forced to fight each other, since the armies of Germany and Austria were allied against Russia. Piłsudski&#x27;s paramilitary units stationed in Galicia were turned into the Polish Legions in 1914 and as a part of the Austro-Hungarian Army fought on the Russian front until 1917, when the formation was disbanded. Piłsudski, who refused demands that his men fight under German command, was arrested and imprisoned by the Germans and became a heroic symbol of Polish nationalism.

Due to a series of German victories on the Eastern Front, the area of Congress Poland became occupied by the Central Powers of Germany and Austria; Warsaw was captured by the Germans on 5 August 1915. In the Act of 5th November 1916, a fresh incarnation of the Kingdom of Poland (&quot;Królestwo Regencyjne&quot;) was proclaimed by Germany and Austria on formerly Russian-controlled territories, within the German &quot;Mitteleuropa&quot; scheme. The sponsor states were never able to agree on a candidate to assume the throne, however; rather, it was governed in turn by German and Austrian governor-generals, a Provisional Council of State, and a Regency Council. This increasingly autonomous puppet state existed until November 1918, when it was replaced by the newly established Republic of Poland. The existence of this &quot;kingdom&quot; and its planned Polish army had a positive effect on the Polish national efforts on the Allied side, but in the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk of March 1918 the victorious in the east Germany imposed harsh conditions on defeated Russia and ignored Polish interests. Toward the end of the war, the German authorities engaged in massive, purposeful devastation of industrial and other economic potential of Polish lands in order to impoverish the country, a likely future competitor of Germany.

The independence of Poland had been campaigned for in Russia and in the West by Dmowski and in the West by Ignacy Jan Paderewski. Tsar Nicholas II of Russia, and then the leaders of the February Revolution and the October Revolution of 1917, installed governments who declared in turn their support for Polish independence. In 1917, France formed the Blue Army (placed under Józef Haller) that comprised about 70,000 Poles by the end of the war, including men captured from German and Austrian units and 20,000 volunteers from the United States. There was also a 30,000-men strong Polish anti-German army in Russia. Dmowski, operating from Paris as head of the Polish National Committee (KNP), became the spokesman for Polish nationalism in the Allied camp. On the initiative of Woodrow Wilson&#x27;s Fourteen Points, Polish independence was officially endorsed by the Allies in June 1918.

In all, about two million Poles served in the war, counting both sides, and about 400–450,000 died. Much of the fighting on the Eastern Front took place in Poland, and civilian casualties and devastation were high.

The final push for independence of Poland took place on the ground in October–November 1918. Near the end of the war, Austro-Hungarian and German units were being disarmed, and the Austrian army&#x27;s collapse freed Cieszyn and Kraków at the end of October. Lviv was then contested in the Polish–Ukrainian War of 1918–1919. Ignacy Daszyński headed the first short-lived independent Polish government in Lublin from 7 November, the leftist Provisional People&#x27;s Government of the Republic of Poland, proclaimed as a democracy. Germany, now defeated, was forced by the Allies to stand down its large military forces in Poland. Overtaken by the German Revolution of 1918–1919 at home, the Germans released Piłsudski from prison. He arrived in Warsaw on 10 November and was granted extensive authority by the Regency Council; Piłsudski&#x27;s authority was also recognized by the Lublin government. On 22 November, he became the temporary head of state. Piłsudski was held by many in high regard, but was resented by the right-wing National Democrats. The emerging Polish state was internally divided, heavily war-damaged and economically dysfunctional.

==Second Polish Republic (1918–1939)==

===Securing national borders, war with Soviet Russia===

After more than a century of foreign rule, Poland regained its independence at the end of World War I as one of the outcomes of the negotiations that took place at the Paris Peace Conference of 1919. The Treaty of Versailles that emerged from the conference set up an independent Polish nation with an outlet to the sea, but left some of its boundaries to be decided by plebiscites. The largely German-inhabited Free City of Danzig was granted a separate status that guaranteed its use as a port by Poland. In the end, the settlement of the German-Polish border turned out to be a prolonged and convoluted process. The dispute helped engender the Greater Poland Uprising of 1918–1919, the three Silesian uprisings of 1919–1921, the East Prussian plebiscite of 1920, the Upper Silesia plebiscite of 1921 and the 1922 Silesian Convention in Geneva.

Other boundaries were settled by war and subsequent treaties. A total of six border wars were fought in 1918–1921, including the Polish–Czechoslovak border conflicts over Cieszyn Silesia in January 1919.

As distressing as these border conflicts were, the Polish–Soviet War of 1919–1921 was the most important series of military actions of the era. Piłsudski had entertained far-reaching anti-Russian cooperative designs in Eastern Europe, and in 1919 the Polish forces pushed eastward into Lithuania, Belarus and Ukraine by taking advantage of the Russian preoccupation with a civil war, but they were soon confronted with the Soviet westward offensive of 1918–1919. Western Ukraine was already a theater of the Polish–Ukrainian War, which eliminated the proclaimed West Ukrainian People&#x27;s Republic in July 1919. In the autumn of 1919, Piłsudski rejected urgent pleas from the former Entente powers to support Anton Denikin&#x27;s White movement in its advance on Moscow. The Polish–Soviet War proper began with the Polish Kiev offensive in April 1920. Allied with the Directorate of Ukraine of the Ukrainian People&#x27;s Republic, the Polish armies had advanced past Vilnius, Minsk and Kiev by June. At that time, a massive Soviet counter-offensive pushed the Poles out of most of Ukraine. On the northern front, the Soviet army reached the outskirts of Warsaw in early August. A Soviet triumph and the quick end of Poland seemed inevitable. However, the Poles scored a stunning victory at the Battle of Warsaw (1920). Afterwards, more Polish military successes followed, and the Soviets had to pull back. They left swathes of territory populated largely by Belarusians or Ukrainians to Polish rule. The new eastern boundary was finalized by the Peace of Riga in March 1921.

The defeat of the Russian armies forced Vladimir Lenin and the Soviet leadership to postpone their strategic objective of linking up with the German and other European revolutionary leftist collaborators to spread communist revolution. Lenin also hoped for generating support for the Red Army in Poland, which failed to materialize.

Piłsudski&#x27;s seizure of Vilnius in October 1920 (known as Żeligowski&#x27;s Mutiny) was a nail in the coffin of the already poor Lithuania–Poland relations that had been strained by the Polish–Lithuanian War of 1919–1920; both states would remain hostile to one another for the remainder of the interwar period. Piłsudski&#x27;s concept of Intermarium (an East European federation of states inspired by the tradition of the multiethnic Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth that would include a hypothetical multinational successor state to the Grand Duchy of Lithuania) had the fatal flaw of being incompatible with his assumption of Polish domination, which would amount to an encroachment on the neighboring peoples&#x27; lands and aspirations. At the time of rising national movements, the plan thus ceased being a feature of Poland&#x27;s politics. A larger federated structure was also opposed by Dmowski&#x27;s National Democrats. Their representative at the Peace of Riga talks, Stanisław Grabski, opted for leaving Minsk, Berdychiv, Kamianets-Podilskyi and the surrounding areas on the Soviet side of the border. The National Democrats did not want to assume the lands they considered politically undesirable, as such territorial enlargement would result in a reduced proportion of citizens who were ethnically Polish.

The Peace of Riga settled the eastern border by preserving for Poland a substantial portion of the old Commonwealth&#x27;s eastern territories at the cost of partitioning the lands of the former Grand Duchy of Lithuania (Lithuania and Belarus) and Ukraine. The Ukrainians ended up with no state of their own and felt betrayed by the Riga arrangements; their resentment gave rise to extreme nationalism and anti-Polish hostility. The Kresy (or borderland) territories in the east won by 1921 would form the basis for a swap arranged and carried out by the Soviets in 1943–1945, who at that time compensated the re-emerging Polish state for the eastern lands lost to the Soviet Union with conquered areas of eastern Germany.

The successful outcome of the Polish–Soviet War gave Poland a false sense of its prowess as a self-sufficient military power and encouraged the government to try to resolve international problems through imposed unilateral solutions. The territorial and ethnic policies of the interwar period contributed to bad relations with most of Poland&#x27;s neighbors and uneasy cooperation with more distant centers of power, especially France and Great Britain.

===Democratic politics (1918–1926)===

Among the chief difficulties faced by the government of the new Polish republic was the lack of an integrated infrastructure among the formerly separate partitions, a deficiency that disrupted industry, transportation, trade, and other areas.

The first Polish legislative election for the re-established Sejm (national parliament) took place in January 1919. A temporary Small Constitution was passed by the body the following month.

The rapidly growing population of Poland within its new boundaries was three-fourths agricultural and one-fourth urban; Polish was the primary language of only two thirds of the inhabitants of the new country. The minorities had very little voice in the government. The permanent March Constitution of Poland was adopted in March 1921. At the insistence of the National Democrats, who were concerned about how aggressively Józef Piłsudski might exercise presidential powers if he were elected to office, the constitution mandated limited prerogatives for the presidency.

The proclamation of the March Constitution was followed by a short and turbulent period of constitutional order and parliamentary democracy that lasted until 1926. The legislature remained fragmented, without stable majorities, and governments changed frequently. The open-minded Gabriel Narutowicz was elected president according to the Constitution by the National Assembly in 1922, without popular vote. However, members of the nationalist right-wing faction did not regard his elevation as legitimate. They viewed Narutowicz rather as a traitor whose election was pushed through by the votes of alien minorities. Narutowicz and his supporters were subjected to an intense harassment campaign, and the president was assassinated on 16 December 1922, after serving only five days in office.

Land reform measures were passed in 1919 and 1925 under pressure from an impoverished peasantry. They were partially implemented, but resulted in the parcellation of only 20% of the great agricultural estates. Poland endured numerous economic calamities and disruptions in the early 1920s, including waves of workers&#x27; strikes such as the 1923 Kraków riot. The German–Polish customs war, initiated by Germany in 1925, was one of the most damaging external factors that put a strain on Poland&#x27;s economy. On the other hand, there were also signs of progress and stabilization, for example a critical reform of finances carried out by the competent government of Władysław Grabski, which lasted almost two years. Certain other achievements of the democratic period having to do with the management of governmental and civic institutions necessary to the functioning of the reunited state and nation were too easily overlooked. Lurking on the sidelines was a disgusted army officer corps unwilling to subject itself to civilian control, but ready to follow the retired Piłsudski, who was highly popular with Poles and just as dissatisfied with the Polish system of government as his former colleagues in the military.

===Piłsudski&#x27;s coup and the Sanation Era (1926–1935)===

On 12 May 1926, Piłsudski staged the May Coup, a military overthrow of the civilian government mounted against President Stanisław Wojciechowski and the troops loyal to the legitimate government. Hundreds died in fratricidal fighting. Piłsudski was supported by several leftist factions who ensured the success of his coup by blocking the railway transportation of government forces. He also had the support of the conservative great landowners, a move that left the right-wing National Democrats as the only major social force opposed to the takeover.

Following the coup, the new government initially respected many parliamentary formalities, but gradually tightened its control and abandoned pretenses. The Centrolew, a coalition of center-left parties, was formed in 1929, and in 1930 called for the &quot;abolition of dictatorship&quot;. In 1930, the Sejm was dissolved and a number of opposition deputies were imprisoned at the Brest Fortress. Five thousand political opponents were arrested ahead of the Polish legislative election of 1930, which was rigged to award a majority of seats to the pro-government Nonpartisan Bloc for Cooperation with the Government (BBWR).

The authoritarian Sanation government (&quot;sanation&quot; meant to denote &quot;healing&quot;) that Piłsudski led until his death in 1935 (and would remain in place until 1939) reflected the dictator&#x27;s evolution from his center-left past to conservative alliances. Political institutions and parties were allowed to function, but the electoral process was manipulated and those not willing to cooperate submissively were subjected to repression. From 1930, persistent opponents of the government, many of the leftist persuasion, were imprisoned and subjected to staged legal processes with harsh sentences, such as the Brest trials, or else detained in the Bereza Kartuska prison and similar camps for political prisoners. About three thousand were detained without trial at different times at the Bereza internment camp between 1934 and 1939. In 1936 for example, 369 activists were taken there, including 342 Polish communists. Rebellious peasants staged riots in 1932, 1933 and the 1937 peasant strike in Poland. Other civil disturbances were caused by striking industrial workers (e.g. events of the &quot;Bloody Spring&quot; of 1936), nationalist Ukrainians and the activists of the incipient Belarusian movement. All became targets of ruthless police-military pacification. Besides sponsoring political repression, the government fostered Józef Piłsudski&#x27;s cult of personality that had already existed long before he assumed dictatorial powers.

Piłsudski signed the Soviet–Polish Non-Aggression Pact in 1932 and the German–Polish declaration of non-aggression in 1934, but in 1933 he insisted that there was no threat from the East or West and said that Poland&#x27;s politics were focused on becoming fully independent without serving foreign interests. He initiated the policy of maintaining an equal distance and an adjustable middle course regarding the two great neighbors, later continued by Józef Beck. Piłsudski kept personal control of the army, but it was poorly equipped, poorly trained and had poor preparations in place for possible future conflicts. His only war plan was a defensive war against a Soviet invasion. The slow modernization after Piłsudski&#x27;s death fell far behind the progress made by Poland&#x27;s neighbors and measures to protect the western border, discontinued by Piłsudski from 1926, were not undertaken until March 1939.

Sanation deputies in the Sejm used a parliamentary maneuver to abolish the democratic March Constitution and push through a more authoritarian April Constitution in 1935; it reduced the powers of the Sejm, which Piłsudski despised. The process and the resulting document were seen as illegitimate by the anti-Sanation opposition, but during World War II, the Polish government-in-exile recognized the April Constitution in order to uphold the legal continuity of the Polish state. Between 1932 and 1933 Piłsudski and Beck initiated several incidents along the borders with Germany and Danzig, both to test whether Western powers would protect the Versailles arrangements (on which Polish security depended), and as preparation for a preventative war against Germany. At the same time they sent emissaries to London and Paris, looking for their support in stopping Germany&#x27;s rearmament effort. An invasion to Danzig by Poland was scheduled for April 21, 1933, but the amassing of troops was discovered and the invasion was postponed. At the time an invasion by Poland would have posed a serious military threat to Germany, but with the British rejecting the idea (in favor of the Four-Power Pact), and with wavering support from the French, the Poles had eventually reneged on the idea of invasion. Between 1933 and 1934 Germany would increase its armament expenditures by 68%, and by January 1934 the two powers would sign a ten-year non-aggression pact. When Marshal Piłsudski died in 1935, he retained the support of dominant sections of Polish society even though he never risked testing his popularity in an honest election. His government was dictatorial, but at that time only Czechoslovakia remained democratic in all of the regions neighboring Poland. Historians have taken widely divergent views of the meaning and consequences of the coup Piłsudski perpetrated and his personal rule that followed.

===Social and economic trends of the interwar period===

Independence stimulated the development of Polish culture in the Interbellum and intellectual achievement was high. Warsaw, whose population almost doubled between World War I and World War II, was a restless, burgeoning metropolis. It outpaced Kraków, Lwów and Wilno, the other major population centers of the country. Mainstream Polish society was not affected by the repressions of the Sanation authorities overall; many Poles enjoyed relative stability, and the economy improved markedly between 1926 and 1929, only to become caught up in the global Great Depression. After 1929, the country&#x27;s industrial production and gross national income slumped by about 50%.

The Great Depression brought low prices for farmers and unemployment for workers. Social tensions increased, including rising antisemitism. A major economic transformation and multi-year state plan to achieve national industrial development, as embodied in the Central Industrial Region initiative launched in 1936, was led by Minister Eugeniusz Kwiatkowski. Motivated primarily by the need for a native arms industry, the initiative was in progress at the time of the outbreak of World War II. Kwiatkowski was also the main architect of the earlier Gdynia seaport project.

The prevalent in political circles nationalism was fueled by the large size of Poland&#x27;s minority populations and their separate agendas. According to the language criterion of the Polish census of 1931, the Poles constituted 69% of the population, Ukrainians 15%, Jews (defined as speakers of the Yiddish language) 8.5%, Belarusians 4.7%, Germans 2.2%, Lithuanians 0.25%, Russians 0.25% and Czechs 0.09%, with some geographical areas dominated by a particular minority. In time, the ethnic conflicts intensified, and the Polish state grew less tolerant of the interests of its national minorities. In interwar Poland, compulsory free general education substantially reduced illiteracy rates, but discrimination was practiced in a way that resulted in a dramatic decrease in the number of Ukrainian language schools and official restrictions on Jewish attendance at selected schools in the late 1930s.

The population grew steadily, reaching 35 million in 1939. However, the overall economic situation in the interwar period was one of stagnation. There was little money for investment inside Poland, and few foreigners were interested in investing there. Total industrial production barely increased between 1913 and 1939 (within the area delimited by the 1939 borders), but because of population growth (from 26.3 million in 1919 to 34.8 million in 1939), the &quot;per capita&quot; output actually decreased by 18%.

Conditions in the predominant agricultural sector kept deteriorating between 1929 and 1939, which resulted in rural unrest and a progressive radicalization of the Polish peasant movement that became increasingly inclined toward militant anti-state activities. It was firmly repressed by the authorities. According to Norman Davies, the failures of the Sanation government (combined with the objective economic realities) caused a radicalization of the Polish masses by the end of the 1930s, but he warns against drawing parallels with the incomparably more oppressive Nazi Germany or the Stalinist Soviet Union.

===Final Sanation years (1935–1939)===

After Piłsudski&#x27;s death in 1935, Poland was governed until (and initially during) the German invasion of 1939 by old allies and subordinates known as &quot;Piłsudski&#x27;s colonels&quot;. They had neither the vision nor the resources to cope with the perilous situation facing Poland in the late 1930s. The colonels had gradually assumed greater powers during Piłsudski&#x27;s life by manipulating the ailing marshal behind the scenes. Eventually they achieved an overt politicization of the army that did nothing to help prepare the country for war.

Foreign policy was the responsibility of Józef Beck, under whom Polish diplomacy attempted balanced approaches toward Germany and the Soviet Union, without success, on the basis of a flawed understanding of the European geopolitics of his day. Beck had numerous foreign policy schemes and harbored illusions of Poland&#x27;s status as a great power. He alienated most of Poland&#x27;s neighbors, but is not blamed by historians for the ultimate failure of relations with Germany. The principal events of his tenure were concentrated in its last two years. In the case of the 1938 Polish ultimatum to Lithuania, the Polish action nearly resulted in a German takeover of southwest Lithuania, the Klaipėda Region (Memel Territory), which had a largely German population. Also in 1938, the Polish government opportunistically undertook a hostile action against the Czechoslovak state as weakened by the Munich Agreement and annexed a small piece of territory on its borders. In this case, Beck&#x27;s understanding of the consequences of the Polish military move turned out to be completely mistaken, because in the end the German occupation of Czechoslovakia markedly weakened Poland&#x27;s own position. Furthermore, Beck erroneously believed that Nazi-Soviet ideological contradictions would preclude their cooperation.

At home, increasingly alienated and suppressed minorities threatened unrest and violence. Extreme nationalist circles such as the National Radical Camp grew more outspoken. One of the groups, the Camp of National Unity, combined many nationalists with Sanation supporters and was connected to the new strongman, Marshal Edward Rydz-Śmigły, whose faction of the Sanation ruling movement was increasingly nationalistic.

In the late 1930s, the exile bloc Front Morges united several major Polish anti-Sanation figures, including Ignacy Paderewski, Władysław Sikorski, Wincenty Witos, Wojciech Korfanty and Józef Haller. It gained little influence inside Poland, but its spirit soon reappeared during World War II, within the Polish government-in-exile.

In October 1938, Joachim von Ribbentrop first proposed German-Polish territorial adjustments and Poland&#x27;s participation in the Anti-Comintern Pact against the Soviet Union. The status of the Free City of Danzig was one of the key bones of contention. Approached by Ribbentrop again in March 1939, the Polish government expressed willingness to address issues causing German concern, but effectively rejected Germany&#x27;s stated demands and thus refused to allow Poland to be turned by Adolf Hitler into a German puppet state. Hitler, incensed by the British and French declarations of support for Poland, abrogated the German–Polish declaration of non-aggression in late April 1939.

To protect itself from an increasingly aggressive Nazi Germany, already responsible for the annexations of Austria (in the Anschluss of 1938), Czechoslovakia (in 1939) and a part of Lithuania after the 1939 German ultimatum to Lithuania, Poland entered into a military alliance with Britain and France (the 1939 Anglo-Polish military alliance and the Franco-Polish alliance (1921), as updated in 1939). However, the two Western powers were defense-oriented and not in a strong position, either geographically or in terms of resources, to assist Poland. Attempts were therefore made by them to induce Soviet-Polish cooperation, which they viewed as the only militarily viable arrangement.

Diplomatic manoeuvers continued in the spring and summer of 1939, but in their final attempts, the Franco-British talks with the Soviets in Moscow on forming an anti-Nazi defensive military alliance failed. Warsaw&#x27;s refusal to allow the Red Army to operate on Polish territory doomed the Western efforts. The final contentious Allied-Soviet exchanges took place on 21 and 23 August 1939. The Stalinist state was the target of an intense German counter-initiative and was concurrently involved in increasingly effective negotiations with Hitler&#x27;s agents. On 23 August, an outcome contrary to the exertions of the Allies became a reality: in Moscow, Germany and the Soviet Union hurriedly signed the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact, which secretly provided for the dismemberment of Poland into Nazi- and Soviet-controlled zones.

==World War II==

===Invasions and resistance===

On 1 September 1939, Hitler ordered an invasion of Poland, the opening event of World War II. Poland had signed an Anglo-Polish military alliance as recently as the 25th of August, and had long been in alliance with France. The two Western powers soon declared war on Germany, but they remained largely inactive (the period early in the conflict became known as the Phoney War) and extended no aid to the attacked country. The technically and numerically superior &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; formations rapidly advanced eastwards and engaged massively in the murder of Polish civilians over the entire occupied territory. On 17 September, a Soviet invasion of Poland began. The Soviet Union quickly occupied most of the areas of eastern Poland that were inhabited by a significant Ukrainian and Belarusian minority. The two invading powers divided up the country as they had agreed in the secret provisions of the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact. Poland&#x27;s top government officials and military high command fled the war zone and arrived at the Romanian Bridgehead in mid-September. After the Soviet entry they sought refuge in Romania.

Among the military operations in which Poles held out the longest (until late September or early October) were the Siege of Warsaw, the Battle of Hel and the resistance of the Independent Operational Group Polesie. Warsaw fell on 27 September after a heavy German bombardment that killed tens of thousands civilians and soldiers. Poland was ultimately partitioned between Germany and the Soviet Union according to the terms of the German–Soviet Frontier Treaty signed by the two powers in Moscow on 29 September.

Gerhard Weinberg has argued that the most significant Polish contribution to World War II was sharing its code-breaking results. This allowed the British to perform the cryptanalysis of the Enigma and decipher the main German military code, which gave the Allies a major advantage in the conflict. As regards actual military campaigns, some Polish historians have argued that simply resisting the initial invasion of Poland was the country&#x27;s greatest contribution to the victory over Nazi Germany, despite its defeat. The Polish Army of nearly one million men significantly delayed the start of the Battle of France, planned by the Germans for 1939. When the Nazi offensive in the West did happen, the delay caused it to be less effective, a possibly crucial factor in the victory of the Battle of Britain.

After Germany invaded the Soviet Union as part of its Operation Barbarossa in June 1941, the whole of pre-war Poland was overrun and occupied by German troops.

German-occupied Poland was divided from 1939 into two regions: Polish areas annexed by Nazi Germany directly into the German &quot;Reich&quot; and areas ruled under a so-called General Government of occupation. The Poles formed an underground resistance movement and a Polish government-in-exile that operated first in Paris, then, from July 1940, in London. Polish-Soviet diplomatic relations, broken since September 1939, were resumed in July 1941 under the Sikorski–Mayski agreement, which facilitated the formation of a Polish army (the Anders&#x27; Army) in the Soviet Union. In November 1941, Prime Minister Sikorski flew to the Soviet Union to negotiate with Stalin on its role on the Soviet-German front, but the British wanted the Polish soldiers in the Middle East. Stalin agreed, and the army was evacuated there.

The organizations forming the Polish Underground State that functioned in Poland throughout the war were loyal to and formally under the Polish government-in-exile, acting through its Government Delegation for Poland. During World War II, hundreds of thousands of Poles joined the underground Polish Home Army (&quot;Armia Krajowa&quot;), a part of the Polish Armed Forces of the government-in-exile. About 200,000 Poles fought on the Western Front in the Polish Armed Forces in the West loyal to the government-in-exile, and about 300,000 in the Polish Armed Forces in the East under the Soviet command on the Eastern Front. The pro-Soviet resistance movement in Poland, led by the Polish Workers&#x27; Party, was active from 1941. It was opposed by the gradually forming extreme nationalistic National Armed Forces.

Beginning in late 1939, hundreds of thousands of Poles from the Soviet-occupied areas were deported and taken east. Of the upper-ranking military personnel and others deemed uncooperative or potentially harmful by the Soviets, about 22,000 were secretly executed by them at the Katyn massacre. In April 1943, the Soviet Union broke off deteriorating relations with the Polish government-in-exile after the German military announced the discovery of mass graves containing murdered Polish army officers. The Soviets claimed that the Poles committed a hostile act by requesting that the Red Cross investigate these reports.

From 1941, the implementation of the Nazi Final Solution began, and the Holocaust in Poland proceeded with force. Warsaw was the scene of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising in April–May 1943, triggered by the liquidation of the Warsaw Ghetto by German SS units. The elimination of Jewish ghettos in German-occupied Poland took place in many cities. As the Jewish people were being removed to be exterminated, uprisings were waged against impossible odds by the Jewish Combat Organization and other desperate Jewish insurgents.

===Soviet advance 1944–1945, Warsaw Uprising===

At a time of increasing cooperation between the Western Allies and the Soviet Union in the wake of the Nazi invasion of 1941, the influence of the Polish government-in-exile was seriously diminished by the death of Prime Minister Władysław Sikorski, its most capable leader, in a plane crash on 4 July 1943. Around that time, Polish-communist civilian and military organizations opposed to the government, led by Wanda Wasilewska and supported by Stalin, were formed in the Soviet Union.

In July 1944, the Soviet Red Army and Soviet-controlled Polish People&#x27;s Army entered the territory of future postwar Poland. In protracted fighting in 1944 and 1945, the Soviets and their Polish allies defeated and expelled the German army from Poland at a cost of over 600,000 Soviet soldiers lost.

The greatest single undertaking of the Polish resistance movement in World War II and a major political event was the Warsaw Uprising that began on 1 August 1944. The uprising, in which most of the city&#x27;s population participated, was instigated by the underground Home Army and approved by the Polish government-in-exile in an attempt to establish a non-communist Polish administration ahead of the arrival of the Red Army. The uprising was originally planned as a short-lived armed demonstration in expectation that the Soviet forces approaching Warsaw would assist in any battle to take the city. The Soviets had never agreed to an intervention, however, and they halted their advance at the Vistula River. The Germans used the opportunity to carry out a brutal suppression of the forces of the pro-Western Polish underground.

The bitterly fought uprising lasted for two months and resulted in the death or expulsion from the city of hundreds of thousands of civilians. After the defeated Poles surrendered on 2 October, the Germans carried out a planned destruction of Warsaw on Hitler&#x27;s orders that obliterated the remaining infrastructure of the city. The Polish First Army, fighting alongside the Soviet Red Army, entered a devastated Warsaw on 17 January 1945.

===Allied conferences, Polish governments===

From the time of the Tehran Conference in late 1943, there was broad agreement among the three Great Powers (the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union) that the locations of the borders between Germany and Poland and between Poland and the Soviet Union would be fundamentally changed after the conclusion of World War II. Stalin&#x27;s view that Poland should be moved far to the west was accepted by Polish communists, whose organizations included the Polish Workers&#x27; Party and the Union of Polish Patriots. The communist-led State National Council, a quasi-parliamentary body, was in existence in Warsaw from the beginning of 1944. In July 1944, a communist-controlled Polish Committee of National Liberation was established in Lublin, to nominally govern the areas liberated from German control. The move prompted protests from Prime Minister Stanisław Mikołajczyk and his Polish government-in-exile.

By the time of the Yalta Conference in February 1945, the communists had already established a Provisional Government of the Republic of Poland. The Soviet position at the conference was strong because of their decisive contribution to the war effort and as a result of their occupation of immense amounts of land in central and eastern Europe. The Great Powers gave assurances that the communist provisional government would be converted into an entity that would include democratic forces from within the country and active abroad, but the London-based government-in-exile was not mentioned. A Provisional Government of National Unity and subsequent democratic elections were the agreed stated goals. The disappointing results of these plans and the failure of the Western powers to ensure a strong participation of non-communists in the immediate post-war Polish government were seen by many Poles as a manifestation of Western betrayal.

===War losses, extermination of Jews and Poles===

A lack of accurate data makes it difficult to document numerically the extent of the human losses suffered by Polish citizens during World War II. Additionally, many assertions made in the past must be considered suspect due to flawed methodology and a desire to promote certain political agendas. The last available enumeration of ethnic Poles and the large ethnic minorities is the Polish census of 1931. Exact population figures for 1939 are therefore not known.

According to the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, at least 3 million Polish Jews and at least 1.9 million non-Jewish Polish civilians were killed. According to the historians Brzoza and Sowa, about 2 million ethnic Poles were killed, but it is not known, even approximately, how many Polish citizens of other ethnicities perished, including Ukrainians, Belarusians, and Germans. Millions of Polish citizens were deported to Germany for forced labor or to German extermination camps such as Treblinka, Auschwitz and Sobibór. Nazi Germany intended to exterminate the Jews completely, in actions that have come to be described collectively as the Holocaust. The Poles were to be expelled from areas controlled by Nazi Germany through a process of resettlement that started in 1939. Such Nazi operations matured into a plan known as the &quot;Generalplan Ost&quot; that amounted to displacement, enslavement and partial extermination of the Slavic people and was expected to be completed within 15 years.


The majority of Poles remained indifferent to the Jewish plight, and neither assisted nor persecuted Jews. Of those who have helped rescue, shelter and protect Jews from the Nazi atrocity, Yad Vashem and the State of Israel have recognized 6,992 individuals as &quot;Righteous Among the Nations&quot;.

In an attempt to incapacitate Polish society, the Nazis and the Soviets executed tens of thousands of members of the intelligentsia and community leadership during events such as the German AB-Aktion in Poland, Operation Tannenberg and the Katyn massacre. Over 95% of the Jewish losses and 90% of the ethnic Polish losses were caused directly by Nazi Germany, whereas 5% of the ethnic Polish losses were caused by the Soviets and 5% by Ukrainian nationalists. The large-scale Jewish presence in Poland that had endured for centuries was rather quickly put to an end by the policies of extermination implemented by the Nazis during the war. Waves of displacement and emigration that took place both during and after the war removed from Poland a majority of the Jews who survived. Further significant Jewish emigration followed events such as the Polish October political thaw of 1956 and the 1968 Polish political crisis.

In 1940–1941, some 325,000 Polish citizens were deported by the Soviet Union. The number of Polish citizens who died at the hands of the Soviets is estimated at less than 100,000.

In 1943–1944, Ukrainian nationalists associated with the Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists (OUN) and the Ukrainian Insurgent Army perpetrated the Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia. Estimates of the number of Polish civilian victims vary greatly, from tens to hundreds of thousands.

Approximately 90% of Poland&#x27;s war casualties were the victims of prisons, death camps, raids, executions, the annihilation of ghettos, epidemics, starvation, excessive work and ill treatment. The war left one million children orphaned and 590,000 persons disabled. The country lost 38% of its national assets (whereas Britain lost only 0.8%, and France only 1.5%). Nearly half of pre-war Poland was expropriated by the Soviet Union, including the two great cultural centers of Lwów and Wilno.

The policies of Nazi Germany have been judged after the war by the International Military Tribunal at the Nuremberg trials and Polish genocide trials to be aimed at extermination of Jews, Poles and Roma, and to have &quot;all the characteristics of genocide in the biological meaning of this term&quot;.

===Changing boundaries and population transfers===

By the terms of the 1945 Potsdam Agreement signed by the three victorious Great Powers, the Soviet Union retained most of the territories captured as a result of the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact of 1939, including western Ukraine and western Belarus, and gained others. Lithuania and the Königsberg area of East Prussia were officially incorporated into the Soviet Union, in the case of the former without the recognition of the Western powers.

Poland was compensated with the bulk of Silesia, including Breslau (Wrocław) and Grünberg (Zielona Góra), the bulk of Pomerania, including Stettin (Szczecin), and the greater southern portion of the former East Prussia, along with Danzig (Gdańsk), pending a final peace conference with Germany which eventually never took place. 
Collectively referred to by the Polish authorities as the &quot;Recovered Territories&quot;, they were included in the reconstituted Polish state. With Germany&#x27;s defeat Poland was thus shifted west in relation to its prewar location, to the area between the Oder–Neisse and Curzon lines, which resulted in a country more compact and with much broader access to the sea. The Poles lost 70% of their pre-war oil capacity to the Soviets, but gained from the Germans a highly developed industrial base and infrastructure that made a diversified industrial economy possible for the first time in Polish history.
The flight and expulsion of Germans from what was eastern Germany prior to the war began before and during the Soviet conquest of those regions from the Nazis, and the process continued in the years immediately after the war. 
8,030,000 Germans were evacuated, expelled, or migrated by 1950.

Early expulsions in Poland were undertaken by the Polish communist authorities even before the Potsdam Conference (the &quot;wild expulsions&quot; from June to mid July 1945, when the Polish military and militia expelled nearly all people from the districts immediately east of the Oder–Neisse line), to ensure the establishment of ethnically homogeneous Poland. About 1% (100,000) of the German civilian population east of the Oder–Neisse line perished in the fighting prior to the surrender in May 1945, and afterwards some 200,000 Germans in Poland were employed as forced labor prior to being expelled. Many Germans died in labor camps such as the Zgoda labour camp and the Potulice camp. Of those Germans who remained within the new borders of Poland, many later chose to emigrate to post-war Germany.

On the other hand, 1.5–2 million ethnic Poles moved or were expelled from the previously Polish areas annexed by the Soviet Union. The vast majority were resettled in the former German territories. At least one million Poles remained in what had become the Soviet Union, and at least half a million ended up in the West or elsewhere outside of Poland. However, contrary to the official declaration that the former German inhabitants of the Recovered Territories had to be removed quickly to house Poles displaced by the Soviet annexation, the Recovered Territories initially faced a severe population shortage.

Many exiled Poles could not return to the country for which they had fought because they belonged to political groups incompatible with the new communist regimes, or because they originated from areas of pre-war eastern Poland that were incorporated into the Soviet Union (see Polish population transfers (1944–1946)). Some were deterred from returning simply on the strength of warnings that anyone who had served in military units in the West would be endangered. Many Poles were pursued, arrested, tortured and imprisoned by the Soviet authorities for belonging to the Home Army or other formations (see Anti-communist resistance in Poland (1944–1946)), or were persecuted because they had fought on the Western front.

Territories on both sides of the new Polish-Ukrainian border were also &quot;ethnically cleansed&quot;. Of the Ukrainians and Lemkos living in Poland within the new borders (about 700,000), close to 95% were forcibly moved to the Soviet Ukraine, or (in 1947) to the new territories in northern and western Poland under Operation Vistula. In Volhynia, 98% of the Polish pre-war population was either killed or expelled; in Eastern Galicia, the Polish population was reduced by 92%. According to Timothy D. Snyder, about 70,000 Poles and about 20,000 Ukrainians were killed in the ethnic violence that occurred in the 1940s, both during and after the war.

According to an estimate by historian Jan Grabowski, about 50,000 of the 250,000 Polish Jews who escaped the Nazis during the liquidation of ghettos survived without leaving Poland (the remainder perished). More were repatriated from the Soviet Union and elsewhere, and the February 1946 population census showed about 300,000 Jews within Poland&#x27;s new borders. Of the surviving Jews, many chose to emigrate or felt compelled to because of the anti-Jewish violence in Poland.

Because of changing borders and the mass movements of people of various nationalities, the emerging communist Poland ended up with a mainly homogeneous, ethnically Polish population (97.6% according to the December 1950 census). The remaining members of ethnic minorities were not encouraged, by the authorities or by their neighbors, to emphasize their ethnic identities.

==Polish People&#x27;s Republic (1945–1989)==

===Post-war struggle for power===

In response to the February 1945 Yalta Conference directives, a Polish Provisional Government of National Unity was formed in June 1945 under Soviet auspices; it was soon recognized by the United States and many other countries. The Soviet domination was apparent from the beginning, as prominent leaders of the Polish Underground State were brought to trial in Moscow (the &quot;Trial of the Sixteen&quot; of June 1945). In the immediate post-war years, the emerging communist rule was challenged by opposition groups, including militarily by the so-called &quot;cursed soldiers&quot;, of whom thousands perished in armed confrontations or were pursued by the Ministry of Public Security and executed. Such guerillas often pinned their hopes on expectations of an imminent outbreak of World War III and defeat of the Soviet Union. The Polish right-wing insurgency faded after the amnesty of February 1947.

The Polish people&#x27;s referendum of June 1946 was arranged by the communist Polish Workers&#x27; Party to legitimize its dominance in Polish politics and claim widespread support for the party&#x27;s policies. Although the Yalta agreement called for free elections, the Polish legislative election of January 1947 was controlled by the communists. Some democratic and pro-Western elements, led by Stanisław Mikołajczyk, former prime minister-in-exile, participated in the Provisional Government and the 1947 elections, but were ultimately eliminated through electoral fraud, intimidation and violence. In times of severe political confrontation and radical economic change, members of Mikołajczyk&#x27;s agrarian movement (the Polish People&#x27;s Party) attempted to preserve the existing aspects of mixed economy and protect property and other rights. However, after the 1947 elections, the Government of National Unity ceased to exist and the communists moved towards abolishing the post-war partially pluralistic &quot;people&#x27;s democracy&quot; and replacing it with a state socialist system. The communist-dominated front Democratic Bloc of the 1947 elections, turned into the Front of National Unity in 1952, became officially the source of governmental authority. The Polish government-in-exile, lacking international recognition, remained in continuous existence until 1990.

===Under Stalinism (1948–1955)===

The Polish People&#x27;s Republic (&quot;Polska Rzeczpospolita Ludowa&quot;) was established under the rule of the communist Polish United Workers&#x27; Party (PZPR). The name change from the Polish Republic was not officially adopted, however, until the proclamation of the Constitution of the Polish People&#x27;s Republic in 1952.

The ruling PZPR was formed by the forced amalgamation in December 1948 of the communist Polish Workers&#x27; Party (PPR) and the historically non-communist Polish Socialist Party (PPS). The PPR chief had been its wartime leader Władysław Gomułka, who in 1947 declared a &quot;Polish road to socialism&quot; as intended to curb, rather than eradicate, capitalist elements. In 1948 he was overruled, removed and imprisoned by Stalinist authorities. The PPS, re-established in 1944 by its left wing, had since been allied with the communists. The ruling communists, who in post-war Poland preferred to use the term &quot;socialism&quot; instead of &quot;communism&quot; to identify their ideological basis, needed to include the socialist junior partner to broaden their appeal, claim greater legitimacy and eliminate competition on the political Left. The socialists, who were losing their organization, were subjected to political pressure, ideological cleansing and purges in order to become suitable for unification on the terms of the PPR. The leading pro-communist leaders of the socialists were the prime ministers Edward Osóbka-Morawski and Józef Cyrankiewicz.

During the most oppressive phase of the Stalinist period (1948–1953), terror was justified in Poland as necessary to eliminate reactionary subversion. Many thousands of perceived dissidents were arbitrarily tried and large numbers were executed. The People&#x27;s Republic was led by discredited Soviet operatives such as Bolesław Bierut, Jakub Berman and Konstantin Rokossovsky. The independent Catholic Church in Poland was subjected to property confiscations and other curtailments from 1949, and in 1950 was pressured into signing an accord with the government. In 1953 and later, despite a partial thaw after the death of Stalin that year, the persecution of the Church intensified and its head, Cardinal Stefan Wyszyński, was detained. A key event in the persecution of the Polish Church was the Stalinist show trial of the Kraków Curia in January 1953.

In the Warsaw Pact, formed in 1955, the Polish Army was the second largest, after the Soviet Army.

===Economic and social developments of the early communist era===

In 1944, large agricultural holdings and former German property in Poland started to be redistributed through land reform, and industry started to be nationalized. Communist restructuring and the imposition of work-space rules encountered active worker opposition already in the years 1945–1947. The moderate Three-Year Plan of 1947–1949 continued with the rebuilding, socialization and socialist restructuring of the economy. It was followed by the Six-Year Plan of 1950–1955 for heavy industry. The rejection of the Marshall Plan in 1947 made aspirations for catching up with West European standards of living unrealistic.

The government&#x27;s highest economic priority was the development of heavy industry useful to the military. State-run or controlled institutions common in all the socialist countries of eastern Europe were imposed on Poland, including collective farms and worker cooperatives. The latter were dismantled in the late 1940s as not socialist enough, although they were later re-established; even small-scale private enterprises were eradicated. Stalinism introduced heavy political and ideological propaganda and indoctrination in social life, culture and education.

Great strides were made, however, in the areas of employment (which became nearly full), universal public education (which nearly eradicated adult illiteracy), health care and recreational amenities. Many historic sites, including the central districts of Warsaw and Gdańsk, both devastated during the war, were rebuilt at great cost.

The communist industrialization program led to increased urbanization and educational and career opportunities for the intended beneficiaries of the social transformation, along the lines of the peasants-workers-working intelligentsia paradigm. The most significant improvement was accomplished in the lives of Polish peasants, many of whom were able to leave their impoverished and overcrowded village communities for better conditions in urban centers. Those who stayed behind took advantage of the implementation of the 1944 land reform decree of the Polish Committee of National Liberation, which terminated the antiquated but widespread parafeudal socioeconomic relations in Poland. The Stalinist attempts at establishing collective farms generally failed. Due to urbanization, the national percentage of the rural population decreased in communist Poland by about 50%. A majority of Poland&#x27;s residents of cities and towns still live in apartment blocks built during the communist era, in part to accommodate migrants from rural areas.

===The Thaw and Gomułka&#x27;s Polish October (1955–1958)===

In March 1956, after the 20th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union in Moscow ushered in de-Stalinization, Edward Ochab was chosen to replace the deceased Bolesław Bierut as first secretary of the Polish United Workers&#x27; Party. As a result, Poland was rapidly overtaken by social restlessness and reformist undertakings; thousands of political prisoners were released and many people previously persecuted were officially rehabilitated. Worker riots in Poznań in June 1956 were violently suppressed, but they gave rise to the formation of a reformist current within the communist party.

Amidst the continuing social and national upheaval, a further shakeup took place in the party leadership as part of what is known as the Polish October of 1956. While retaining most traditional communist economic and social aims, the state under Władysław Gomułka, the new first secretary of the PZPR, liberalized internal life in Poland. The dependence on the Soviet Union was somewhat mollified, and the state&#x27;s relationships with the Church and Catholic lay activists were put on a new footing. A repatriation agreement with the Soviet Union allowed the repatriation of hundreds of thousands of Poles who were still in Soviet hands, including many former political prisoners. Collectivization efforts were abandoned—agricultural land, unlike in other Comecon countries, remained for the most part in the private ownership of farming families. State-mandated provisions of agricultural products at fixed, artificially low prices were reduced, and from 1972 eliminated.

The legislative election of 1957 was followed by several years of political stability that was accompanied by economic stagnation and curtailment of reforms and reformists. One of the last initiatives of the brief reform era was a nuclear weapons–free zone in Central Europe proposed in 1957 by Adam Rapacki, Poland&#x27;s foreign minister.

Culture in the Polish People&#x27;s Republic, to varying degrees linked to the intelligentsia&#x27;s opposition to the authoritarian system, developed to a sophisticated level under Gomułka and his successors. The creative process was often compromised by state censorship, but significant works were created in fields such as literature, theater, cinema and music, among others. Journalism of veiled understanding and varieties of native and Western popular culture were well represented. Uncensored information and works generated by émigré circles were conveyed through a variety of channels. The Paris-based &quot;Kultura&quot; magazine developed a conceptual framework for dealing with the issues of borders and the neighbors of a future free Poland, but for ordinary Poles Radio Free Europe was of foremost importance.

===Stagnation and crackdown (1958–1970)===

One of the confirmations of the end of an era of greater tolerance was the expulsion from the communist party of several prominent &quot;Marxist revisionists&quot; in the 1960s.

In 1965, the Conference of Polish Bishops issued the Letter of Reconciliation of the Polish Bishops to the German Bishops, a gesture intended to heal bad mutual feelings left over from World War II. In 1966, the celebrations of the 1,000th anniversary of the Christianization of Poland led by Cardinal Stefan Wyszyński and other bishops turned into a huge demonstration of the power and popularity of the Catholic Church in Poland.

The post-1956 liberalizing trend, in decline for a number of years, was reversed in March 1968, when student demonstrations were suppressed during the 1968 Polish political crisis. Motivated in part by the Prague Spring movement, the Polish opposition leaders, intellectuals, academics and students used a historical-patriotic &quot;Dziady&quot; theater spectacle series in Warsaw (and its termination forced by the authorities) as a springboard for protests, which soon spread to other centers of higher education and turned nationwide. The authorities responded with a major crackdown on opposition activity, including the firing of faculty and the dismissal of students at universities and other institutions of learning. At the center of the controversy was also the small number of Catholic deputies in the Sejm (the Znak Association members) who attempted to defend the students.

In an official speech, Gomułka drew attention to the role of Jewish activists in the events taking place. This provided ammunition to a nationalistic and antisemitic communist party faction headed by Mieczysław Moczar that was opposed to Gomułka&#x27;s leadership. Using the context of the military victory of Israel in the Six-Day War of 1967, some in the Polish communist leadership waged an antisemitic campaign against the remnants of the Jewish community in Poland. The targets of this campaign were accused of disloyalty and active sympathy with Israeli aggression. Branded &quot;Zionists&quot;, they were scapegoated and blamed for the unrest in March 1968, which eventually led to the emigration of much of Poland&#x27;s remaining Jewish population (about 15,000 Polish citizens left the country).

With the active support of the Gomułka regime, the Polish People&#x27;s Army took part in the infamous Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in August 1968, after the Brezhnev Doctrine was informally announced.

In the final major achievement of Gomułka diplomacy, the governments of Poland and West Germany signed in December 1970 the Treaty of Warsaw, which normalized their relations and made possible meaningful cooperation in a number of areas of bilateral interest. In particular, West Germany recognized the post-World War II &quot;de facto&quot; border between Poland and East Germany.

===Worker revolts, reforms of Gierek, the Polish pope and Solidarity (1970–1981)===

Price increases for essential consumer goods triggered the Polish protests of 1970. In December, there were disturbances and strikes in the Baltic Sea port cities of Gdańsk, Gdynia, and Szczecin that reflected deep dissatisfaction with living and working conditions in the country. The activity was centered in the industrial shipyard areas of the three coastal cities. Dozens of protesting workers and bystanders were killed in police and military actions, generally under the authority of Gomułka and Minister of Defense Wojciech Jaruzelski. In the aftermath, Edward Gierek replaced Gomułka as first secretary of the communist party. The new regime was seen as more modern, friendly and pragmatic, and at first it enjoyed a degree of popular and foreign support.

To revitalize the economy, from 1971 the Gierek regime introduced wide-ranging reforms that involved large-scale foreign borrowing. These actions initially caused improved conditions for consumers, but in a few years the strategy backfired and the economy deteriorated. Another attempt to raise food prices resulted in the June 1976 protests. The Workers&#x27; Defence Committee (KOR), established in response to the crackdown that followed, consisted of dissident intellectuals determined to support industrial workers, farmers and students persecuted by the authorities. The opposition circles active in the late 1970s were emboldened by the Helsinki Conference processes.

In October 1978, the Archbishop of Kraków, Cardinal Karol Józef Wojtyła, became Pope John Paul II, head of the Catholic Church. Catholics and others rejoiced at the elevation of a Pole to the papacy and greeted his June 1979 visit to Poland with an outpouring of emotion.

Fueled by large infusions of Western credit, Poland&#x27;s economic growth rate was one of the world&#x27;s highest during the first half of the 1970s, but much of the borrowed capital was misspent, and the centrally planned economy was unable to use the new resources effectively. The 1973 oil crisis caused recession and high interest rates in the West, to which the Polish government had to respond with sharp domestic consumer price increases. The growing debt burden became insupportable in the late 1970s, and negative economic growth set in by 1979.

Around 1 July 1980, with the Polish foreign debt standing at more than $20 billion, the government made yet another attempt to increase meat prices. Workers responded with escalating work stoppages that culminated in the 1980 general strikes in Lublin. In mid-August, labor protests at the Gdańsk Shipyard gave rise to a chain reaction of strikes that virtually paralyzed the Baltic coast by the end of the month and, for the first time, closed most coal mines in Silesia. The Inter-Enterprise Strike Committee coordinated the strike action across hundreds of workplaces and formulated the 21 demands as the basis for negotiations with the authorities. The Strike Committee was sovereign in its decision-making, but was aided by a team of &quot;expert&quot; advisers that included the well-known dissidents Jacek Kuroń, Karol Modzelewski, Bronisław Geremek and Tadeusz Mazowiecki.

On 31 August 1980, representatives of workers at the Gdańsk Shipyard, led by an electrician and activist Lech Wałęsa, signed the Gdańsk Agreement with the government that ended their strike. Similar agreements were concluded in Szczecin (the Szczecin Agreement) and in Silesia. The key provision of these agreements was the guarantee of the workers&#x27; right to form independent trade unions and the right to strike. Following the successful resolution of the largest labor confrontation in communist Poland&#x27;s history, nationwide union organizing movements swept the country.

Edward Gierek was blamed by the Soviets for not following their &quot;fraternal&quot; advice, not shoring up the communist party and the official trade unions and allowing &quot;anti-socialist&quot; forces to emerge. On 5 September 1980, Gierek was replaced by Stanisław Kania as first secretary of the PZPR.

Delegates of the emergent worker committees from all over Poland gathered in Gdańsk on 17 September and decided to form a single national union organization named &quot;Solidarity&quot;.

While party–controlled courts took up the contentious issues of Solidarity&#x27;s legal registration as a trade union (finalized by November 10), planning had already begun for the imposition of martial law. A parallel farmers&#x27; union was organized and strongly opposed by the regime, but Rural Solidarity was eventually registered (12 May 1981). In the meantime, a rapid deterioration of the authority of the communist party, disintegration of state power and escalation of demands and threats by the various Solidarity–affiliated groups were occurring. According to Kuroń, a &quot;tremendous social democratization movement in all spheres&quot; was taking place and could not be contained. Wałęsa had meetings with Kania, which brought no resolution to the impasse.

Following the Warsaw Pact summit in Moscow, the Soviet Union proceeded with a massive military build-up along Poland&#x27;s border in December 1980, but during the summit Kania forcefully argued with Leonid Brezhnev and other allied communists leaders against the feasibility of an external military intervention, and no action was taken. The United States, under presidents Jimmy Carter and Ronald Reagan, repeatedly warned the Soviets about the consequences of a direct intervention, while discouraging an open insurrection in Poland and signaling to the Polish opposition that there would be no rescue by the NATO forces.

In February 1981, Defense Minister General Wojciech Jaruzelski assumed the position of prime minister. The Solidarity social revolt had thus far been free of any major use of force, but in March 1981 in Bydgoszcz three activists were beaten up by the secret police. In a nationwide &quot;warning strike&quot; the 9.5-million-strong Solidarity union was supported by the population at large, but a general strike was called off by Wałęsa after the 30 March settlement with the government. Both Solidarity and the communist party were badly split and the Soviets were losing patience. Kania was re-elected at the Party Congress in July, but the collapse of the economy continued and so did the general disorder.

At the first Solidarity National Congress in September–October 1981 in Gdańsk, Lech Wałęsa was elected national chairman of the union with 55% of the vote. An appeal was issued to the workers of the other East European countries, urging them to follow in the footsteps of Solidarity. To the Soviets, the gathering was an &quot;anti-socialist and anti-Soviet orgy&quot; and the Polish communist leaders, increasingly led by Jaruzelski and General Czesław Kiszczak, were ready to apply force.

In October 1981, Jaruzelski was named first secretary of the PZPR. The Plenum&#x27;s vote was 180 to 4, and he kept his government posts. Jaruzelski asked parliament to ban strikes and allow him to exercise extraordinary powers, but when neither request was granted, he decided to proceed with his plans anyway.

===The martial law, Jaruzelski&#x27;s rule and the end of communism (1981–1989)===

On 12–13 December 1981, the regime declared martial law in Poland, under which the army and the ZOMO special police forces were used to crush Solidarity. The Soviet leaders insisted that Jaruzelski pacifies the opposition with the forces at his disposal, without Soviet involvement. Almost all Solidarity leaders and many affiliated intellectuals were arrested or detained. Nine workers were killed in the Pacification of Wujek. The United States and other Western countries responded by imposing economic sanctions against Poland and the Soviet Union. Unrest in the country was subdued, but continued.

During martial law, Poland was ruled by the so-called Military Council of National Salvation. The open or semi-open opposition communications, as recently practiced, were replaced by underground publishing (known in the eastern bloc as Samizdat), and Solidarity was reduced to a few thousand underground activists.

Having achieved some semblance of stability, the Polish regime relaxed and then rescinded martial law over several stages. By December 1982 martial law was suspended and a small number of political prisoners, including Wałęsa, were released. Although martial law formally ended in July 1983 and a partial amnesty was enacted, several hundred political prisoners remained in jail. Jerzy Popiełuszko, a popular pro-Solidarity priest, was abducted and murdered by security functionaries in October 1984.

Further developments in Poland occurred concurrently with and were influenced by the reformist leadership of Mikhail Gorbachev in the Soviet Union (processes known as Glasnost and Perestroika). In September 1986, a general amnesty was declared and the government released nearly all political prisoners. However, the country lacked basic stability, as the regime&#x27;s efforts to organize society from the top down had failed, while the opposition&#x27;s attempts at creating an &quot;alternate society&quot; were also unsuccessful. With the economic crisis unresolved and societal institutions dysfunctional, both the ruling establishment and the opposition began looking for ways out of the stalemate. Facilitated by the indispensable mediation of the Catholic Church, exploratory contacts were established.

Student protests resumed in February 1988. Continuing economic decline led to strikes across the country in April, May and August. The Soviet Union, increasingly destabilized, was unwilling to apply military or other pressure to prop up allied regimes in trouble. The Polish government felt compelled to negotiate with the opposition and in September 1988 preliminary talks with Solidarity leaders ensued in Magdalenka. Numerous meetings that took place involved Wałęsa and General Kiszczak, among others. In November, the regime made a major public relations mistake by allowing a televised debate between Wałęsa and Alfred Miodowicz, chief of the All-Poland Alliance of Trade Unions, the official trade union organization. The fitful bargaining and intra-party squabbling led to the official Round Table Negotiations in 1989, followed by the Polish legislative election in June of that year, a watershed event marking the fall of communism in Poland.

==Third Polish Republic (1989–today)==

===Systemic transition===

The Polish Round Table Agreement of April 1989 called for local self-government, policies of job guarantees, legalization of independent trade unions and many wide-ranging reforms. The current Sejm promptly implemented the deal and agreed to National Assembly elections that were set for 4 June and 18 June. Only 35% of the seats in the Sejm (national legislature&#x27;s lower house) and all of the Senate seats were freely contested; the remaining Sejm seats (65%) were guaranteed for the communists and their allies.

The failure of the communists at the polls (almost all of the contested seats were won by the opposition) resulted in a political crisis. The new April Novelization to the constitution called for re-establishment of the Polish presidency and on 19 July the National Assembly elected the communist leader, General Wojciech Jaruzelski, to that office. His election, seen at the time as politically necessary, was barely accomplished with tacit support from some Solidarity deputies, and the new president&#x27;s position was not strong. Moreover, the unexpected definitiveness of the parliamentary election results created new political dynamics and attempts by the communists to form a government failed.

On 19 August, President Jaruzelski asked journalist and Solidarity activist Tadeusz Mazowiecki to form a government; on 12 September, the Sejm voted approval of Prime Minister Mazowiecki and his cabinet. Mazowiecki decided to leave the economic reform entirely in the hands of economic liberals led by the new Deputy Prime Minister Leszek Balcerowicz, who proceeded with the design and implementation of his &quot;shock therapy&quot; policy. For the first time in post-war history, Poland had a government led by non-communists, setting a precedent soon to be followed by other Eastern Bloc nations in a phenomenon known as the Revolutions of 1989. Mazowiecki&#x27;s acceptance of the &quot;thick line&quot; formula meant that there would be no &quot;witch-hunt&quot;, i.e., an absence of revenge seeking or exclusion from politics in regard to former communist officials.

In part because of the attempted indexation of wages, inflation reached 900% by the end of 1989, but was soon dealt with by means of radical methods. In December 1989, the Sejm approved the Balcerowicz Plan to transform the Polish economy rapidly from a centrally planned one to a free market economy. The Constitution of the Polish People&#x27;s Republic was amended to eliminate references to the &quot;leading role&quot; of the communist party and the country was renamed the &quot;Republic of Poland&quot;. The communist Polish United Workers&#x27; Party dissolved itself in January 1990. In its place, a new party, Social Democracy of the Republic of Poland, was created. &quot;Territorial self-government&quot;, abolished in 1950, was legislated back in March 1990, to be led by locally elected officials; its fundamental unit was the administratively independent gmina.

In October 1990, the constitution was amended to curtail the term of President Jaruzelski. In November 1990, the German–Polish Border Treaty, with unified Germany, was signed.

In November 1990, Lech Wałęsa was elected president for a five-year term; in December, he became the first popularly elected president of Poland. Poland&#x27;s first free parliamentary election was held in October 1991. 18 parties entered the new Sejm, but the largest representation received only 12% of the total vote.

===Democratic constitution, NATO and European Union memberships===

There were several post-Solidarity governments between the 1989 election and the 1993 election, after which the &quot;post-communist&quot; left-wing parties took over. In 1993, the formerly Soviet Northern Group of Forces, a vestige of past domination, left Poland.

In 1995, Aleksander Kwaśniewski of the Social Democratic Party was elected president and remained in that capacity for the next ten years (two terms).

In 1997, the new Constitution of Poland was finalized and approved in a referendum; it replaced the Small Constitution of 1992, an amended version of the communist constitution.

Poland joined NATO in 1999. Elements of the Polish Armed Forces have since participated in the Iraq War and the War in Afghanistan (2001–2021). Poland joined the European Union as part of its enlargement in 2004. However, Poland has not adopted the euro as its currency and legal tender, but instead uses the Polish złoty.

In April 2010, Polish president Lech Kaczynski and dozens of the country&#x27;s top political and military leaders died in the Smolensk air disaster.

After the election of the conservative Law and Justice party in 2015, the Polish government repeatedly clashed with EU institutions on the issue of judicial reform and was accused by the European Commission and the European Parliament of undermining &quot;European Values&quot; and eroding democratic standards. However, the Polish government headed by the Law and Justice party maintained that the reforms were necessary due to the prevalence of corruption within the Polish judiciary and the continued presence of holdover Communist era judges.

In October 2019, Poland&#x27;s governing Law and Justice party (PiS) won parliamentary election, keeping its majority in the lower house. The second was centrist Civic Coalition (KO). The government of Prime Minister Mateusz Morawiecki continued. However, PiS leader Jarosław Kaczyński was considered the most powerful political figure in Poland although not a member of government. In July 2020, President Andrzej Duda, supported by PiS, was re-elected.

Poland was one of neighbouring Ukraine&#x27;s most ardent supporters after the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. As of November 2022, Poland had received more than 1.5 million Ukrainian refugees since the beginning of the war. In September 2023, however, Poland said that it would stop supplying arms to Ukraine and instead focus on its own defense. Poland&#x27;s decision to ban importing Ukrainian grain, in order to protect its own farmers, had caused tension between the two countries.

In October 2023, the ruling Law and Justice (PiS) party won the largest share of the vote in the election, but lost its majority in parliament. In December 2023, Donald Tusk became the new Prime Minister to succeed Morawiecki, leading a coalition of three parliamentary groups made up of Civic Coalition, Third Way, and The Left. Law and Justice became the leading opposition party.

Tensions between Poland and its eastern neighbour, Belarus, reached a new high in June 2024 when Belarus, who had encouraged masses of illegal immigrants to cross the Polish border on foot as part of the undeclared dirty tricks campaign of its CSTO ally Russia, created the conditions in which a Polish border ground was stabbed to death by a would-be immigrant. The Polish state soon tightened controls of its frontier and on 27 July 2024 the Sejm passed a law which liberalized the use of firearms by border patrols.

==See also==
*Historia narodu polskiego
*History of Europe
*History of the Jews in Poland
*List of Polish monarchs
*List of heads of state of Poland
*List of prime ministers of Poland
*History of the Polish Army
*Polish hussars
*Politics of Poland
== Notes ==
&quot;a.&quot;Piłsudski&#x27;s family roots in the Polonized gentry of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and the resulting perspective of seeing himself and people like him as legitimate Lithuanians put him in conflict with modern Lithuanian nationalists (who in Piłsudski&#x27;s lifetime redefined the scope and meaning of the &quot;Lithuanian&quot; identity), and, by extension, with other nationalists including the Polish modern nationalist movement.

&quot;b.&quot;In 1938, Poland and Romania refused to agree to a Franco-British proposal that in the event of war with Nazi Germany, Soviet forces would be allowed to cross their territories to aid Czechoslovakia. The Polish ruling elites considered the Soviets in some ways more threatening than the Nazis.

The Soviet Union repeatedly declared its intention to fulfill its obligations under the 1935 treaty with Czechoslovakia and defend Czechoslovakia militarily. A transfer of land and air forces through Poland and/or Romania was required, and the Soviets approached the French, who also had a treaty with Czechoslovakia (and with Poland and with the Soviet Union). Edward Rydz-Śmigły rebuked the French suggestion on that matter in 1936, and in 1938 Józef Beck pressured Romania not to allow even Soviet warplanes to fly over its territory. Like Hungary, Poland was looking into using the German-Czechoslovak conflict to settle its own territorial grievances, namely disputes over parts of Trans-Olza, Spiš and Orava.

&quot;c.&quot; In October 1939, the British Foreign Office notified the Soviets that the United Kingdom would be satisfied with a postwar creation of small ethnic Poland, patterned after the Duchy of Warsaw. An establishment of Poland restricted to &quot;minimal size&quot;, according to ethnographic boundaries (such as the lands common to both the prewar Poland and postwar Poland), was planned by the Soviet People&#x27;s Commissariat for Foreign Affairs in 1943–1944. Such territorial reduction was recommended by Ivan Maisky to Vyacheslav Molotov in early 1944, because of what Maisky saw as Poland&#x27;s historically unfriendly disposition toward Russia and the Soviet Union, likely in some way to continue. Joseph Stalin opted for a larger version, allowing a &quot;swap&quot; (territorial compensation for Poland), which involved the eastern lands gained by Poland at the Peace of Riga of 1921 and now lost, and eastern Germany conquered from the Nazis in 1944–1945. In regard to the several major disputed areas: Lower Silesia west of the Oder and the Eastern Neisse rivers (the British wanted it to remain a part of the future German state), Stettin (in 1945 the German communists already established their administration there), &quot;Zakerzonia&quot; (western Red Ruthenia demanded by the Ukrainians), and the Białystok region (Białystok was claimed by the communists of the Byelorussian SSR), the Soviet leader made decisions that favored Poland.

Other territorial and ethnic scenarios were also possible, generally with possible outcomes less advantageous to Poland than the form the country assumed.

&quot;d.&quot;Timothy D. Snyder spoke of about 100,000 Jews killed by Poles during the Nazi occupation, the majority probably by members of the collaborationist Blue Police. This number would have likely been many times higher had Poland entered into an alliance with Germany in 1939, as advocated by some Polish historians and others.

&quot;e.&quot;Some may have falsely claimed the Jewish identity hoping for permission to emigrate. The communist authorities, pursuing the concept of Poland of single ethnicity (in accordance with the recent border changes and expulsions), were allowing the Jews to leave the country. For a discussion of early communist Poland&#x27;s ethnic politics, see Timothy D. Snyder, &quot;The Reconstruction of Nations&quot;, chapters on modern &quot;Ukrainian Borderland&quot;.

&quot;f.&quot;A Communist Party of Poland had existed in the past, but was eliminated in Stalin&#x27;s purges in 1938.

&quot;g.&quot;The Soviet leadership, which had previously ordered the crushing of the Uprising of 1953 in East Germany, the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 and the Prague Spring in 1968, in late 1970 became worried about potential demoralizing effects that deployment against Polish workers would have on the Polish army, a crucial Warsaw Pact component. The Soviets withdrew their support for Gomułka, who insisted on the use of force; he and his close associates were subsequently ousted from the Polish Politburo by the Polish Central Committee.

&quot;h.&quot;East of the Molotov-Ribbentrop line, the population was 43% Polish, 33% Ukrainian, 8% Belarusian and 8% Jewish. The Soviet Union did not want to appear as an aggressor, and moved its troops to eastern Poland under the pretext of offering protection to &quot;the kindred Ukrainian and Belorussian people&quot;.

&quot;i.&quot;Joseph Stalin at the 1943 Tehran Conference discussed with Winston Churchill and Franklin D. Roosevelt new post-war borders in central-eastern Europe, including the shape of a future Poland. He endorsed the Piast Concept, which justified a massive shift of Poland&#x27;s frontiers to the west. Stalin resolved to secure and stabilize the western reaches of the Soviet Union and disable the future military potential of Germany by constructing a compact and ethnically defined Poland (along with the Soviet ethnic Ukraine, Belarus and Lithuania) and by radically altering the region&#x27;s system of national borders. After 1945, the Polish communist regime wholeheartedly adopted and promoted the Piast Concept, making it the centerpiece of their claim to be the true inheritors of Polish nationalism. After all the killings and population transfers during and after the war, the country was 99% &quot;Polish&quot;.

&quot;j.&quot;&quot;All the currently available documents of Nazi administration show that, together with the Jews, the stratum of the Polish intelligentsia was marked for total extermination. In fact, Nazi Germany achieved this goal almost by half, since Poland lost 50 percent of her citizens with university diplomas and 35 percent of those with a gimnazium diploma.&quot; According to Brzoza and Sowa, 450,000 of Polish citizens had completed higher, secondary, or trade school education by the outbreak of the war. 37.5% of people with higher education perished, 30% of those with general secondary education, and 53.3% of trade school graduates.

&quot;k.&quot;Decisive political events took place in Poland shortly before the Hungarian Revolution of 1956. Władysław Gomułka, a reformist party leader, was reinstated to the Politburo of the PZPR and the Eighth Plenum of its Central Committee was announced to convene on 19 October 1956, all without seeking a Soviet approval. The Soviet Union responded with military moves and intimidation and its &quot;military-political delegation&quot;, led by Nikita Khrushchev, quickly arrived in Warsaw. Gomułka tried to convince them of his loyalty but insisted on the reforms that he considered essential, including a replacement of Poland&#x27;s Soviet-trusted minister of defense, Konstantin Rokossovsky. The disconcerted Soviets returned to Moscow, the PZPR Plenum elected Gomułka first secretary and removed Rokossovsky from the Politburo. On 21 October, the Soviet Presidium followed Khrushchev&#x27;s lead and decided unanimously to &quot;refrain from military intervention&quot; in Poland, a decision likely influenced also by the ongoing preparations for the invasion of Hungary. The Soviet gamble paid off, because Gomułka in the coming years turned out to be a very dependable Soviet ally and an orthodox communist.

However, unlike the other Warsaw Pact countries, Poland did not endorse the Soviet armed intervention in Hungary. The Hungarian Revolution was intensely supported by the Polish public.

&quot;l.&quot;The delayed reinforcements were coming and the government military commanders General Tadeusz Rozwadowski and Władysław Anders wanted to keep on fighting the coup perpetrators, but President Stanisław Wojciechowski and the government decided to surrender to prevent the imminent spread of civil war. The coup brought to power the &quot;Sanation&quot; regime under Józef Piłsudski (Edward Rydz-Śmigły after Piłsudski&#x27;s death). The Sanation regime persecuted the opposition within the military and in general. Rozwadowski died after abusive imprisonment, according to some accounts murdered. Another major opponent of Piłsudski, General Włodzimierz Zagórski, disappeared in 1927. According to Aleksandra Piłsudska, the marshal&#x27;s wife, following the coup and for the rest of his life Piłsudski lost his composure and appeared over-burdened.

At the time of Rydz-Śmigły&#x27;s command, the Sanation camp embraced the ideology of Roman Dmowski, Piłsudski&#x27;s nemesis. Rydz-Śmigły did not allow General Władysław Sikorski, an enemy of the Sanation movement, to participate as a soldier in the country&#x27;s defense against the Invasion of Poland in September 1939. During World War II in France and then in Britain, the Polish government-in-exile became dominated by anti-Sanation politicians. The perceived Sanation followers were in turn persecuted (in exile) under prime ministers Sikorski and Stanisław Mikołajczyk.

&quot;m.&quot;General Zygmunt Berling of the Soviet-allied First Polish Army attempted in mid-September a crossing of the Vistula and landing at Czerniaków to aid the insurgents, but the operation was defeated by the Germans and the Poles suffered heavy losses.

&quot;n.&quot;The decision to launch the Warsaw Uprising resulted in the destruction of the city, its population and its elites and has been a source of lasting controversy. According to the historians Czesław Brzoza and Andrzej Leon Sowa, orders of further military offensives, issued at the end of August 1944 as a continuation of Operation Tempest, show a loss of the sense of responsibility for the country&#x27;s fate on the part of the underground Polish leadership.

&quot;o.&quot;One of the party leaders Mieczysław Rakowski, who abandoned his mentor Gomułka following the 1970 crisis, saw the demands of the demonstrating workers as &quot;exclusively socialist&quot; in character, because of the way they were phrased. Most people in communist Poland, including opposition activists, did not question the supremacy of socialism or the socialist idea; misconduct by party officials, such as not following the provisions of the constitution, was blamed. From the time of Gierek, this assumed standard of political correctness was increasingly challenged: pluralism, and then free market, became frequently used concepts.

&quot;p.&quot;The Polish Sanation authorities were provoked by the independence-seeking Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists (OUN). OUN engaged in political assassinations, terror and sabotage, to which the Polish state responded with a repressive campaign in the 1930s, as Józef Piłsudski and his successors imposed collective responsibility on the villagers in the affected areas. After the disturbances of 1933 and 1934, the Bereza Kartuska prison camp was established; it became notorious for its brutal regime. The government brought Polish settlers and administrators to parts of Volhynia with a centuries-old tradition of Ukrainian peasant rising against Polish land owners (and to Eastern Galicia). In the late 1930s, after Piłsudski&#x27;s death, military persecution intensified and a policy of &quot;national assimilation&quot; was aggressively pursued. Military raids, public beatings, property confiscations and the closing and destruction of Orthodox churches aroused lasting enmity in Galicia and antagonized Ukrainian society in Volhynia at the worst possible moment, according to Timothy D. Snyder. However, he also notes that &quot;Ukrainian terrorism and Polish reprisals touched only part of the population, leaving vast regions unaffected&quot; and &quot;the OUN&#x27;s nationalist prescription, a Ukrainian state for ethnic Ukrainians alone was far from popular&quot;. Halik Kochanski wrote of the legacy of bitterness between the Ukrainians and Poles that soon exploded in the context of World War II. See also: History of the Ukrainian minority in Poland.

&quot;q.&quot;In Poland, officials of central government (the provincial office of &quot;wojewoda&quot;) can overrule elected territorial and municipal local governments. However, in such cases &quot;wojewoda&quot; decisions have sometimes been invalidated by courts.

&quot;r.&quot;Foreign policy was one of the few governmental areas in which Piłsudski took an active interest. He saw Poland&#x27;s role and opportunity as lying in Eastern Europe and advocated passive relations with the West. He felt that a German attack should not be feared, because even if this unlikely event were to take place, the Western powers would be bound to restrain Germany and come to Poland&#x27;s rescue.

&quot;s.&quot;According to the researcher Jan Sowa, the Commonwealth failed as a state because it was not able to conform to the emerging new European order established at the Peace of Westphalia of 1648. Poland&#x27;s elective kings, restricted by the self-serving and short-sighted nobility, could not impose a strong and efficient central government with its characteristic post-Westphalian internal and external sovereignty. The inability of Polish kings to levy and collect taxes (and therefore sustain a standing army) and conduct independent foreign policy were among the chief obstacles to Poland competing effectively on the changed European scene, where absolutist power was a prerequisite for survival and became the foundation for the abolition of serfdom and gradual formation of parliamentarism.

&quot;t.&quot;Besides the Home Army there were other major underground fighting formations: Bataliony Chłopskie, National Armed Forces (NSZ) and Gwardia Ludowa (later Armia Ludowa). From 1943, the leaders of the nationalistic NSZ collaborated with Nazi Germany in a case unique in occupied Poland. The NSZ conducted an anti-communist civil war. Before the arrival of the Soviets, the NSZ&#x27;s Holy Cross Mountains Brigade left Poland under the protection of the German army. According to the historians Czesław Brzoza and Andrzej Leon Sowa, participation figures given for the underground resistance are often inflated. In the spring of 1944, the time of the most extensive involvement of the underground organizations, there were most likely considerably fewer than 500,000 military and civilian personnel participating, over the entire spectrum, from the right wing to the communists.

&quot;u.&quot;According to Jerzy Eisler, about 1.1 million people may have been imprisoned or detained in 1944–1956 and about 50,000 may have died because of the struggle and persecution, including about 7,000 soldiers of the right-wing underground killed in the 1940s. According to Adam Leszczyński, up to 30,000 people were killed by the communist regime during the first several years after the war.

&quot;v.&quot;According to Andrzej Stelmachowski, one of the key participants of the Polish systemic transformation, Minister Leszek Balcerowicz pursued extremely liberal economic policies, often extraordinarily painful for society. The December 1989 Sejm statute of credit relations reform introduced an &quot;incredible&quot; system of privileges for banks, which were allowed to unilaterally alter interest rates on already existing contracts. The exceedingly high rates they instantly introduced ruined many previously profitable enterprises and caused a complete breakdown of the apartment block construction industry, which had long-term deleterious effects on the state budget as well. Balcerowicz&#x27;s policies also caused permanent damage to Polish agriculture, an area in which he lacked expertise, and to the often successful and useful Polish cooperative movement.

According to Karol Modzelewski, a dissident and critic of the economic transformation, in 1989 Solidarity no longer existed, having been in reality eliminated during the martial law period. What the &quot;post-Solidarity elites&quot; did in 1989 amounted to a betrayal of the old Solidarity base, and the retribution was only a matter of time.

&quot;w.&quot;Led by Władysław Anders, the Polish II Corps fought in 1944–1945 in the Allied Italian Campaign, where the corps&#x27; main engagement was the Battle of Monte Cassino.

&quot;x.&quot;The Piast Concept, of which the chief proponent was Jan Ludwik Popławski (late 19th century), was based on the claim that the Piast homeland was inhabited by so-called &quot;native&quot; aboriginal Slavs and Slavonic Poles since time immemorial and only later was &quot;infiltrated&quot; by &quot;alien&quot; Celts, Germanic peoples, and others. After 1945, the so-called &quot;autochthonous&quot; or &quot;aboriginal&quot; school of Polish prehistory received official backing and a considerable degree of popular support in Poland. According to this view, the Lusatian Culture, which flourished between the Oder and the Vistula in the early Iron Age, was said to be Slavonic; all non-Slavonic tribes and peoples recorded in the area at various points in ancient times were dismissed as &quot;migrants&quot; and &quot;visitors&quot;. In contrast, the critics of this theory, such as Marija Gimbutas, regarded it as an unproved hypotheses and for them the date and origin of the westward migration of the Slavs were largely uncharted; the Slavonic connections of the Lusatian Culture were entirely imaginary; and the presence of an ethnically mixed and constantly changing collection of peoples on the North European Plain was taken for granted.

&quot;y.&quot;According to the count presented by Prime Minister and Internal Affairs Minister Felicjan Sławoj Składkowski before the Sejm committee in January 1938, 818 people were killed in police suppression of labor protests (industrial and agricultural) during the 1932–1937 period.

&quot;z.&quot;John II Casimir Vasa is known for his remarkable and accurate prediction of the Partitions of Poland, made over a century before the event&#x27;s occurrence.

&quot;a1.&quot;According to war historian Ben Macintyre, &quot;The Polish contribution to allied victory in the Second World War was extraordinary, perhaps even decisive, but for many years it was disgracefully played down, obscured by the politics of the Cold War.&quot;

&quot;b1.&quot;Piłsudski left the Polish Socialist Party in 1914 and severed his connections with the socialist movement, but many activists from the Left and of other political orientations presumed his continuing involvement there.

&quot;c1.&quot;Woodrow Wilson&#x27;s Fourteen Points program was subsequently weakened by internal developments in the US, Britain, France, and Germany. In the last case, Poland was denied the city of Danzig on the Baltic coast.

&quot;d1.&quot;The government of Soviet Russia issued in August 1918 a decree strongly supportive of the independence of Poland, but at that time no Polish lands were under Russian control.

==References==

=== Citations ===
=== Works cited ===
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
==Bibliography==

Academic journals
More recent general history of Poland books in English

* Biskupski, M. B. &quot;The History of Poland&quot;. Greenwood, 2000. 264 pp. online edition 
* Dabrowski, Patrice M. &quot;Poland: The First Thousand Years.&quot; Northern Illinois University Press, 2016. 506 pp. 
* Frucht, Richard. &quot;Encyclopedia of Eastern Europe: From the Congress of Vienna to the Fall of Communism&quot; Garland Pub., 2000 online edition 
* Halecki, Oskar. &quot;History of Poland&quot;, New York: Roy Publishers, 1942. New York: Barnes and Noble, 1993, 
* Kenney, Padraic. &quot;After the Blank Spots Are Filled: Recent Perspectives on Modern Poland,&quot; &quot;Journal of Modern History&quot; Volume 79, Number 1, March 2007 pp 134–61, historiography
* Kieniewicz, Stefan. &quot;History of Poland&quot;, Hippocrene Books, 1982, 
* Kloczowski, Jerzy. &quot;A History of Polish Christianity&quot;. Cambridge U. Pr., 2000. 385 pp.
* Lerski, George J. &quot;Historical Dictionary of Poland, 966–1945&quot;. Greenwood, 1996. 750 pp. online edition 
* Leslie, R. F. et al. &quot;The History of Poland since 1863&quot;. Cambridge U. Press, 1980. 494 pp.
* Lewinski-Corwin, Edward Henry. &quot;The Political History of Poland&quot; (1917), well-illustrated; 650pp online at books.google.com
* Litwin Henryk, &quot;Central European Superpower&quot;, &quot;BUM &quot;, 2016.
* Pogonowski, Iwo Cyprian. &quot;Poland: An Illustrated History&quot;, New York: Hippocrene Books, 2000, 
* Pogonowski, Iwo Cyprian. &quot;Poland: A Historical Atlas&quot;. Hippocrene, 1987. 321 pp.
* Radzilowski, John. &quot;A Traveller&#x27;s History of Poland&quot;, Northampton, Massachusetts: Interlink Books, 2007, 
* Reddaway, W. F., Penson, J. H., Halecki, O., and Dyboski, R. (Eds.). &quot;The Cambridge History of Poland&quot;, 2 vols., Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1941 (1697–1935), 1950 (to 1696). New York: Octagon Books, 1971 online edition vol 1 to 1696 , old fashioned but highly detailed
* Roos, Hans. &quot;A History of Modern Poland&quot; (1966)
* Sanford, George. &quot;Historical Dictionary of Poland&quot;. Scarecrow Press, 2003. 291 pp.
* Wróbel, Piotr. &quot;Historical Dictionary of Poland, 1945–1996&quot;. Greenwood, 1998. 397 pp.
* Zamoyski, Adam. &quot;Poland: A History&quot;. Hippocrene Books, 2012. 426 pp. 
Published in Poland

* &quot;History of Poland&quot;, Aleksander Gieysztor et al. Warsaw: PWN, 1968
* &quot;History of Poland&quot;, Stefan Kieniewicz et al. Warsaw: PWN, 1979
* &quot;An Outline History of Poland&quot;, by Jerzy Topolski. Warsaw: Interpress Publishers, 1986, 
* &quot;An Illustrated History of Poland&quot;, by Dariusz Banaszak, Tomasz Biber, Maciej Leszczyński. Poznań: Publicat, 2008, 
* &quot;Poland: History of Poland&quot;, by Stanisław Kołodziejski, Roman Marcinek, Jakub Polit. Kraków: Wydawnictwo Ryszard Kluszczyński, 2005, 2009, 
==External links==

; Movie (on-line):
* Animated history of Poland, (PARP, Expo 2010 Shanghai China)
* Borders of Poland, A.D. 990–2008

; Other:
* Looking at Poland&#x27;s History Through the Prism of Art
* History of Poland, in paintings
* History of Poland on Historycy.org forum
* History of Poland: Primary Documents
* Commonwealth of Diverse Cultures: Poland&#x27;s Heritage 
* &quot;Poland, Christianity in&quot; &quot;The New Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge&quot; (1910) vol 9 pp. 104–8
* Williams, Henry Smith (Ed.) 1905, The historians&#x27; history of the world in twenty-five volumes, volume 17: Switzerland (concluded), Russia and Poland, New York: The Outlook Company. 

=== Maps ===
* Poland and West-Slavs 800–950 
* Poland 990–1040 
* Poland 1040–1090 
* Poland 1090–1140 
* Poland 1140–1250 
* Poland 1250–1290 
* Poland 1290–1333 
* Poland 1333–1350 
* Poland 1350–1370 
* Poland 1773
* Poland 2004</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q199569" start="4" end="21" title="History of Poland" label="history of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446303" start="56" end="71" title="Lechites" label="medieval tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q573912" start="73" end="89" title="Christianization of Poland" label="Christianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q577867" start="94" end="102" title="Kingdom of Poland" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485791" start="112" end="136" title="Polish Golden Age" label="Poland&amp;#x27;s Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q639715" start="138" end="150" title="Polonization" label="expansionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="183" end="198" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="European powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="207" end="230" title="Partitions of Poland" label="collapse and partitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q103495" start="236" end="245" title="world war" label="world war"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="248" end="257" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="282" end="291" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="339" end="352" title="Ancient history" label="ancient times"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="445" end="450" title="Celts" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="452" end="461" title="Scythians" label="Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q162858" start="463" end="473" title="Sarmatians" label="Sarmatians"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="475" end="480" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q207761" start="482" end="487" title="Balts" label="Balts"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="492" end="508" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q840454" start="530" end="541" title="West Slavs" label="West Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446303" start="542" end="550" title="Lechites" label="Lechites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="584" end="589" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="640" end="657" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q428713" start="672" end="686" title="Polans (western)" label="Western Polans"/>
<link wikidata="Q560549" start="814" end="842" title="North European Plain" label="North-Central European Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961536" start="849" end="853" title="Name of Poland" label="name"/>
<link wikidata="Q201615" start="885" end="891" title="Piast dynasty" label="Piasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q53435" start="930" end="939" title="Mieszko I of Poland" label="Mieszko I"/>
<link wikidata="Q573912" start="986" end="1014" title="Christianization of Poland" label="adopted Western Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q212685" start="1082" end="1090" title="High Middle Ages" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q53436" start="1118" end="1138" title="Bolesław I the Brave" label="Bolesław I the Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q53457" start="1223" end="1244" title="Casimir III the Great" label="Casimir III the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q194355" start="1388" end="1408" title="Jagiellonian dynasty" label="Jagiellonian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="1464" end="1473" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903045" start="1486" end="1507" title="Renaissance in Poland" label="Renaissance in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q639715" start="1555" end="1567" title="Polonization" label="Polonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="1612" end="1642" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q185145" start="1673" end="1684" title="great power" label="great power"/>
<link wikidata="Q978929" start="1798" end="1813" title="Golden Liberty" label="noble democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q584683" start="1822" end="1839" title="elective monarchy" label="elective monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129096" start="2093" end="2119" title="Constitution of 3 May 1791" label="Constitution of 3 May 1791"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="2201" end="2211" title="partitions of Poland" label="partitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="2231" end="2245" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="2251" end="2269" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="2278" end="2295" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210074" start="2378" end="2398" title="Resistance movements in partitioned Poland (1795–1918)" label="resistance movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2471" end="2482" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="2581" end="2603" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Second Polish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="2681" end="2693" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2702" end="2714" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="2715" end="2729" title="Invasion of Poland" label="invaded Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2756" end="2768" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q326822" start="2801" end="2831" title="Untermensch" label="different faiths or identities"/>
<link wikidata="Q700120" start="2852" end="2884" title="Occupation of Poland (1939–1945)" label="occupation between 1939 and 1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="2914" end="2927" title="The Holocaust" label="extermination"/>
<link wikidata="Q210846" start="2931" end="2957" title="Polish government-in-exile" label="Polish government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667608" start="2997" end="3014" title="Polish contribution to World War II" label="Poles contributed"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="3022" end="3028" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="3093" end="3100" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q216184" start="3105" end="3112" title="Western Front (World War II)" label="western"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="3157" end="3165" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q325261" start="3280" end="3289" title="satellite state" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="3290" end="3299" title="communism" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="3332" end="3361" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933038" start="3471" end="3516" title="Territorial evolution of Poland" label="geographic centre of gravity towards the west"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255952" start="3569" end="3600" title="Demographic history of Poland" label="historic multi-ethnic character"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003" start="3648" end="3658" title="Solidarity (Polish trade union)" label="Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="3703" end="3728" title="planned economy" label="planned communist economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="3732" end="3742" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="3749" end="3756" title="liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="3757" end="3780" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259201" start="3827" end="3846" title="History of Poland (1989–present)" label="modern Polish state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="3928" end="3939" title="prehistory" label="prehistoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q695827" start="3944" end="3957" title="protohistory" label="protohistoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="4089" end="4094" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="4101" end="4105" title="Homo" label="Homo"/>
<link wikidata="Q101362" start="4144" end="4156" title="Homo erectus" label="Homo erectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q164777" start="4187" end="4196" title="microlith" label="microlith"/>
<link wikidata="Q717942" start="4225" end="4234" title="Trzebnica" label="Trzebnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q54150" start="4239" end="4252" title="Lower Silesian Voivodeship" label="Lower Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q839954" start="4276" end="4294" title="archeological site" label="archeological site"/>
<link wikidata="Q7463501" start="4330" end="4347" title="Lower Paleolithic" label="Lower Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="4362" end="4371" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="4455" end="4466" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q479257" start="4505" end="4516" title="stone tools" label="stone tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q167628" start="4543" end="4568" title="Kraków-Częstochowa Upland" label="Kraków-Częstochowa Upland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="4572" end="4581" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q107679" start="4604" end="4609" title="cliff" label="cliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="4688" end="4700" title="Homo sapiens" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q179234" start="4711" end="4737" title="Early European modern humans" label="anatomically modern humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="4798" end="4817" title="Last Glacial Period" label="Last Glacial Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q14664222" start="4819" end="4841" title="Weichselian glaciation" label="Weichselian glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q152131" start="4956" end="4973" title="Sudeten Mountains" label="Sudeten Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q765881" start="4986" end="4999" title="Moravian Gate" label="Moravian Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529959" start="5008" end="5022" title="Kłodzko Valley" label="Kłodzko Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="5047" end="5056" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q806348" start="5079" end="5101" title="Linear Pottery culture" label="Linear Pottery culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q911169" start="5134" end="5150" title="Danubian culture" label="Danubian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="5173" end="5185" title="Danube" label="Danube River"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="5289" end="5301" title="agriculture" label="agricultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="5397" end="5407" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="5544" end="5557" title="New Stone Age" label="New Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q836693" start="5649" end="5656" title="Kuyavia" label="Kuyavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q592166" start="5664" end="5667" title="Bronocice pot" label="pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394755" start="5673" end="5682" title="Bronocice" label="Bronocice"/>
<link wikidata="Q631059" start="5885" end="5922" title="Świętokrzyskie Mountains" label="Świętokrzyskie (Holy Cross) Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="5999" end="6006" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="6020" end="6030" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522018" start="6057" end="6063" title="List of World Heritage Sites in Poland" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q83087" start="6084" end="6089" title="flint" label="flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434086" start="6099" end="6109" title="Krzemionki" label="Krzemionki"/>
<link wikidata="Q875115" start="6162" end="6174" title="Funnelbeaker culture" label="Funnelbeaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q218257" start="6179" end="6195" title="Globular Amphora culture" label="Globular Amphora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211146" start="6260" end="6280" title="Rock art" label="ancient parietal art"/>
<link wikidata="Q177463" start="6347" end="6355" title="charcoal" label="charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q52827" start="6356" end="6365" title="pictogram" label="pictogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="6388" end="6393" title="deity" label="deity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="6457" end="6473" title="Early Bronze Age" label="Early Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="6513" end="6521" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q611017" start="6602" end="6618" title="Lusatian culture" label="Lusatian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="6725" end="6730" title="Celts" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q208247" start="6738" end="6753" title="La Tène culture" label="La Tène culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="6814" end="6822" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="6880" end="6892" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q131192" start="6973" end="6989" title="Migration Period" label="Migration Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q217192" start="7006" end="7015" title="Dark Ages (historiography)" label="Dark Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q207761" start="7070" end="7075" title="Balts" label="Balts"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="7122" end="7127" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378782" start="7394" end="7414" title="Early Slavs" label="early Slavic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423912" start="7514" end="7523" title="Przeworsk culture" label="Przeworsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446303" start="7650" end="7658" title="Lechites" label="Lechitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133311" start="7727" end="7739" title="Tribe" label="tribal units"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277231" start="7741" end="7754" title="Polish tribes" label="Polish tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q646153" start="7786" end="7805" title="Bavarian Geographer" label="Bavarian Geographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q428713" start="7854" end="7868" title="Polans (western)" label="Western Polans"/>
<link wikidata="Q211371" start="7876" end="7890" title="Greater Poland" label="Greater Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q28108" start="7955" end="7974" title="political system" label="political structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="8024" end="8029" title="State (polity)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q201615" start="8141" end="8154" title="Piast dynasty" label="Piast dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q53435" start="8294" end="8303" title="Mieszko I of Poland" label="Mieszko I"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="8406" end="8418" title="Latin Church" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q236462" start="8462" end="8482" title="Doubravka of Bohemia" label="Doubravka of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="8494" end="8503" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q573912" start="8537" end="8554" title="Christianization of Poland" label="baptism of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446303" start="8678" end="8686" title="Lechites" label="Lechitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193360" start="8801" end="8819" title="List of Polish monarchs" label="a series of rulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q577867" start="8883" end="8890" title="Kingdom of Poland (1025–1385)" label="kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193664" start="8918" end="8932" title="culture of medieval Poland" label="Polish culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377906" start="8970" end="8986" title="Culture of Europe" label="European culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q53436" start="9042" end="9062" title="Bolesław I the Brave" label="Bolesław I the Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152005" start="9092" end="9105" title="Catholic Church in Poland" label="Polish Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q193360" start="9184" end="9198" title="List of Polish monarchs" label="king of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q243427" start="9379" end="9397" title="Adalbert of Prague" label="Adalbert of Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q918723" start="9413" end="9420" title="Prussia (region)" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q421772" start="9440" end="9459" title="Congress of Gniezno" label="Congress of Gniezno"/>
<link wikidata="Q151090" start="9497" end="9505" title="Otto III, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Otto III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364553" start="9521" end="9545" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Gniezno" label="Archbishopric of Gniezno"/>
<link wikidata="Q103556" start="9692" end="9700" title="Henry II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q175211" start="9742" end="9760" title="Kingdom of Germany" label="Kingdom of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q53455" start="10018" end="10040" title="Casimir I the Restorer" label="Casimir I the Restorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q53440" start="10074" end="10098" title="Bolesław II the Generous" label="Bolesław II the Generous"/>
<link wikidata="Q351635" start="10154" end="10178" title="Stanislaus of Szczepanów" label="Stanislaus of Szczepanów"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="10269" end="10283" title="Excommunication" label="excommunicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q511158" start="10456" end="10471" title="Gallus Anonymus" label="Gallus Anonymus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4501692" start="10509" end="10534" title="Gesta principum Polonorum" label="Gesta principum Polonorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q53441" start="10584" end="10605" title="Bolesław III Wrymouth" label="Bolesław III Wrymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984183" start="10865" end="10882" title="Testament of Bolesław III Wrymouth" label="Testament of 1138"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977215" start="10884" end="10906" title="feudal fragmentation" label="internal fragmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q53456" start="10988" end="11007" title="Casimir II the Just" label="Casimir II the Just"/>
<link wikidata="Q75036" start="11058" end="11069" title="Seniorate Province" label="senior duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q325727" start="11156" end="11163" title="Łęczyca" label="Łęczyca"/>
<link wikidata="Q369562" start="11178" end="11195" title="Wincenty Kadłubek" label="Wincenty Kadłubek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150522" start="11212" end="11262" title="Chronica seu originale regum et principum Poloniae" label="Chronica seu originale regum et principum Poloniae"/>
<link wikidata="Q53460" start="11359" end="11378" title="Konrad I of Masovia" label="Konrad I of Masovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="11392" end="11408" title="Teutonic Order" label="Teutonic Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q207761" start="11431" end="11437" title="Balts" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q109073" start="11438" end="11446" title="Old Prussians" label="Prussian"/>
<link wikidata="Q153091" start="11633" end="11654" title="Duchy of Prussia" label="German Prussian state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667645" start="11660" end="11691" title="first Mongol invasion of Poland" label="first Mongol invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929625" start="11794" end="11808" title="Silesian Piasts" label="Silesian Piast"/>
<link wikidata="Q53446" start="11814" end="11832" title="Henry II the Pious" label="Henry II the Pious"/>
<link wikidata="Q159512" start="11840" end="11857" title="Battle of Legnica" label="Battle of Legnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799" start="11876" end="11883" title="Wrocław" label="Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981896" start="11927" end="11939" title="German town law" label="incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q163725" start="12100" end="12113" title="Magdeburg rights" label="Magdeburg Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452949" start="12124" end="12142" title="Bolesław the Pious" label="Bolesław the Pious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516823" start="12151" end="12167" title="history of the Jews in Poland" label="Jewish liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915090" start="12175" end="12192" title="Statute of Kalisz" label="Statute of Kalisz"/>
<link wikidata="Q54017" start="12348" end="12359" title="Przemysł II" label="Przemysł II"/>
<link wikidata="Q211371" start="12363" end="12377" title="Greater Poland" label="Greater Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q155581" start="12531" end="12555" title="Wenceslaus II of Bohemia" label="Wenceslaus II of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54048" start="12637" end="12663" title="Władysław I the Elbow-high" label="Władysław I the Elbow-high"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="12740" end="12746" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q326188" start="12777" end="12786" title="Pomerelia" label="Pomerelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q53457" start="12794" end="12815" title="Casimir III the Great" label="Casimir III the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="12972" end="12979" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520" start="13035" end="13044" title="Pomerania" label="Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q643843" start="13179" end="13186" title="Mazovia" label="Mazovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q616206" start="13226" end="13238" title="Red Ruthenia" label="Red Ruthenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160876" start="13295" end="13313" title="Congress of Kraków" label="Congress of Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="13419" end="13426" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="13427" end="13434" title="crusades" label="crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q189441" start="13486" end="13509" title="Jagiellonian University" label="Jagiellonian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q53998" start="13849" end="13867" title="Louis I of Hungary" label="Louis I of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q939200" start="13875" end="13898" title="Capetian House of Anjou" label="Capetian House of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q9366696" start="13920" end="13947" title="union of Hungary and Poland" label="union of Hungary and Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="13999" end="14014" title="szlachta" label="Polish nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468870" start="14019" end="14039" title="Privilege of Koszyce" label="Privilege of Koszyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q53449" start="14122" end="14129" title="Jadwiga of Poland" label="Jadwiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q54049" start="14294" end="14301" title="Władysław II Jagiełło" label="Jogaila"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="14305" end="14314" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="14328" end="14339" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q54049" start="14450" end="14471" title="Władysław II Jagiełło" label="Władysław II Jagiełło"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="14524" end="14532" title="personal union" label="personal"/>
<link wikidata="Q825902" start="14533" end="14556" title="Polish–Lithuanian union" label="Polish–Lithuanian union"/>
<link wikidata="Q194355" start="14570" end="14590" title="Jagiellonian dynasty" label="Jagiellonian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121044" start="14651" end="14665" title="Union of Krewo" label="Union of Krewo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147883" start="14803" end="14811" title="Ruthenia" label="Ruthenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="14830" end="14854" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="15168" end="15178" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q33570" start="15268" end="15286" title="Battle of Grunwald" label="Battle of Grunwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q156020" start="15419" end="15433" title="State of the Teutonic Order" label="Teutonic Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q71279" start="15437" end="15451" title="Malbork Castle" label="Malbork Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055227" start="15457" end="15473" title="Union of Horodło" label="Union of Horodło"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="15617" end="15625" title="szlachta" label="szlachta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573943" start="15688" end="15708" title="Neminem captivabimus" label="Neminem captivabimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q54053" start="15861" end="15874" title="Władysław III of Poland" label="Władysław III"/>
<link wikidata="Q9366696" start="15954" end="15972" title="Union of Hungary and Poland" label="Poland and Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q32832" start="16008" end="16023" title="Battle of Varna" label="Battle of Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q14366850" start="16034" end="16041" title="Crusade of Varna" label="crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="16054" end="16068" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q22771585" start="16094" end="16105" title="interregnum" label="interregnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q53459" start="16179" end="16199" title="Casimir IV Jagiellon" label="Casimir IV Jagiellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q589662" start="16348" end="16361" title="Royal Prussia" label="Royal Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q315921" start="16397" end="16432" title="Thirteen Years&amp;#x27; War (1454–66)" label="Thirteen Years&amp;#x27; War of 1454–66"/>
<link wikidata="Q156020" start="16442" end="16456" title="State of the Teutonic Order" label="Teutonic state"/>
<link wikidata="Q233532" start="16488" end="16502" title="Second Peace of Thorn (1466)" label="Peace of Thorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q103801" start="16556" end="16568" title="East Prussia" label="East Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153091" start="16581" end="16597" title="Duchy of Prussia" label="Duchy of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="16638" end="16642" title="fief" label="fief"/>
<link wikidata="Q160440" start="16753" end="16767" title="Crimean Khanate" label="Crimean Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q170770" start="16825" end="16846" title="Grand Duchy of Moscow" label="Grand Duchy of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="16880" end="16886" title="feudalism" label="feudal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931961" start="16965" end="16980" title="landed nobility" label="landed nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="16982" end="16988" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="17086" end="17100" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="17161" end="17169" title="szlachta" label="szlachta"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="17257" end="17266" title="Bicameralism" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660626" start="17267" end="17279" title="Sejm of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="General Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q640358" start="17373" end="17383" title="Nihil novi" label="Nihil novi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="17448" end="17465" title="legislature" label="legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q978929" start="17557" end="17571" title="Golden Liberty" label="Golden Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635663" start="17716" end="17723" title="folwark" label="folwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q838811" start="17811" end="17818" title="peasant" label="peasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7453267" start="17819" end="17824" title="serfdom in Poland" label="serfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="18066" end="18078" title="middle class" label="middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="18164" end="18174" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="18175" end="18186" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18258" end="18279" title="History of Poland during the Jagiellonian dynasty#Reformation" label="Reformation in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="18311" end="18324" title="Christian denomination" label="denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q54056" start="18523" end="18542" title="Sigismund I the Old" label="Sigismund I the Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q54058" start="18564" end="18585" title="Sigismund II Augustus" label="Sigismund II Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485791" start="18657" end="18667" title="Polish Golden Age" label="Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903045" start="18675" end="18696" title="Renaissance in Poland" label="Renaissance in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="18723" end="18742" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q59737" start="18789" end="18804" title="Jan Kochanowski" label="Jan Kochanowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q40433" start="18966" end="18972" title="Albert, Duke of Prussia" label="Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7253161" start="19028" end="19043" title="Prussian Homage" label="Prussian Homage"/>
<link wikidata="Q643843" start="19081" end="19088" title="Mazovia" label="Mazovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q963303" start="19230" end="19245" title="Union of Lublin" label="Union of Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="19334" end="19341" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q825902" start="19406" end="19430" title="Polish–Lithuanian union" label="Polish–Lithuanian polity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093720" start="19438" end="19448" title="real union" label="real union"/>
<link wikidata="Q183464" start="19584" end="19591" title="Livonia" label="Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q246863" start="19671" end="19683" title="Livonian War" label="Livonian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q970753" start="19704" end="19725" title="executionist movement" label="executionist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q501844" start="19799" end="19839" title="magnates of Poland and Lithuania" label="magnate families of Poland and Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q158004" start="19863" end="19871" title="Piotrków Trybunalski" label="Piotrków"/>
<link wikidata="Q749576" start="19912" end="19927" title="Polish Brethren" label="Polish Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="19943" end="19953" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492456" start="19974" end="19985" title="Brest Bible" label="Brest Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="20013" end="20020" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q963303" start="20206" end="20221" title="Union of Lublin" label="Union of Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="20246" end="20276" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660626" start="20448" end="20466" title="Sejm of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="central parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064448" start="20471" end="20487" title="sejmik" label="local assemblies"/>
<link wikidata="Q584683" start="20507" end="20520" title="elective monarchy" label="elected kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="20732" end="20751" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="21097" end="21112" title="Western culture" label="Western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q639715" start="21119" end="21141" title="Polonization" label="Polish characteristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q166185" start="21496" end="21516" title="Warsaw Confederation" label="Warsaw Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q53448" start="21643" end="21662" title="Henry III of France" label="Henry III of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156016" start="21698" end="21711" title="Royal elections in Poland" label="free election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095146" start="21797" end="21811" title="pacta conventa" label="pacta conventa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370385" start="21929" end="21945" title="heir presumptive" label="heir presumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q54030" start="22152" end="22167" title="Stephen Báthory" label="Stephen Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q52971" start="22372" end="22386" title="Crown Tribunal" label="Crown Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q210601" start="22551" end="22564" title="House of Vasa" label="House of Vasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q52940" start="22648" end="22661" title="Sigismund III Vasa" label="Sigismund III"/>
<link wikidata="Q54054" start="22681" end="22693" title="Władysław IV Vasa" label="Władysław IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="22880" end="22895" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="22949" end="22968" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11743202" start="22982" end="23036" title="Counter-Reformation in Poland" label="converts from Polish and Lithuanian Protestant circles"/>
<link wikidata="Q845668" start="23051" end="23065" title="Union of Brest" label="Union of Brest"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="23076" end="23094" title="Eastern Christianity" label="Eastern Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q472189" start="23129" end="23142" title="Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church" label="Uniate Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q581254" start="23210" end="23232" title="Zebrzydowski rebellion" label="Zebrzydowski rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q186096" start="23350" end="23356" title="Tsardom of Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q94080" start="23408" end="23424" title="Time of Troubles" label="Time of Troubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044829" start="23472" end="23490" title="Polish–Russian War (1609–1618)" label="Polish–Russian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="23717" end="23723" title="Swedish Empire" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="23748" end="23754" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645044" start="23766" end="23785" title="Polish–Swedish wars" label="Polish–Swedish wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="23808" end="23822" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q650411" start="23864" end="23870" title="Battle of Cecora (1620)" label="Cecora"/>
<link wikidata="Q860981" start="23883" end="23889" title="Battle of Khotyn (1621)" label="Khotyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7453267" start="23930" end="23937" title="serfdom in Poland" label="serfdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174694" start="23989" end="24006" title="Cossack uprisings" label="Cossack uprisings"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="24024" end="24041" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="24096" end="24118" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140492" start="24210" end="24222" title="Smolensk War" label="Smolensk War"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="24263" end="24278" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q53452" start="24433" end="24453" title="John II Casimir Vasa" label="John II Casimir Vasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485791" start="24681" end="24698" title="Polish Golden Age" label="Polish Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076173" start="24812" end="24819" title="Zaporozhian Cossacks" label="Cossack"/>
<link wikidata="Q641479" start="24820" end="24840" title="Khmelnytsky Uprising" label="Khmelnytsky Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q933023" start="24986" end="24998" title="liberum veto" label="liberum veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q525758" start="25233" end="25253" title="Pereyaslav Council" label="Treaty of Pereyaslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q186096" start="25319" end="25333" title="Tsardom of Russia" label="Tsar of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q654006" start="25339" end="25358" title="Second Northern War" label="Second Northern War"/>
<link wikidata="Q631163" start="25484" end="25498" title="Deluge (history)" label="Swedish Deluge"/>
<link wikidata="Q17335" start="25531" end="25546" title="Treaty of Oliva" label="Treaty of Oliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q688969" start="25634" end="25652" title="Treaty of Bromberg" label="Treaty of Bromberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q153091" start="25689" end="25705" title="Duchy of Prussia" label="Duchy of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q631991" start="25747" end="25775" title="Russo-Polish War (1654–1667)" label="Russo-Polish War (1654–1667)"/>
<link wikidata="Q721168" start="25877" end="25895" title="Truce of Andrusovo" label="Truce of Andrusovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872868" start="25936" end="25963" title="Lubomirski&amp;#x27;s rebellion" label="Lubomirski&amp;#x27;s rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045287" start="26061" end="26072" title="Slavery in the Ottoman Empire" label="slave raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q160440" start="26080" end="26094" title="Crimean Khanate" label="Crimean Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138117" start="26160" end="26177" title="Merkuriusz Polski Ordynaryjny" label="Merkuriusz Polski"/>
<link wikidata="Q69461" start="26408" end="26414" title="Early modern France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q54041" start="26477" end="26504" title="Michał Korybut Wiśniowiecki" label="Michał Korybut Wiśniowiecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q74298" start="26573" end="26601" title="Polish–Ottoman War (1672–76)" label="Polish–Ottoman War (1672–76)"/>
<link wikidata="Q53454" start="26690" end="26707" title="John III Sobieski" label="John III Sobieski"/>
<link wikidata="Q9360767" start="26812" end="26829" title="Treaty of Jaworów" label="Treaty of Jaworów"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="27029" end="27035" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636391" start="27044" end="27060" title="Battle of Khotyn (1673)" label="Battle of Khotyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="27113" end="27120" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q200855" start="27138" end="27154" title="Battle of Vienna" label="Battle of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361299" start="27356" end="27388" title="Treaty of Perpetual Peace (1686)" label="Treaty of Perpetual Peace (1686)"/>
<link wikidata="Q597506" start="27470" end="27495" title="First Partition of Poland" label="First Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202" start="28248" end="28253" title="Saxony" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q152909" start="28254" end="28269" title="House of Wettin" label="House of Wettin"/>
<link wikidata="Q53437" start="28292" end="28314" title="Augustus II the Strong" label="Augustus II the Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q53438" start="28443" end="28455" title="Augustus III of Poland" label="Augustus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q22722" start="28532" end="28546" title="prince-elector" label="prince-elector"/>
<link wikidata="Q156199" start="28551" end="28557" title="Electorate of Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q151616" start="28676" end="28694" title="Great Northern War" label="Great Northern War"/>
<link wikidata="Q54022" start="28845" end="28866" title="Stanisław Leszczyński" label="Stanisław Leszczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q561415" start="28956" end="28967" title="Silent Sejm" label="Silent Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q186096" start="29039" end="29046" title="Tsardom of Russia" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q978929" start="29109" end="29123" title="Golden Liberty" label="Golden Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q457509" start="29369" end="29384" title="Tumult of Thorn (Toruń)" label="Tumult of Thorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="29403" end="29409" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="29411" end="29418" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="29423" end="29430" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9360733" start="29522" end="29554" title="Treaty of the Three Black Eagles" label="Treaty of the Three Black Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q212658" start="29642" end="29670" title="War of the Polish Succession" label="War of the Polish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="29845" end="29863" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="29957" end="29964" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="29974" end="29991" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q699849" start="29999" end="30012" title="Silesian Wars" label="Silesian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="30021" end="30035" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q156199" start="30069" end="30089" title="Electorate of Saxony" label="Electorate of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796477" start="30188" end="30208" title="Enlightenment in Poland" label="Polish Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q167935" start="30303" end="30318" title="Załuski Library" label="Załuski Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q890246" start="30680" end="30691" title="Czartoryski" label="Czartoryski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939627" start="30720" end="30739" title="Familia (political party)" label="&amp;quot;Familia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="30933" end="30939" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="30950" end="30956" title="Gdańsk" label="Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q187588" start="31043" end="31055" title="social class" label="social class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156016" start="31320" end="31334" title="Royal elections in Poland" label="royal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q54019" start="31372" end="31400" title="Stanisław August Poniatowski" label="Stanisław August Poniatowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="31511" end="31530" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q874784" start="31877" end="31894" title="Bar Confederation" label="Bar Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="32253" end="32267" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q33550" start="32428" end="32447" title="Frederick the Great" label="Frederick the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q597506" start="32495" end="32520" title="First Partition of Poland" label="First Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354098" start="32688" end="32702" title="Partition Sejm" label="Partition Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q21067567" start="32756" end="32769" title="fait accompli" label="fait accompli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562345" start="32810" end="32842" title="Commission of National Education" label="Commission of National Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q883433" start="33108" end="33118" title="Great Sejm" label="Great Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129096" start="33208" end="33234" title="Constitution of 3 May 1791" label="Constitution of 3 May 1791"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="33409" end="33426" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q911889" start="33662" end="33685" title="Targowica Confederation" label="Targowica Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="33725" end="33741" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352215" start="33856" end="33882" title="Polish–Russian War of 1792" label="Polish–Russian War of 1792"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025374" start="34195" end="34221" title="Second Partition of Poland" label="Second Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661055" start="34389" end="34400" title="Grodno Sejm" label="Grodno Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q191479" start="34777" end="34795" title="Tadeusz Kościuszko" label="Tadeusz Kościuszko"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="34836" end="34855" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435624" start="34918" end="34948" title="Kościuszko&amp;#x27;s proclamation" label="Kościuszko&amp;#x27;s proclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="34952" end="34958" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q849176" start="34994" end="35011" title="Kościuszko Uprising" label="national uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q4234899" start="35109" end="35119" title="kosynierzy" label="kosynierzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347209" start="35429" end="35444" title="Battle of Praga" label="Battle of Praga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453505" start="35458" end="35483" title="Third Partition of Poland" label="Third Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q181376" start="35695" end="35701" title="Grodno" label="Grodno"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="35738" end="35754" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="35829" end="35842" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="36746" end="36766" title="French Revolution" label="revolutionary France"/>
<link wikidata="Q158027" start="36768" end="36788" title="Jan Henryk Dąbrowski" label="Jan Henryk Dąbrowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102497" start="36796" end="36810" title="Polish Legions (Napoleonic period)" label="Polish Legions"/>
<link wikidata="Q482988" start="37025" end="37047" title="Poland Is Not Yet Lost" label="Poland Is Not Yet Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q151942" start="37081" end="37088" title="Mazurka" label="Mazurka"/>
<link wikidata="Q370069" start="37136" end="37149" title="Józef Wybicki" label="Józef Wybicki"/>
<link wikidata="Q152115" start="37164" end="37179" title="Duchy of Warsaw" label="Duchy of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="37244" end="37252" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q154596" start="37313" end="37331" title="Treaties of Tilsit" label="Treaties of Tilsit"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="37345" end="37366" title="Alexander I of Russia" label="Alexander I of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862957" start="37372" end="37399" title="Army of the Duchy of Warsaw" label="Army of the Duchy of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q154382" start="37408" end="37425" title="Józef Poniatowski" label="Józef Poniatowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q306150" start="37512" end="37529" title="Austro-Polish War" label="Austro-Polish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q684324" start="37598" end="37624" title="War of the Fifth Coalition" label="War of the Fifth Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q179250" start="37688" end="37713" title="French invasion of Russia" label="French invasion of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q814235" start="37730" end="37753" title="German Campaign of 1813" label="German Campaign of 1813"/>
<link wikidata="Q385984" start="37806" end="37841" title="Constitution of the Duchy of Warsaw" label="Constitution of the Duchy of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="37897" end="37914" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="37939" end="37950" title="land reform" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="38059" end="38077" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q342889" start="38117" end="38139" title="Adam Jerzy Czartoryski" label="Adam Jerzy Czartoryski"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933102" start="38226" end="38247" title="Polish question" label="Polish national cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="38486" end="38501" title="Congress Poland" label="Congress Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="38549" end="38563" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="38569" end="38583" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="38602" end="38606" title="tsar" label="tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157186" start="38626" end="38646" title="Constitution of the Kingdom of Poland" label="its own constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794340" start="38651" end="38659" title="Army of Congress Poland" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089765" start="38801" end="38813" title="Western Krai" label="Western Krai"/>
<link wikidata="Q129797" start="38899" end="38916" title="Russian Partition" label="Russian Partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683502" start="39058" end="39131" title="administrative division of Polish–Lithuanian territories after partitions" label="administrative division of Polish–Lithuanian territories after partitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q129791" start="39137" end="39155" title="Prussian Partition" label="Prussian Partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783098" start="39192" end="39212" title="Grand Duchy of Posen" label="Grand Duchy of Posen"/>
<link wikidata="Q185387" start="39272" end="39284" title="Suffrage" label="enfranchised"/>
<link wikidata="Q129794" start="39354" end="39372" title="Austrian Partition" label="Austrian Partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933418" start="39394" end="39411" title="Poverty in Austrian Galicia" label="its rural poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q501303" start="39417" end="39436" title="Free City of Cracow" label="Free City of Cracow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210074" start="40169" end="40211" title="Resistance movements in partitioned Poland (1795–1918)" label="resistance movements in partitioned Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q462964" start="40252" end="40269" title="November Uprising" label="November Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773905" start="40668" end="40694" title="Polish National Government (November Uprising)" label="Polish National Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="41003" end="41017" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q720008" start="41049" end="41065" title="Great Emigration" label="Great Emigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174101" start="41278" end="41286" title="Romanticism in Poland" label="Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q837672" start="41287" end="41292" title="Three Bards" label="poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q79822" start="41293" end="41308" title="Adam Mickiewicz" label="Adam Mickiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q243267" start="41310" end="41326" title="Juliusz Słowacki" label="Juliusz Słowacki"/>
<link wikidata="Q340122" start="41328" end="41342" title="Cyprian Norwid" label="Cyprian Norwid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268" start="41361" end="41376" title="Frédéric Chopin" label="Frédéric Chopin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029956" start="41504" end="41516" title="organic work" label="organic work"/>
<link wikidata="Q658197" start="41826" end="41849" title="Greater Poland uprising (1846)" label="Greater Poland uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q685372" start="41890" end="41905" title="Kraków uprising" label="Kraków uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q501303" start="42026" end="42045" title="Free City of Cracow" label="Free City of Cracow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4132516" start="42223" end="42241" title="Galician slaughter" label="Galician slaughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="42278" end="42282" title="serfdom" label="serf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7453267" start="42335" end="42350" title="Serfdom in Poland" label="mandatory labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635663" start="42373" end="42380" title="folwark" label="folwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q11837438" start="42465" end="42492" title="abolition of serfdom in Poland" label="abolition of Polish serfdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="42500" end="42515" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="42670" end="42687" title="Revolutions of 1848" label="Spring of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q266339" start="42714" end="42723" title="Józef Bem" label="Józef Bem"/>
<link wikidata="Q690959" start="42752" end="42774" title="Revolutions of 1848 in the Austrian Empire" label="revolutions in Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q473716" start="42779" end="42786" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1848" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699" start="42798" end="42816" title="German revolutions of 1848–49" label="German revolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q835649" start="42834" end="42865" title="Greater Poland uprising (1848)" label="Greater Poland uprising of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="43220" end="43235" title="Congress Poland" label="Congress Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="43259" end="43281" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Alexander II of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646631" start="43481" end="43484" title="Reds (January Uprising)" label="Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="43495" end="43504" title="Left-wing politics" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748389" start="43695" end="43700" title="Whites (January Uprising)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="43711" end="43721" title="Right-wing politics" label="right-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355574" start="43887" end="43909" title="Aleksander Wielopolski" label="Aleksander Wielopolski"/>
<link wikidata="Q473670" start="44137" end="44153" title="January Uprising" label="January Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q941645" start="44349" end="44365" title="Romuald Traugutt" label="Romuald Traugutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11837438" start="44587" end="44628" title="Abolition of serfdom in Poland" label="enfranchisement decree in Congress Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="44771" end="44781" title="capitalism" label="capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210053" start="45328" end="45346" title="Polish nationalism" label="Polish nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068091" start="45669" end="45681" title="Vistula Land" label="Vistula Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="45772" end="45779" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="45784" end="45790" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q332695" start="45953" end="45966" title="Russification" label="Russification"/>
<link wikidata="Q326128" start="45971" end="45984" title="Germanisation" label="Germanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="46084" end="46099" title="Polish language" label="Polish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q180086" start="46280" end="46287" title="Galicia (Eastern Europe)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="46493" end="46518" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austro-Hungarian Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092629" start="46707" end="46733" title="Polish Academy of Learning" label="Polish Academy of Learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q414147" start="46738" end="46757" title="academy of sciences" label="academy of sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029956" start="46822" end="46834" title="organic work" label="organic work"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178147" start="47114" end="47131" title="trade association" label="trade association"/>
<link wikidata="Q735828" start="47684" end="47704" title="Positivism in Poland" label="Positivism in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="47839" end="47850" title="bourgeoisie" label="bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="47976" end="47987" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="48130" end="48147" title="industrialisation" label="industrialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q81011" start="48333" end="48346" title="Upper Silesia" label="Upper Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q580" start="48800" end="48804" title="Łódź" label="Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q126781" start="49237" end="49252" title="Cieszyn Silesia" label="Cieszyn Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180086" start="49259" end="49266" title="Galicia (Eastern Europe)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="49352" end="49372" title="Lviv" label="Lemberg (Lwów, Lviv)"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="49377" end="49383" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="49424" end="49435" title="land reform" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q381142" start="49732" end="49746" title="intelligentsia" label="intelligentsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="49786" end="49798" title="middle class" label="middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q132603" start="50015" end="50026" title="proletariat" label="proletariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246302" start="50034" end="50049" title="Privilege (social inequality)" label="underprivileged"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="50292" end="50304" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="50341" end="50346" title="North America" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="50351" end="50364" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="50529" end="50543" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="50952" end="50961" title="socialism" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="50963" end="50974" title="nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q492050" start="50976" end="50984" title="agrarianism" label="agrarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059879" start="51195" end="51212" title="Proletariat (party)" label="First Proletariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q210355" start="51266" end="51284" title="National Democracy (Poland)" label="National Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4371233" start="51299" end="51352" title="Polish Social Democratic Party of Galicia" label="Polish Social Democratic Party of Galicia and Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q210431" start="51366" end="51388" title="Polish Socialist Party" label="Polish Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="51402" end="51409" title="Marxism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q967759" start="51410" end="51465" title="Social Democracy of the Kingdom of Poland and Lithuania" label="Social Democracy of the Kingdom of Poland and Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q647460" start="51552" end="51556" title="General Jewish Labour Bund in Lithuania, Poland and Russia" label="Bund"/>
<link wikidata="Q209158" start="51566" end="51585" title="Christian democracy" label="Christian democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102649" start="51679" end="51712" title="Polish Christian Democratic Party" label="Polish Christian Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="51793" end="51803" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q186192" start="51805" end="51816" title="Lithuanians" label="Lithuanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q483569" start="51818" end="51829" title="Belarusians" label="Belarusians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="51834" end="51838" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q767083" start="52132" end="52143" title="Prometheism" label="Prometheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133329" start="52189" end="52201" title="Young Poland" label="Young Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198855" start="52202" end="52219" title="cultural movement" label="cultural movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="52233" end="52241" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186" start="52421" end="52443" title="Marie Curie" label="Marie Skłodowska Curie"/>
<link wikidata="Q186161" start="52455" end="52464" title="ionizing radiation" label="radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="52517" end="52522" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318712" start="52561" end="52602" title="Revolution in the Kingdom of Poland (1905–07)" label="Revolution of 1905–1907 in Russian Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q184928" start="52862" end="52880" title="1905 Russian Revolution" label="Revolution of 1905"/>
<link wikidata="Q161590" start="52934" end="52947" title="Roman Dmowski" label="Roman Dmowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q885" start="52952" end="52967" title="Józef Piłsudski" label="Józef Piłsudski"/>
<link wikidata="Q210355" start="53033" end="53051" title="National Democracy (Poland)" label="National Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q210431" start="53095" end="53117" title="Polish Socialist Party" label="Polish Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649453" start="53420" end="53424" title="State Duma (Russian Empire)" label="Duma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396442" start="53550" end="53566" title="Kingdom of Galicia and Lodomeria" label="Austrian Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322583" start="54212" end="54226" title="Vilnius Region" label="Vilnius Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886497" start="54346" end="54370" title="Union of Active Struggle" label="Union of Active Struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="54493" end="54504" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="54550" end="54557" title="Allies of World War I" label="Entente"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865994" start="54697" end="54728" title="History of Poland during World War I" label="World War I in the Polish lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q180086" start="55414" end="55421" title="Galicia (Eastern Europe)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q685455" start="55443" end="55457" title="Polish Legions in World War I" label="Polish Legions"/>
<link wikidata="Q682645" start="55487" end="55508" title="Austro-Hungarian Army" label="Austro-Hungarian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q154573" start="55792" end="55805" title="Eastern Front (World War I)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="55819" end="55834" title="Congress Poland" label="Congress Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="55858" end="55872" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534916" start="55957" end="55976" title="Act of 5th November" label="Act of 5th November"/>
<link wikidata="Q696908" start="56010" end="56027" title="Kingdom of Poland (1917–1918)" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498665" start="56169" end="56181" title="Mitteleuropa" label="Mitteleuropa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252732" start="56362" end="56390" title="Provisional Council of State" label="Provisional Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308003" start="56398" end="56413" title="Regency Council (Poland)" label="Regency Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="56532" end="56550" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Republic of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q177859" start="56682" end="56693" title="Triple Entente" label="Allied side"/>
<link wikidata="Q122371" start="56706" end="56729" title="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk" label="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="56771" end="56778" title="German Empire" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q191957" start="57188" end="57209" title="Ignacy Jan Paderewski" label="Ignacy Jan Paderewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="57216" end="57237" title="Nicholas II of Russia" label="Nicholas II of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101534" start="57267" end="57286" title="February Revolution" label="February Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="57295" end="57313" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q882462" start="57432" end="57441" title="Blue Army (Poland)" label="Blue Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q698651" start="57456" end="57468" title="Józef Haller" label="Józef Haller"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="57612" end="57625" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985560" start="57742" end="57767" title="Polish National Committee (1917–19)" label="Polish National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="57860" end="57874" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q157648" start="57882" end="57897" title="Fourteen Points" label="Fourteen Points"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="57950" end="57956" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="58306" end="58322" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austro-Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q321197" start="58405" end="58412" title="Cieszyn" label="Cieszyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="58417" end="58423" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="58447" end="58451" title="Lviv" label="Lviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q842774" start="58478" end="58498" title="Polish–Ukrainian War" label="Polish–Ukrainian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q14430" start="58513" end="58529" title="Ignacy Daszyński" label="Ignacy Daszyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q37333" start="58592" end="58598" title="Lublin" label="Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170306" start="58835" end="58865" title="German Revolution of 1918–19" label="German Revolution of 1918–1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308003" start="58998" end="59013" title="Regency Council (Poland)" label="Regency Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="59531" end="59542" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="59609" end="59639" title="Paris Peace Conference, 1919" label="Paris Peace Conference of 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="59645" end="59665" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q216173" start="59853" end="59872" title="Free City of Danzig" label="Free City of Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q698027" start="60088" end="60124" title="Greater Poland uprising (1918–1919)" label="Greater Poland Uprising of 1918–1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q703893" start="60136" end="60154" title="Silesian Uprisings" label="Silesian uprisings"/>
<link wikidata="Q477392" start="60173" end="60197" title="1920 East Prussian plebiscite" label="East Prussian plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q574321" start="60211" end="60235" title="Upper Silesia plebiscite" label="Upper Silesia plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="60280" end="60286" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684359" start="60418" end="60454" title="Polish–Czechoslovak border conflicts" label="Polish–Czechoslovak border conflicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q126781" start="60460" end="60475" title="Cieszyn Silesia" label="Cieszyn Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q186284" start="60545" end="60562" title="Polish–Soviet War" label="Polish–Soviet War"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="60867" end="60876" title="Russian Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089540" start="60917" end="60955" title="Soviet westward offensive of 1918–19" label="Soviet westward offensive of 1918–1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q842774" start="61002" end="61022" title="Polish–Ukrainian War" label="Polish–Ukrainian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q457167" start="61056" end="61093" title="West Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="West Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="61179" end="61186" title="Allies of World War I" label="Entente"/>
<link wikidata="Q108314" start="61205" end="61218" title="Anton Denikin" label="Anton Denikin"/>
<link wikidata="Q104309" start="61226" end="61240" title="White movement" label="White movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600516" start="61318" end="61332" title="Kiev offensive (1920)" label="Kiev offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599614" start="61364" end="61386" title="Directorate of Ukraine" label="Directorate of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q243610" start="61394" end="61426" title="Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="61464" end="61471" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280" start="61473" end="61478" title="Minsk" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q821283" start="61791" end="61814" title="Battle of Warsaw (1920)" label="Battle of Warsaw (1920)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599728" start="61833" end="61858" title="Battle of the Niemen River" label="Polish military successes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076469" start="62043" end="62056" title="Peace of Riga" label="Peace of Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="62113" end="62127" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415843" start="62287" end="62307" title="communist revolution" label="communist revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="62357" end="62365" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116959" start="62469" end="62493" title="Żeligowski&amp;#x27;s Mutiny" label="Żeligowski&amp;#x27;s Mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q9346140" start="62540" end="62566" title="Lithuania–Poland relations" label="Lithuania–Poland relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495944" start="62597" end="62618" title="Polish–Lithuanian War" label="Polish–Lithuanian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="62706" end="62721" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364972" start="62751" end="62762" title="Intermarium" label="Intermarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="62847" end="62877" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="62949" end="62973" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076469" start="63370" end="63383" title="Peace of Riga" label="Peace of Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327128" start="63391" end="63408" title="Stanisław Grabski" label="Stanisław Grabski"/>
<link wikidata="Q158799" start="63435" end="63444" title="Berdychiv" label="Berdychiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q193965" start="63446" end="63465" title="Kamianets-Podilskyi" label="Kamianets-Podilskyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411476" start="64166" end="64171" title="Kresy" label="Kresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293310" start="64327" end="64338" title="Territorial changes of Poland immediately after World War II" label="compensated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607319" start="64420" end="64454" title="Recovered Territories" label="conquered areas of eastern Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="64886" end="64892" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="64897" end="64910" title="United Kingdom" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q928538" start="65206" end="65233" title="1919 Polish legislative election" label="Polish legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="65257" end="65261" title="Sejm" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3902557" start="65324" end="65342" title="Small Constitution of 1919" label="Small Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535435" start="65668" end="65696" title="March Constitution of Poland" label="March Constitution of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q55836" start="66240" end="66258" title="Gabriel Narutowicz" label="Gabriel Narutowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102558" start="66318" end="66335" title="National Assembly (Poland)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="66754" end="66765" title="Land reform" label="Land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q4237514" start="67097" end="67113" title="1923 Kraków riot" label="1923 Kraków riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q821376" start="67119" end="67144" title="German–Polish customs war" label="German–Polish customs war"/>
<link wikidata="Q470954" start="67423" end="67440" title="Władysław Grabski" label="Władysław Grabski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851730" start="68077" end="68085" title="May Coup (Poland)" label="May Coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q55844" start="68161" end="68184" title="Stanisław Wojciechowski" label="Stanisław Wojciechowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q916984" start="68750" end="68759" title="Centrolew" label="Centrolew"/>
<link wikidata="Q23868" start="68974" end="68988" title="Brest Fortress" label="Brest Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053068" start="69051" end="69086" title="1930 Polish legislative election" label="Polish legislative election of 1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q505989" start="69156" end="69208" title="Nonpartisan Bloc for Cooperation with the Government" label="Nonpartisan Bloc for Cooperation with the Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q586557" start="69236" end="69244" title="Sanation" label="Sanation"/>
<link wikidata="Q177253" start="69787" end="69809" title="show trial" label="staged legal processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653315" start="69844" end="69856" title="Brest trials" label="Brest trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q819159" start="69882" end="69904" title="Bereza Kartuska prison" label="Bereza Kartuska prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668049" start="70030" end="70040" title="internment" label="internment"/>
<link wikidata="Q605468" start="70136" end="70153" title="Communist Party of Poland" label="Polish communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564159" start="70210" end="70239" title="1937 peasant strike in Poland" label="1937 peasant strike in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11750920" start="70570" end="70612" title="Józef Piłsudski&amp;#x27;s cult of personality" label="Józef Piłsudski&amp;#x27;s cult of personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q126241" start="70703" end="70736" title="Soviet–Polish Non-Aggression Pact" label="Soviet–Polish Non-Aggression Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q126413" start="70753" end="70796" title="German–Polish declaration of non-aggression" label="German–Polish declaration of non-aggression"/>
<link wikidata="Q389389" start="71135" end="71145" title="Józef Beck" label="Józef Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2535435" start="71685" end="71703" title="March Constitution of Poland" label="March Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280229" start="71742" end="71760" title="April Constitution of Poland" label="April Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q210846" start="71958" end="71984" title="Polish government-in-exile" label="Polish government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q885" start="72102" end="72111" title="Józef Piłsudski" label="Piłsudski"/>
<link wikidata="Q389389" start="72116" end="72120" title="Józef Beck" label="Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q216173" start="72184" end="72190" title="Free City of Danzig" label="Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="72246" end="72256" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q969619" start="72332" end="72348" title="preventative war" label="preventative war"/>
<link wikidata="Q702246" start="72463" end="72495" title="German rearmament" label="Germany&amp;#x27;s rearmament effort"/>
<link wikidata="Q327858" start="72783" end="72798" title="Four-Power Pact" label="Four-Power Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q126413" start="73038" end="73057" title="German–Polish declaration of non-aggression" label="non-aggression pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="73287" end="73301" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210027" start="73613" end="73646" title="Polish culture in the Interbellum" label="Polish culture in the Interbellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="73823" end="73827" title="Lviv" label="Lwów"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="73832" end="73837" title="Vilnius" label="Wilno"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="74124" end="74140" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419090" start="74173" end="74194" title="industrial production" label="industrial production"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803767" start="74199" end="74220" title="gross national income" label="gross national income"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="74370" end="74382" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133730" start="74505" end="74530" title="Central Industrial Region (Poland)" label="Central Industrial Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q609655" start="74580" end="74601" title="Eugeniusz Kwiatkowski" label="Eugeniusz Kwiatkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q392933" start="74648" end="74661" title="arms industry" label="arms industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q385" start="74794" end="74800" title="Gdynia" label="Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="74854" end="74865" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210017" start="75004" end="75025" title="Polish census of 1931" label="Polish census of 1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="75121" end="75128" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="75612" end="75630" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q874884" start="75859" end="75869" title="Economic stagnation" label="stagnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q376303" start="76560" end="76573" title="Norman Davies" label="Norman Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="76811" end="76823" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="76831" end="76840" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="76841" end="76853" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="76987" end="77010" title="Invasion of Poland" label="German invasion of 1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200140" start="77057" end="77082" title="Piłsudski&amp;#x27;s colonels" label="Piłsudski&amp;#x27;s colonels"/>
<link wikidata="Q389389" start="77495" end="77505" title="Józef Beck" label="Józef Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115323" start="78029" end="78063" title="1938 Polish ultimatum to Lithuania" label="1938 Polish ultimatum to Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="78133" end="78142" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q161334" start="78148" end="78163" title="Klaipėda Region" label="Klaipėda Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="78315" end="78327" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="78353" end="78369" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684359" start="78374" end="78408" title="Polish–Czechoslovak border conflicts" label="annexed a small piece of territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q275618" start="78574" end="78609" title="German occupation of Czechoslovakia" label="German occupation of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q210671" start="78904" end="78925" title="National Radical Camp (1934)" label="National Radical Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617519" start="78970" end="78992" title="Camp of National Unity" label="Camp of National Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q295688" start="79094" end="79112" title="Edward Rydz-Śmigły" label="Edward Rydz-Śmigły"/>
<link wikidata="Q469577" start="79227" end="79239" title="Front Morges" label="Front Morges"/>
<link wikidata="Q191957" start="79301" end="79318" title="Ignacy Jan Paderewski" label="Ignacy Paderewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q153132" start="79320" end="79338" title="Władysław Sikorski" label="Władysław Sikorski"/>
<link wikidata="Q540177" start="79340" end="79354" title="Wincenty Witos" label="Wincenty Witos"/>
<link wikidata="Q62006" start="79356" end="79373" title="Wojciech Korfanty" label="Wojciech Korfanty"/>
<link wikidata="Q698651" start="79378" end="79390" title="Józef Haller" label="Józef Haller"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="79472" end="79484" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q210846" start="79497" end="79523" title="Polish government-in-exile" label="Polish government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q101886" start="79543" end="79565" title="Joachim von Ribbentrop" label="Joachim von Ribbentrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q152195" start="79658" end="79677" title="Anti-Comintern Pact" label="Anti-Comintern Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q216173" start="79722" end="79741" title="Free City of Danzig" label="Free City of Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="80018" end="80030" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q208164" start="80045" end="80057" title="puppet state" label="puppet state"/>
<link wikidata="Q126413" start="80152" end="80195" title="German–Polish declaration of non-aggression" label="German–Polish declaration of non-aggression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="80267" end="80279" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="80324" end="80331" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="80340" end="80349" title="Anschluss" label="Anschluss"/>
<link wikidata="Q571893" start="80419" end="80453" title="1939 German ultimatum to Lithuania" label="1939 German ultimatum to Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q918147" start="80529" end="80559" title="Anglo-Polish military alliance" label="Anglo-Polish military alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838120" start="80568" end="80597" title="Franco-Polish alliance (1921)" label="Franco-Polish alliance (1921)"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="81148" end="81156" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="81303" end="81312" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="81614" end="81637" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="81825" end="81843" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="81866" end="81878" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q918147" start="81901" end="81931" title="Anglo-Polish military alliance" label="Anglo-Polish military alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838120" start="81988" end="82008" title="Franco-Polish alliance (1921)" label="alliance with France"/>
<link wikidata="Q190882" start="82152" end="82162" title="Phoney War" label="Phoney War"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="82256" end="82265" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305266" start="82421" end="82446" title="Soviet invasion of Poland" label="Soviet invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="82561" end="82570" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q483569" start="82575" end="82585" title="Belarusians" label="Belarusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="82694" end="82717" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q114342" start="82821" end="82840" title="Romanian Bridgehead" label="Romanian Bridgehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="82904" end="82911" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q182240" start="83029" end="83044" title="Siege of Warsaw (1939)" label="Siege of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q704550" start="83050" end="83063" title="Battle of Hel" label="Battle of Hel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026941" start="83090" end="83127" title="Independent Operational Group Polesie" label="Independent Operational Group Polesie"/>
<link wikidata="Q26195" start="83345" end="83374" title="German–Soviet Frontier Treaty" label="German–Soviet Frontier Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q214357" start="83428" end="83444" title="Gerhard Weinberg" label="Gerhard Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667608" start="83482" end="83517" title="Polish contribution to World War II" label="Polish contribution to World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665859" start="83597" end="83624" title="cryptanalysis of the Enigma" label="cryptanalysis of the Enigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="83684" end="83690" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="84032" end="84048" title="Battle of France" label="Battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="84221" end="84238" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="84295" end="84315" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q700120" start="84402" end="84424" title="Occupation of Poland (1939–1945)" label="German-occupied Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276549" start="84465" end="84501" title="Polish areas annexed by Nazi Germany" label="Polish areas annexed by Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206012" start="84520" end="84544" title="German Reich" label="German &amp;quot;Reich&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q156111" start="84579" end="84597" title="General Government" label="General Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363019" start="84633" end="84664" title="Polish resistance movement in World War II" label="underground resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q210846" start="84671" end="84697" title="Polish government-in-exile" label="Polish government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="84721" end="84726" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="84753" end="84759" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757717" start="84862" end="84887" title="Sikorski–Mayski agreement" label="Sikorski–Mayski agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000653" start="84943" end="84960" title="Anders&amp;#x27; Army" label="Anders&amp;#x27; Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="85094" end="85113" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Soviet-German front"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="85165" end="85176" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q116080" start="85258" end="85282" title="Polish Underground State" label="Polish Underground State"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376710" start="85412" end="85444" title="Government Delegation for Poland" label="Government Delegation for Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="85528" end="85537" title="Home Army" label="Home Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q119879" start="85581" end="85600" title="Polish Armed Forces in the West" label="Polish Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q216184" start="85663" end="85676" title="Western Front (World War II)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q119879" start="85684" end="85715" title="Polish Armed Forces in the West" label="Polish Armed Forces in the West"/>
<link wikidata="" start="85775" end="85806" title="Polish Armed Forces in the East#Berling Army: 1943–1945" label="Polish Armed Forces in the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="85839" end="85852" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q687409" start="85911" end="85937" title="Polish Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Polish Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q569284" start="86023" end="86044" title="National Armed Forces" label="National Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q134301" start="86325" end="86339" title="Katyn massacre" label="Katyn massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="86632" end="86641" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="86707" end="86711" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q127013" start="86712" end="86726" title="Final Solution" label="Final Solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587808" start="86738" end="86761" title="the Holocaust in Poland" label="the Holocaust in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q160161" start="86812" end="86834" title="Warsaw Ghetto Uprising" label="Warsaw Ghetto Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q154607" start="86890" end="86903" title="Warsaw Ghetto" label="Warsaw Ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="86914" end="86916" title="Schutzstaffel" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6190055" start="86943" end="86983" title="Jewish ghettos in German-occupied Poland" label="Jewish ghettos in German-occupied Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q266706" start="87123" end="87149" title="Jewish Combat Organization" label="Jewish Combat Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="87342" end="87363" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Nazi invasion of 1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q210846" start="87386" end="87412" title="Polish government-in-exile" label="Polish government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q153132" start="87469" end="87487" title="Władysław Sikorski" label="Władysław Sikorski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434045" start="87519" end="87545" title="1943 Gibraltar B-24 crash" label="plane crash on 4 July 1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q256327" start="87652" end="87668" title="Wanda Wasilewska" label="Wanda Wasilewska"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="87753" end="87761" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143263" start="87784" end="87809" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363019" start="88073" end="88115" title="Polish resistance movement in World War II" label="Polish resistance movement in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402078" start="88152" end="88167" title="Warsaw Uprising" label="Warsaw Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="88303" end="88312" title="Home Army" label="Home Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="88733" end="88740" title="Vistula" label="Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q22796" start="89089" end="89118" title="planned destruction of Warsaw" label="planned destruction of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659023" start="89206" end="89223" title="First Polish Army (1944–1945)" label="Polish First Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q150974" start="89381" end="89398" title="Tehran Conference" label="Tehran Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="89473" end="89486" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="89492" end="89506" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="89516" end="89528" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293310" start="89640" end="89698" title="Territorial changes of Poland immediately after World War II" label="fundamentally changed after the conclusion of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q687409" start="89831" end="89857" title="Polish Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Polish Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q245113" start="89866" end="89890" title="Union of Polish Patriots" label="Union of Polish Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154256" start="89910" end="89932" title="State National Council" label="State National Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q40147" start="90054" end="90093" title="Polish Committee of National Liberation" label="Polish Committee of National Liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37333" start="90113" end="90119" title="Lublin" label="Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q527012" start="90229" end="90250" title="Stanisław Mikołajczyk" label="Stanisław Mikołajczyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q161227" start="90307" end="90323" title="Yalta Conference" label="Yalta Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773922" start="90383" end="90431" title="Provisional Government of the Republic of Poland" label="Provisional Government of the Republic of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q210846" start="90843" end="90862" title="Polish government-in-exile" label="government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q674419" start="90884" end="90924" title="Provisional Government of National Unity" label="Provisional Government of National Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q954443" start="91211" end="91227" title="Western betrayal" label="Western betrayal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210017" start="91665" end="91686" title="Polish census of 1931" label="Polish census of 1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q238990" start="91765" end="91804" title="United States Holocaust Memorial Museum" label="United States Holocaust Memorial Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="91832" end="91836" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="91971" end="91976" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="92065" end="92076" title="ethnic group" label="ethnicities"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="92097" end="92107" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q483569" start="92109" end="92120" title="Belarusians" label="Belarusians"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="92126" end="92133" title="Germans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q153813" start="92218" end="92236" title="extermination camp" label="extermination camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q152010" start="92246" end="92255" title="Treblinka extermination camp" label="Treblinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="92257" end="92266" title="Auschwitz concentration camp" label="Auschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q152658" start="92271" end="92278" title="Sobibór extermination camp" label="Sobibór"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="92396" end="92409" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q16836025" start="92500" end="92533" title="Expulsion of Poles by Nazi Germany" label="resettlement that started in 1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q156115" start="92595" end="92610" title="Generalplan Ost" label="Generalplan Ost"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="92693" end="92699" title="Slavs" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474378" start="92891" end="92946" title="Rescue of Jews by Poles during the Holocaust" label="rescue, shelter and protect Jews from the Nazi atrocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q156591" start="92948" end="92958" title="Yad Vashem" label="Yad Vashem"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="92967" end="92982" title="State of Israel" label="State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722429" start="93026" end="93053" title="Polish Righteous Among the Nations" label="Righteous Among the Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q381142" start="93179" end="93193" title="intelligentsia" label="intelligentsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q286474" start="93245" end="93271" title="German AB-Aktion in Poland" label="German AB-Aktion in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q702638" start="93273" end="93293" title="Operation Tannenberg" label="Operation Tannenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q134301" start="93302" end="93316" title="Katyn massacre" label="Katyn massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516823" start="93538" end="93563" title="History of the Jews in Poland" label="Jewish presence in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547540" start="93908" end="93922" title="Polish October" label="Polish October"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405494" start="93954" end="93982" title="1968 Polish political crisis" label="1968 Polish political crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q844787" start="94223" end="94261" title="Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists" label="Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q737212" start="94276" end="94300" title="Ukrainian Insurgent Army" label="Ukrainian Insurgent Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q695020" start="94317" end="94367" title="Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia" label="Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="94953" end="94957" title="Lviv" label="Lwów"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="94962" end="94967" title="Vilnius" label="Wilno"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="95076" end="95092" title="Nuremberg trials" label="Nuremberg trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q277476" start="95352" end="95369" title="Potsdam Agreement" label="Potsdam Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="95493" end="95516" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="95592" end="95601" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749" start="95610" end="95641" title="Kaliningrad Oblast" label="Königsberg area of East Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="95808" end="95815" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799" start="95827" end="95844" title="Wrocław" label="Breslau (Wrocław)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104720" start="95849" end="95872" title="Zielona Góra" label="Grünberg (Zielona Góra)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520" start="95886" end="95895" title="Pomerania" label="Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q393" start="95907" end="95925" title="Szczecin" label="Stettin (Szczecin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q103801" start="95974" end="95986" title="East Prussia" label="East Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="95999" end="96014" title="Gdańsk" label="Danzig (Gdańsk)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607319" start="96162" end="96183" title="Recovered Territories" label="Recovered Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q160928" start="96361" end="96372" title="Oder–Neisse line" label="Oder–Neisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q335255" start="96377" end="96383" title="Curzon Line" label="Curzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16837151" start="96714" end="96745" title="flight and expulsion of Germans from Poland during and after World War II" label="flight and expulsion of Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q160928" start="97285" end="97301" title="Oder–Neisse line" label="Oder–Neisse line"/>
<link wikidata="Q700924" start="97486" end="97507" title="End of World War II in Europe" label="surrender in May 1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q727603" start="97631" end="97642" title="Forced labor of Germans after World War II" label="labor camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926242" start="97655" end="97672" title="Zgoda labour camp" label="Zgoda labour camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q190415" start="97681" end="97694" title="Central Labour Camp in Potulice" label="Potulice camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536279" start="97780" end="97808" title="Flight and expulsion of Germans (1944–1950)" label="emigrate to post-war Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411476" start="97907" end="97940" title="Kresy" label="areas annexed by the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607319" start="97982" end="98007" title="Recovered Territories" label="former German territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607319" start="98251" end="98272" title="Recovered Territories" label="Recovered Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607319" start="98354" end="98375" title="Recovered Territories" label="Recovered Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q450355" start="98700" end="98739" title="Polish population transfers (1944–1946)" label="Polish population transfers (1944–1946)"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="98995" end="99004" title="Home Army" label="Home Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152591" start="99030" end="99077" title="Anti-communist resistance in Poland (1944–1946)" label="Anti-communist resistance in Poland (1944–1946)"/>
<link wikidata="Q154278" start="99223" end="99242" title="ethnic cleansing" label="ethnically cleansed"/>
<link wikidata="Q837881" start="99272" end="99278" title="Lemkos" label="Lemkos"/>
<link wikidata="Q547898" start="99354" end="99368" title="Population exchange between Poland and Soviet Ukraine" label="forcibly moved"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="99376" end="99390" title="Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Soviet Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422493" start="99465" end="99482" title="Operation Vistula" label="Operation Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530" start="99487" end="99495" title="Volhynia" label="Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180086" start="99576" end="99583" title="Galicia (Eastern Europe)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q747312" start="99640" end="99657" title="Timothy D. Snyder" label="Timothy D. Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q18233236" start="99839" end="99852" title="Jan Grabowski (historian)" label="Jan Grabowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774216" start="100249" end="100279" title="Anti-Jewish violence in Poland, 1944–1946" label="anti-Jewish violence in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q161227" start="100771" end="100787" title="Yalta Conference" label="Yalta Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q674419" start="100809" end="100849" title="Provisional Government of National Unity" label="Provisional Government of National Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q116080" start="101050" end="101074" title="Polish Underground State" label="Polish Underground State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633149" start="101118" end="101138" title="Trial of the Sixteen" label="Trial of the Sixteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320177" start="101302" end="101317" title="cursed soldiers" label="cursed soldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432024" start="101399" end="101426" title="Ministry of Public Security (Poland)" label="Ministry of Public Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q363" start="101524" end="101537" title="World War III" label="World War III"/>
<link wikidata="Q11789696" start="101574" end="101602" title="National Military Union" label="Polish right-wing insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747394" start="101619" end="101643" title="Amnesty of 1947" label="amnesty of February 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210061" start="101650" end="101694" title="1946 Polish people&amp;#x27;s referendum" label="Polish people&amp;#x27;s referendum of June 1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q687409" start="101725" end="101751" title="Polish Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Polish Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054954" start="101919" end="101962" title="1947 Polish legislative election" label="Polish legislative election of January 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q527012" start="102046" end="102067" title="Stanisław Mikołajczyk" label="Stanisław Mikołajczyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q692209" start="102207" end="102222" title="electoral fraud" label="electoral fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442008" start="102376" end="102402" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Party (1945–1949)" label="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q191675" start="102450" end="102463" title="mixed economy" label="mixed economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205544" start="102654" end="102665" title="pluralist democracy" label="pluralistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963246" start="102726" end="102741" title="state socialism" label="state socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855859" start="102774" end="102779" title="popular front" label="front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021587" start="102835" end="102858" title="Front of National Unity" label="Front of National Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q210846" start="102928" end="102954" title="Polish government-in-exile" label="Polish government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="103076" end="103105" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q537303" start="103197" end="103230" title="Polish United Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Polish United Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q668817" start="103347" end="103396" title="Constitution of the Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Constitution of the Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q687409" start="103495" end="103521" title="Polish Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Polish Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q210431" start="103563" end="103585" title="Polish Socialist Party" label="Polish Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q159603" start="103635" end="103652" title="Władysław Gomułka" label="Władysław Gomułka"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="103831" end="103840" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="104251" end="104255" title="Left-wing politics" label="Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293166" start="104526" end="104548" title="Edward Osóbka-Morawski" label="Edward Osóbka-Morawski"/>
<link wikidata="Q434797" start="104553" end="104571" title="Józef Cyrankiewicz" label="Józef Cyrankiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q55832" start="104896" end="104911" title="Bolesław Bierut" label="Bolesław Bierut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679661" start="104913" end="104925" title="Jakub Berman" label="Jakub Berman"/>
<link wikidata="Q40482" start="104930" end="104952" title="Konstantin Rokossovsky" label="Konstantin Rokossovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="104970" end="104985" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q165522" start="105284" end="105300" title="Stefan Wyszyński" label="Stefan Wyszyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q616026" start="105376" end="105416" title="Stalinist show trial of the Kraków Curia" label="Stalinist show trial of the Kraków Curia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="105442" end="105453" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="105712" end="105723" title="land reform" label="land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="105752" end="105764" title="nationalization" label="nationalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q514816" start="105911" end="105926" title="Three-Year Plan" label="Three-Year Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190277" start="105971" end="105984" title="Social ownership" label="socialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3578779" start="105989" end="106027" title="socialist economics" label="socialist restructuring of the economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7532591" start="106052" end="106065" title="Six-Year Plan" label="Six-Year Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q622662" start="106083" end="106097" title="heavy industry" label="heavy industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="106120" end="106133" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="106180" end="106193" title="Western Europe" label="West European"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314084" start="106465" end="106481" title="Collective farming" label="collective farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939471" start="106486" end="106504" title="worker cooperative" label="worker cooperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250063" start="106699" end="106735" title="Propaganda in the Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="political and ideological propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q375159" start="106740" end="106754" title="indoctrination" label="indoctrination"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341210" start="106884" end="106910" title="Education in the Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="universal public education"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="107188" end="107200" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q387927" start="107659" end="107724" title="PKWN Manifesto" label="land reform decree of the Polish Committee of National Liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18142" start="108078" end="108093" title="High-rise building" label="apartment block"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140920" start="108265" end="108321" title="20th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="20th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q277560" start="108343" end="108359" title="de-Stalinization" label="de-Stalinization"/>
<link wikidata="Q545740" start="108361" end="108373" title="Edward Ochab" label="Edward Ochab"/>
<link wikidata="Q52967" start="108695" end="108730" title="Poznań 1956 protests" label="Worker riots in Poznań in June 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547540" start="108983" end="108997" title="Polish October" label="Polish October"/>
<link wikidata="Q159603" start="109092" end="109109" title="Władysław Gomułka" label="Władysław Gomułka"/>
<link wikidata="Q217975" start="109299" end="109321" title="Znak (association)" label="Catholic lay activists"/>
<link wikidata="Q931904" start="109408" end="109454" title="Repatriation of Poles (1955–59)" label="repatriation of hundreds of thousands of Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146197" start="109530" end="109554" title="Collectivization in the Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Collectivization efforts"/>
<link wikidata="Q191582" start="109605" end="109612" title="Comecon" label="Comecon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051880" start="109827" end="109855" title="1957 Polish legislative election" label="legislative election of 1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q206313" start="109933" end="109994" title="real socialism" label="economic stagnation and curtailment of reforms and reformists"/>
<link wikidata="Q350681" start="110118" end="110130" title="Adam Rapacki" label="Adam Rapacki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193514" start="110165" end="110209" title="Culture in the Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Culture in the Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q381142" start="110244" end="110258" title="intelligentsia" label="intelligentsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058940" start="110421" end="110437" title="Censorship in the Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="state censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="110616" end="110631" title="popular culture" label="popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4989857" start="110701" end="110707" title="émigré" label="émigré"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="110765" end="110770" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750512" start="110783" end="110790" title="Kultura" label="Kultura"/>
<link wikidata="Q485500" start="110944" end="110961" title="Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty" label="Radio Free Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083688" start="111172" end="111191" title="Revisionism (Marxism)" label="Marxist revisionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253462" start="111227" end="111255" title="Episcopal Conference of Poland" label="Conference of Polish Bishops"/>
<link wikidata="Q876478" start="111267" end="111335" title="Letter of Reconciliation of the Polish Bishops to the German Bishops" label="Letter of Reconciliation of the Polish Bishops to the German Bishops"/>
<link wikidata="Q573912" start="111473" end="111499" title="Christianization of Poland" label="Christianization of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152005" start="111619" end="111644" title="Catholic Church in Poland" label="Catholic Church in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405494" start="111798" end="111826" title="1968 Polish political crisis" label="1968 Polish political crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q162401" start="111853" end="111866" title="Prague Spring" label="Prague Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q444370" start="111980" end="111986" title="Dziady (poem)" label="Dziady"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="112459" end="112463" title="Sejm" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q217975" start="112469" end="112485" title="Znak (association)" label="Znak Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="112688" end="112699" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356183" start="112734" end="112751" title="Mieczysław Moczar" label="Mieczysław Moczar"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="112844" end="112850" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="112858" end="112869" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="113120" end="113128" title="Zionism" label="Zionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143263" start="113392" end="113417" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773668" start="113444" end="113482" title="Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia" label="Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223777" start="113509" end="113526" title="Brezhnev Doctrine" label="Brezhnev Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="113637" end="113649" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q658048" start="113678" end="113694" title="Treaty of Warsaw (1970)" label="Treaty of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="113922" end="113934" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q760020" start="114081" end="114104" title="1970 Polish protests" label="Polish protests of 1970"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="114162" end="114172" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="114188" end="114194" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q385" start="114196" end="114202" title="Gdynia" label="Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q393" start="114208" end="114216" title="Szczecin" label="Szczecin"/>
<link wikidata="Q55834" start="114545" end="114564" title="Wojciech Jaruzelski" label="Wojciech Jaruzelski"/>
<link wikidata="Q312185" start="114584" end="114597" title="Edward Gierek" label="Edward Gierek"/>
<link wikidata="Q47074338" start="115111" end="115129" title="June 1976 protests" label="June 1976 protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779995" start="115135" end="115166" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Defence Committee" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Defence Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q318161" start="115432" end="115451" title="Helsinki Accords" label="Helsinki Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q17375334" start="115485" end="115505" title="Archbishop of Kraków" label="Archbishop of Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="115544" end="115561" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="115575" end="115590" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="115656" end="115662" title="pope" label="papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="115954" end="115969" title="planned economy" label="planned economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="116023" end="116038" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q176494" start="116046" end="116055" title="recession" label="recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q6695398" start="116516" end="116546" title="Lublin 1980 strikes" label="1980 general strikes in Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736541" start="116585" end="116600" title="Gdańsk Shipyard" label="Gdańsk Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="116759" end="116766" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044634" start="116772" end="116805" title="Inter-Enterprise Strike Committee" label="Inter-Enterprise Strike Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849351" start="116885" end="116895" title="21 demands of MKS" label="21 demands"/>
<link wikidata="Q55743" start="117102" end="117113" title="Jacek Kuroń" label="Jacek Kuroń"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378796" start="117115" end="117132" title="Karol Modzelewski" label="Karol Modzelewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q157282" start="117134" end="117151" title="Bronisław Geremek" label="Bronisław Geremek"/>
<link wikidata="Q55922" start="117156" end="117174" title="Tadeusz Mazowiecki" label="Tadeusz Mazowiecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q444" start="117282" end="117293" title="Lech Wałęsa" label="Lech Wałęsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q765885" start="117306" end="117322" title="Gdańsk Agreement" label="Gdańsk Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7664241" start="117419" end="117437" title="Szczecin Agreement" label="Szczecin Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="117558" end="117569" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q318370" start="118022" end="118037" title="Stanisław Kania" label="Stanisław Kania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003" start="118240" end="118250" title="Solidarity (Polish trade union)" label="Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="118454" end="118465" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646070" start="118552" end="118568" title="Rural Solidarity" label="Rural Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q765165" start="119232" end="119247" title="Leonid Brezhnev" label="Leonid Brezhnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="119407" end="119419" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="119424" end="119437" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="119644" end="119648" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q55834" start="119701" end="119720" title="Wojciech Jaruzelski" label="Wojciech Jaruzelski"/>
<link wikidata="Q41252" start="119861" end="119870" title="Bydgoszcz" label="Bydgoszcz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056803" start="120382" end="120410" title="History of Solidarity" label="Solidarity National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q455656" start="120815" end="120831" title="Czesław Kiszczak" label="Czesław Kiszczak"/>
<link wikidata="Q718605" start="121302" end="121323" title="martial law in Poland" label="martial law in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q136324" start="121354" end="121358" title="ZOMO" label="ZOMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571791" start="121416" end="121439" title="Soviet reaction to the Polish crisis of 1980–1981" label="Soviet leaders insisted"/>
<link wikidata="Q4477811" start="121664" end="121685" title="Pacification of Wujek" label="Pacification of Wujek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971000" start="121916" end="121954" title="Military Council of National Salvation" label="Military Council of National Salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q152416" start="122098" end="122106" title="Samizdat" label="Samizdat"/>
<link wikidata="Q156277" start="122558" end="122575" title="Jerzy Popiełuszko" label="Jerzy Popiełuszko"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="122789" end="122806" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q173100" start="122847" end="122855" title="Glasnost" label="Glasnost"/>
<link wikidata="Q167634" start="122860" end="122871" title="Perestroika" label="Perestroika"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584653" start="123570" end="123596" title="1988 Polish strikes" label="strikes across the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545702" start="123900" end="123910" title="Magdalenka, Masovian Voivodeship" label="Magdalenka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723169" start="124110" end="124126" title="Alfred Miodowicz" label="Alfred Miodowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q490099" start="124141" end="124176" title="All-Poland Alliance of Trade Unions" label="All-Poland Alliance of Trade Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q927194" start="124286" end="124310" title="Polish Round Table Agreement" label="Round Table Negotiations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355470" start="124336" end="124363" title="1989 Polish legislative election" label="Polish legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="124416" end="124433" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="fall of communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q927194" start="124517" end="124545" title="Polish Round Table Agreement" label="Polish Round Table Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206725" start="124606" end="124619" title="job guarantee" label="job guarantee"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="124706" end="124710" title="Sejm" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355470" start="124755" end="124782" title="1989 Polish legislative election" label="National Assembly elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q98975" start="124912" end="124918" title="Senate of Poland" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936064" start="125179" end="125197" title="April Novelization" label="April Novelization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165660" start="125290" end="125307" title="Contract Sejm" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115045" start="125308" end="125336" title="1989 Polish presidential election" label="elected the communist leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q55834" start="125346" end="125365" title="Wojciech Jaruzelski" label="Wojciech Jaruzelski"/>
<link wikidata="Q55922" start="125814" end="125832" title="Tadeusz Mazowiecki" label="Tadeusz Mazowiecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q729119" start="126015" end="126032" title="economic liberalism" label="economic liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q55932" start="126070" end="126088" title="Leszek Balcerowicz" label="Leszek Balcerowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648240" start="126152" end="126165" title="Shock therapy (economics)" label="shock therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="126316" end="126328" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="126366" end="126385" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="Revolutions of 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783933" start="126429" end="126439" title="thick line" label="thick line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="126489" end="126499" title="Witch-hunt#Figurative use of the term" label="witch-hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038409" start="126645" end="126655" title="indexation" label="indexation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="126666" end="126675" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982018" start="126802" end="126818" title="Balcerowicz Plan" label="Balcerowicz Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="126893" end="126904" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q668817" start="126918" end="126967" title="Constitution of the Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Constitution of the Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q537303" start="127137" end="127170" title="Polish United Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Polish United Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628291" start="127232" end="127274" title="Social Democracy of the Republic of Poland" label="Social Democracy of the Republic of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="127295" end="127322" title="Local government" label="Territorial self-government"/>
<link wikidata="Q15334" start="127482" end="127487" title="gmina" label="gmina"/>
<link wikidata="Q650979" start="127603" end="127630" title="German–Polish Border Treaty (1990)" label="German–Polish Border Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="127637" end="127644" title="German reunification" label="unified"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="127645" end="127652" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q673527" start="127697" end="127718" title="1990 Polish presidential election" label="was elected president"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054799" start="127792" end="127811" title="president of Poland" label="president of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608105" start="127827" end="127860" title="1991 Polish parliamentary election" label="first free parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355470" start="128116" end="128129" title="1989 Polish legislative election" label="1989 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q681139" start="128138" end="128151" title="1993 Polish parliamentary election" label="1993 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q953174" start="128175" end="128189" title="Democratic Left Alliance (Poland)" label="post-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465139" start="128254" end="128278" title="Northern Group of Forces" label="Northern Group of Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q55758" start="128333" end="128355" title="Aleksander Kwaśniewski" label="Aleksander Kwaśniewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628291" start="128363" end="128386" title="Social Democracy of the Republic of Poland" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q961507" start="128493" end="128515" title="Constitution of Poland" label="Constitution of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154297" start="128576" end="128602" title="Small Constitution of 1992" label="Small Constitution of 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q668817" start="128630" end="128652" title="Constitution of the Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="communist constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="128669" end="128673" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q282696" start="128699" end="128718" title="Polish Armed Forces" label="Polish Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="128750" end="128758" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="128767" end="128797" title="War in Afghanistan (2001–2021)" label="War in Afghanistan (2001–2021)"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="128817" end="128831" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230874" start="128847" end="128866" title="2004 enlargement of the European Union" label="enlargement in 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q786661" start="128884" end="128899" title="Poland and the euro" label="has not adopted"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="128904" end="128908" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q123213" start="128964" end="128976" title="Polish złoty" label="Polish złoty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757" start="129011" end="129025" title="Lech Kaczyński" label="Lech Kaczynski"/>
<link wikidata="Q131311" start="129106" end="129127" title="Smolensk air disaster" label="Smolensk air disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q156874" start="129169" end="129184" title="Law and Justice" label="Law and Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q104870125" start="129222" end="129240" title="2015–present Polish constitutional crisis" label="repeatedly clashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="129317" end="129336" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="129345" end="129364" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="129655" end="129668" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Communist era"/>
<link wikidata="Q23132741" start="129751" end="129773" title="2019 Polish parliamentary election" label="parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021144" start="129840" end="129855" title="Civic Coalition (Poland)" label="Civic Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771436" start="129895" end="129913" title="Mateusz Morawiecki" label="Mateusz Morawiecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q55917" start="129945" end="129963" title="Jarosław Kaczyński" label="Jarosław Kaczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q9151911" start="130085" end="130097" title="Andrzej Duda" label="Andrzej Duda"/>
<link wikidata="Q30632774" start="130121" end="130131" title="2020 Polish presidential election" label="re-elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="130213" end="130245" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q84081860" start="130722" end="130730" title="2023 Polish parliamentary election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q946" start="130787" end="130798" title="Donald Tusk" label="Donald Tusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q848197" start="130881" end="130900" title="parliamentary group" label="parliamentary group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021144" start="130913" end="130928" title="Civic Coalition (Poland)" label="Civic Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q118905408" start="130930" end="130939" title="Third Way (Poland)" label="Third Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q66807204" start="130945" end="130953" title="The Left (Poland)" label="The Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="131060" end="131067" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q318693" start="131253" end="131257" title="CSTO" label="CSTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="131453" end="131457" title="Sejm" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292904" start="131543" end="131568" title="Historia narodu polskiego" label="Historia narodu polskiego"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787" start="131570" end="131587" title="History of Europe" label="History of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516823" start="131589" end="131618" title="History of the Jews in Poland" label="History of the Jews in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q193360" start="131620" end="131643" title="List of Polish monarchs" label="List of Polish monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q55830" start="131645" end="131677" title="List of heads of state of Poland" label="List of heads of state of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q750375" start="131679" end="131712" title="List of prime ministers of Poland" label="List of prime ministers of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870242" start="131714" end="131740" title="History of the Polish Army" label="History of the Polish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155518" start="131742" end="131756" title="Polish hussars" label="Polish hussars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154909" start="131758" end="131776" title="Politics of Poland" label="Politics of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q639715" start="131840" end="131849" title="Polonization" label="Polonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="131864" end="131888" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297068" start="132008" end="132025" title="Lithuanian National Revival" label="modern Lithuanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q210355" start="132203" end="132237" title="National Democracy (Poland)" label="Polish modern nationalist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="132274" end="132281" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="132304" end="132310" title="France" label="Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="132311" end="132318" title="United Kingdom" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="132358" end="132370" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="132372" end="132378" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="132437" end="132451" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152925" start="132838" end="132864" title="Locarno Treaties" label="treaty with Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838120" start="132870" end="132881" title="Franco-Polish alliance (1921)" label="with Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826038" start="132886" end="132907" title="Franco-Soviet Treaty of Mutual Assistance" label="with the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q295688" start="132910" end="132928" title="Edward Rydz-Śmigły" label="Edward Rydz-Śmigły"/>
<link wikidata="Q389389" start="132995" end="133005" title="Józef Beck" label="Józef Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="133091" end="133098" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q275618" start="133134" end="133162" title="German occupation of Czechoslovakia" label="German-Czechoslovak conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684359" start="133212" end="133220" title="Polish–Czechoslovak border conflicts" label="disputes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811448" start="133235" end="133245" title="Trans-Olza" label="Trans-Olza"/>
<link wikidata="Q205530" start="133247" end="133251" title="Spiš" label="Spiš"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028412" start="133256" end="133261" title="Orava (region)" label="Orava"/>
<link wikidata="Q358834" start="133300" end="133322" title="Foreign and Commonwealth Office" label="British Foreign Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q152115" start="133455" end="133470" title="Duchy of Warsaw" label="Duchy of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959942" start="133675" end="133721" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Soviet Union)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Commissariat for Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378653" start="133782" end="133793" title="Ivan Maisky" label="Ivan Maisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q132899" start="133797" end="133815" title="Vyacheslav Molotov" label="Vyacheslav Molotov"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="133979" end="133992" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411476" start="134107" end="134120" title="Kresy" label="eastern lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076469" start="134145" end="134158" title="Peace of Riga" label="Peace of Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607319" start="134185" end="134200" title="Recovered Territories" label="eastern Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353353" start="134287" end="134300" title="Lower Silesia" label="Lower Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q552" start="134313" end="134317" title="Oder" label="Oder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455991" start="134326" end="134340" title="Eastern Neisse" label="Eastern Neisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q393" start="134417" end="134424" title="Szczecin" label="Stettin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043366" start="134511" end="134521" title="Zakerzonia" label="Zakerzonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q616206" start="134537" end="134549" title="Red Ruthenia" label="Red Ruthenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q761" start="134587" end="134596" title="Białystok" label="Białystok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895" start="134652" end="134668" title="Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Byelorussian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q747312" start="134896" end="134913" title="Timothy D. Snyder" label="Timothy D. Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q156744" start="135026" end="135042" title="collaborationism" label="collaborationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q693994" start="135043" end="135054" title="Blue Police" label="Blue Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570389" start="135267" end="135282" title="Jewish identity" label="Jewish identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q747312" start="135575" end="135592" title="Timothy D. Snyder" label="Timothy D. Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q605468" start="135707" end="135732" title="Communist Party of Poland" label="Communist Party of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154266" start="135737" end="135756" title="communism in Poland" label="existed in the past"/>
<link wikidata="Q187650" start="135780" end="135800" title="Great Purge" label="Stalin&amp;#x27;s purges"/>
<link wikidata="Q157682" start="135897" end="135929" title="Uprising of 1953 in East Germany" label="Uprising of 1953 in East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="135935" end="135963" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1956" label="Hungarian Revolution of 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q162401" start="135972" end="135985" title="Prague Spring" label="Prague Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="136140" end="136151" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q309118" start="136314" end="136323" title="Politburo" label="Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q190652" start="136338" end="136355" title="Central Committee" label="Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="136384" end="136402" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="Molotov-Ribbentrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="136697" end="136710" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q150974" start="136723" end="136740" title="Tehran Conference" label="Tehran Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="136756" end="136773" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="136778" end="136799" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967046" start="136904" end="136917" title="Piast Concept" label="Piast Concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="137965" end="137974" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="gimnazium"/>
<link wikidata="Q164348" start="138347" end="138375" title="Hungarian Revolution of 1956" label="Hungarian Revolution of 1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q159603" start="138377" end="138394" title="Władysław Gomułka" label="Władysław Gomułka"/>
<link wikidata="Q309118" start="138444" end="138453" title="Politburo" label="Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q537303" start="138461" end="138465" title="PZPR" label="PZPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q190652" start="138495" end="138512" title="Central Committee" label="Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="138719" end="138736" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q40482" start="138946" end="138968" title="Konstantin Rokossovsky" label="Konstantin Rokossovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164547" start="139143" end="139174" title="Khrushchev Thaw" label="followed Khrushchev&amp;#x27;s lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="139516" end="139527" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q277001" start="139776" end="139795" title="Tadeusz Jordan-Rozwadowski" label="Tadeusz Rozwadowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q165544" start="139800" end="139816" title="Władysław Anders" label="Władysław Anders"/>
<link wikidata="Q55844" start="139881" end="139904" title="Stanisław Wojciechowski" label="Stanisław Wojciechowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q586557" start="140026" end="140034" title="Sanation" label="Sanation"/>
<link wikidata="Q885" start="140054" end="140069" title="Józef Piłsudski" label="Józef Piłsudski"/>
<link wikidata="Q295688" start="140071" end="140089" title="Edward Rydz-Śmigły" label="Edward Rydz-Śmigły"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041348" start="140330" end="140350" title="Włodzimierz Zagórski (general)" label="Włodzimierz Zagórski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4715587" start="140386" end="140406" title="Aleksandra Piłsudska" label="Aleksandra Piłsudska"/>
<link wikidata="Q161590" start="140625" end="140638" title="Roman Dmowski" label="Roman Dmowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q153132" start="140700" end="140718" title="Władysław Sikorski" label="Władysław Sikorski"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="140825" end="140843" title="Invasion of Poland" label="Invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q210846" start="140918" end="140944" title="Polish government-in-exile" label="Polish government-in-exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q527012" start="141095" end="141116" title="Stanisław Mikołajczyk" label="Stanisław Mikołajczyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q245320" start="141141" end="141156" title="Zygmunt Berling" label="Zygmunt Berling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659023" start="141178" end="141195" title="First Polish Army (1944–1945)" label="First Polish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="141241" end="141248" title="Vistula" label="Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201987" start="141264" end="141274" title="Czerniaków" label="Czerniaków"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402078" start="141423" end="141438" title="Warsaw Uprising" label="Warsaw Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q422376" start="141715" end="141732" title="Operation Tempest" label="Operation Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q559771" start="141895" end="141914" title="Mieczysław Rakowski" label="Mieczysław Rakowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963246" start="142209" end="142218" title="state socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="142226" end="142240" title="socialism" label="socialist idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q131160" start="142393" end="142414" title="political correctness" label="political correctness"/>
<link wikidata="Q333024" start="142444" end="142453" title="Pluralism (political philosophy)" label="pluralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="142464" end="142475" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q586557" start="142536" end="142544" title="Sanation" label="Sanation"/>
<link wikidata="Q844787" start="142599" end="142637" title="Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists" label="Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q885" start="142787" end="142802" title="Józef Piłsudski" label="Józef Piłsudski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072548" start="142830" end="142872" title="Pacification of Ukrainians in Eastern Galicia" label="collective responsibility on the villagers"/>
<link wikidata="Q819159" start="142941" end="142963" title="Bereza Kartuska prison" label="Bereza Kartuska prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530" start="143099" end="143107" title="Volhynia" label="Volhynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180086" start="143210" end="143217" title="Galicia (Eastern Europe)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="143469" end="143477" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q747312" start="143610" end="143627" title="Timothy D. Snyder" label="Timothy D. Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642293" start="143904" end="143919" title="Halik Kochanski" label="Halik Kochanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q695020" start="143992" end="144005" title="Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia" label="soon exploded"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="144024" end="144036" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="144048" end="144091" title="History of the Ukrainian minority in Poland#Second Polish Republic" label="History of the Ukrainian minority in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="144183" end="144191" title="Voivode#Poland" label="wojewoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="144236" end="144245" title="municipality" label="municipal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="144246" end="144262" title="local government" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q150995" start="144962" end="144981" title="Peace of Westphalia" label="Peace of Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="145546" end="145553" title="serfdom" label="serfdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="145579" end="145594" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="145623" end="145632" title="Home Army" label="Home Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q473844" start="145689" end="145708" title="Bataliony Chłopskie" label="Bataliony Chłopskie"/>
<link wikidata="Q569284" start="145710" end="145731" title="National Armed Forces" label="National Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980468" start="145742" end="145756" title="Gwardia Ludowa" label="Gwardia Ludowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q632757" start="145764" end="145776" title="Armia Ludowa" label="Armia Ludowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885294" start="145992" end="146020" title="Holy Cross Mountains Brigade" label="Holy Cross Mountains Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q578276" start="146514" end="146526" title="Jerzy Eisler" label="Jerzy Eisler"/>
<link wikidata="Q208868" start="146918" end="146939" title="Andrzej Stelmachowski" label="Andrzej Stelmachowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q55932" start="147017" end="147035" title="Leszek Balcerowicz" label="Leszek Balcerowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="147044" end="147061" title="neoliberalism" label="extremely liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982018" start="147062" end="147079" title="Balcerowicz Plan" label="economic policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4539" start="147748" end="147759" title="cooperative" label="cooperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378796" start="147784" end="147801" title="Karol Modzelewski" label="Karol Modzelewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003" start="147866" end="147876" title="Solidarity (Polish trade union)" label="Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="147941" end="147959" title="History of Poland (1945–1989)#Final decade of the Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic (1980–90)" label="martial law period"/>
<link wikidata="Q165544" start="148137" end="148153" title="Władysław Anders" label="Władysław Anders"/>
<link wikidata="Q8923598" start="148159" end="148174" title="II Corps (Poland)" label="Polish II Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="148209" end="148225" title="Italian Campaign (World War II)" label="Italian Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q335288" start="148273" end="148296" title="Battle of Monte Cassino" label="Battle of Monte Cassino"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967046" start="148317" end="148330" title="Piast Concept" label="Piast Concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q778968" start="148365" end="148385" title="Jan Ludwik Popławski" label="Jan Ludwik Popławski"/>
<link wikidata="Q201615" start="148439" end="148444" title="Piast dynasty" label="Piast"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="148622" end="148627" title="Celts" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="148629" end="148645" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q611017" start="148875" end="148891" title="Lusatian Culture" label="Lusatian Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q552" start="148922" end="148926" title="Oder" label="Oder"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="148935" end="148942" title="Vistula" label="Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="148956" end="148964" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q221084" start="149197" end="149212" title="Marija Gimbutas" label="Marija Gimbutas"/>
<link wikidata="Q560549" start="149515" end="149535" title="North European Plain" label="North European Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403120" start="149655" end="149682" title="Felicjan Sławoj Składkowski" label="Felicjan Sławoj Składkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q53452" start="149863" end="149883" title="John II Casimir Vasa" label="John II Casimir Vasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="149943" end="149963" title="Partitions of Poland" label="Partitions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895507" start="150064" end="150077" title="Ben Macintyre" label="Ben Macintyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="150278" end="150286" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="150545" end="150559" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q157648" start="150567" end="150582" title="Fourteen Points" label="Fourteen Points"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="150731" end="150737" title="Gdańsk" label="Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="150745" end="150751" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q847840" start="150793" end="150806" title="History of Soviet Russia and the Soviet Union (1917–27)" label="Soviet Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q327932" start="151562" end="151576" title="Oskar Halecki" label="Halecki, Oskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995475" start="151928" end="151944" title="Hippocrene Books" label="Hippocrene Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q6100947" start="152491" end="152514" title="Iwo Cyprian Pogonowski" label="Pogonowski, Iwo Cyprian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832516" start="153493" end="153513" title="Aleksander Gieysztor" label="Aleksander Gieysztor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809178" start="153572" end="153589" title="Stefan Kieniewicz" label="Stefan Kieniewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q350932" start="153662" end="153676" title="Jerzy Topolski" label="Jerzy Topolski"/>
<link wikidata="Q5728457" start="154512" end="154539" title="Henry Smith Williams" label="Williams, Henry Smith (Ed.)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13773" wikidata="Q744598" url="?curid=13773" title="Hradčany">
<text>Hradčany (; ), is the district of the city of Prague, Czech Republic surrounding Prague Castle.

The castle is one of the biggest in the world at about in length and an average of about wide. Its history stretches back to the 9th century. St Vitus Cathedral is located in the castle area.

Most of the district consists of noble historical palaces. There are many other attractions for visitors: romantic nooks, peaceful places and beautiful lookouts.

Hradčany was an independent borough until 1784, when the four independent boroughs that had formerly constituted Prague were proclaimed a single city. The other three were Malá Strana (, Lesser Quarter), Staré Město (, Old Town) and Nové Město (, New Town).

== Demographics ==
==References==

==External links==
* Official Website of the City of Prague
* Hradčany - Prague-wiki

==Photo gallery==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q744598" start="0" end="8" title="Hradčany" label="Hradčany"/>
<link wikidata="Q585444" start="22" end="30" title="Districts of Prague" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="46" end="52" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="54" end="68" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193369" start="81" end="94" title="Prague Castle" label="Prague Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5949" start="239" end="257" title="St Vitus Cathedral" label="St Vitus Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="" start="340" end="347" title=":Category:Palaces in Prague" label="palaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q753289" start="625" end="636" title="Malá Strana" label="Malá Strana"/>
<link wikidata="Q748211" start="657" end="668" title="Old Town (Prague)" label="Staré Město"/>
<link wikidata="Q753219" start="686" end="696" title="New Town, Prague" label="Nové Město"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13774" wikidata="Q16555" url="?curid=13774" title="Houston">
<text>Houston ( ) is the most populous city in the U.S. state of Texas and in the Southern United States. Located in Southeast Texas near Galveston Bay and the Gulf of Mexico, it is the seat of Harris County, as well as the principal city of the Greater Houston metropolitan area, the fifth-most populous metropolitan statistical area in the United States and the second-most populous in Texas after Dallas–Fort Worth. With a population of 2,314,157 in 2023, Houston is the fourth-most populous city in the United States after New York City, Los Angeles, and Chicago, and the sixth-most populous city in North America. Houston is the southeast anchor of the greater megaregion known as the Texas Triangle.

Comprising a land area of , Houston is the ninth-most expansive city in the United States (including consolidated city-counties). It is the largest city in the United States by total area whose government is not consolidated with a county, parish, or borough. Though primarily in Harris County, small portions of the city extend into Fort Bend and Montgomery counties, bordering other principal communities of Greater Houston such as Sugar Land and The Woodlands.

Houston was founded by land investors on August 30, 1836, at the confluence of Buffalo Bayou and White Oak Bayou (a point now known as Allen&#x27;s Landing) and incorporated as a city on June 5, 1837. The city is named after former General Sam Houston, who was president of the Republic of Texas and had won Texas&#x27;s independence from Mexico at the Battle of San Jacinto east of Allen&#x27;s Landing. After briefly serving as the capital of the Texas Republic in the late 1830s, Houston grew steadily into a regional trading center for the remainder of the 19th century. The 20th century brought a convergence of economic factors that fueled rapid growth in Houston, including a burgeoning port and railroad industry, the decline of Galveston as Texas&#x27;s primary port following a devastating 1900 hurricane, the subsequent construction of the Houston Ship Channel, and the Texas oil boom. In the mid-20th century, Houston&#x27;s economy diversified, as it became home to the Texas Medical Center—the world&#x27;s largest concentration of healthcare and research institutions—and NASA&#x27;s Johnson Space Center, home to the Mission Control Center.

Since the late 19th century, Houston&#x27;s economy has had a broad industrial base in energy, manufacturing, aeronautics, and transportation. Leading in healthcare sectors and building oilfield equipment, Houston has the second-most &quot;Fortune&quot; 500 headquarters of any U.S. municipality within its city limits. The Port of Houston ranks first in the United States in international waterborne tonnage handled and second in total cargo tonnage handled.

Nicknamed the &quot;Bayou City&quot;, &quot;Space City&quot;, &quot;H-Town&quot;, and &quot;the 713&quot;, Houston has become a global city, with strengths in culture, medicine, and research. The city&#x27;s population comprises various ethnic and religious backgrounds, as well as a large and growing international community. Houston is the most diverse metropolitan area in Texas and has been described as the most racially and ethnically diverse major city in the U.S. It is home to many cultural institutions and exhibits, such as the Houston Museum District and the Houston Theater District.

==History==

Present-day Houston sits on land that was once occupied by the Karankawa and the Atakapa indigenous peoples for at least 2,000 years before the first known settlers arrived. These tribes are almost nonexistent today; this was most likely caused by foreign disease, and competition with various settler groups in the 18th and 19th centuries. However, the land then remained largely uninhabited from the late 1700s until settlement in the 1830s.

=== Early settlement to the 20th century ===
The Allen brothers—Augustus Chapman and John Kirby—explored town sites on Buffalo Bayou and Galveston Bay. According to historian David McComb, &quot;[T]he brothers, on August 26, 1836, bought from Elizabeth E. Parrott, wife of T.F.L. Parrott and widow of John Austin, the south half of the lower league [ tract] granted to her by her late husband. They paid $5,000 total, but only $1,000 of this in cash; notes made up the remainder.&quot; This was financed by assets inherited by Augustus&#x27;s wife, Charlotte Baldwin Allen. 

The Allen brothers ran their first advertisement for Houston just four days later in the &quot;Telegraph and Texas Register&quot;, naming the notional town in honor of Sam Houston, who would become President later that year. They successfully lobbied the Republic of Texas Congress to designate Houston as the temporary capital, agreeing to provide the new government with a state capitol building. About a dozen persons resided in the town at the beginning of 1837, but that number grew to about 1,500 by the time the Texas Congress convened in Houston for the first time that May. The Republic of Texas granted Houston incorporation on June 5, 1837, as James S. Holman became its first mayor. In the same year, Houston became the county seat of Harrisburg County (now Harris County).

In 1839, the Republic of Texas relocated its capital to Austin. The town suffered another setback that year when a yellow fever epidemic claimed about one life for every eight residents, yet it persisted as a commercial center, forming a symbiosis with its Gulf Coast port, Galveston. Landlocked farmers brought their produce to Houston, using Buffalo Bayou to gain access to Galveston and the Gulf of Mexico. Houston merchants profited from selling staples to farmers and shipping the farmers&#x27; produce to Galveston.

The great majority of enslaved people in Texas came with their owners from the older slave states. Sizable numbers, however, came through the domestic slave trade. New Orleans was the center of this trade in the Deep South, but slave dealers were in Houston. Thousands of enslaved black people lived near the city before the American Civil War. Many of them near the city worked on sugar and cotton plantations, while most of those in the city limits had domestic and artisan jobs.

In 1840, the community established a chamber of commerce, in part to promote shipping and navigation at the newly created port on Buffalo Bayou.

By 1860, Houston had emerged as a commercial and railroad hub for the export of cotton. Railroad spurs from the Texas inland converged in Houston, where they met rail lines to the ports of Galveston and Beaumont. During the American Civil War, Houston served as a headquarters for Confederate Major General John B. Magruder, who used the city as an organization point for the Battle of Galveston. After the Civil War, Houston businessmen initiated efforts to widen the city&#x27;s extensive system of bayous so the city could accept more commerce between Downtown and the nearby port of Galveston. By 1890, Houston was the railroad center of Texas.

In 1900, after Galveston was struck by a devastating hurricane, efforts to make Houston into a viable deep-water port were accelerated. The following year, the discovery of oil at the Spindletop oil field near Beaumont prompted the development of the Texas petroleum industry. In 1902, President Theodore Roosevelt approved a $1 million improvement project for the Houston Ship Channel. By 1910, the city&#x27;s population had reached 78,800, almost doubling from a decade before. African Americans formed a large part of the city&#x27;s population, numbering 23,929 people, which was nearly one-third of Houston&#x27;s residents.

President Woodrow Wilson opened the deep-water Port of Houston in 1914, seven years after digging began. By 1930, Houston had become Texas&#x27;s most populous city and Harris County the most populous county. In 1940, the U.S. Census Bureau reported Houston&#x27;s population as 77.5% White and 22.4% black.

=== World War II to the late 20th century ===
When World War II started, tonnage levels at the port decreased and shipping activities were suspended; however, the war did provide economic benefits for the city. Petrochemical refineries and manufacturing plants were constructed along the ship channel because of the demand for petroleum and synthetic rubber products by the defense industry during the war. Ellington Field, initially built during World War I, was revitalized as an advanced training center for bombardiers and navigators. The Brown Shipbuilding Company was founded in 1942 to build ships for the U.S. Navy during World War II. Due to the boom in defense jobs, thousands of new workers migrated to the city, both black, and white people competing for the higher-paying jobs. President Roosevelt had established a policy of nondiscrimination for defense contractors, and black people gained some opportunities, especially in shipbuilding, although not without resistance from white people and increasing social tensions that erupted into occasional violence. Economic gains of black people who entered defense industries continued in the postwar years.

In 1945, the M.D. Anderson Foundation formed the Texas Medical Center. After the war, Houston&#x27;s economy reverted to being primarily port-driven. In 1948, the city annexed several unincorporated areas, more than doubling its size. Houston proper began to spread across the region. In 1950, the availability of air conditioning provided impetus for many companies to relocate to Houston, where wages were lower than those in the North; this resulted in an economic boom and produced a key shift in the city&#x27;s economy toward the energy sector.

The increased production of the expanded shipbuilding industry during World War II spurred Houston&#x27;s growth, as did the establishment in 1961 of NASA&#x27;s &quot;Manned Spacecraft Center&quot; (renamed the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center in 1973). This was the stimulus for the development of the city&#x27;s aerospace industry. The Astrodome, nicknamed the &quot;Eighth Wonder of the World&quot;, opened in 1965 as the world&#x27;s first indoor domed sports stadium.

During the late 1970s, Houston had a population boom as people from the Rust Belt states moved to Texas in large numbers. The new residents came for numerous employment opportunities in the petroleum industry, created as a result of the Arab oil embargo. With the increase in professional jobs, Houston has become a destination for many college-educated persons, most recently including African Americans in a reverse Great Migration from northern areas.

In 1997, Houstonians elected Lee P. Brown as the city&#x27;s first African American mayor.

=== Early 21st century ===

==== Population ====

Houston has continued to grow into the 21st century, with the population increasing 15.7% from 2000 to 2022.

==== Oil and gas ====
Oil and gas have continued to fuel Houston&#x27;s economic growth, with major oil companies including Phillips 66, ConocoPhillips, Occidental Petroleum, Halliburton, and ExxonMobil having their headquarters in the Houston area. In 2001, Enron Corporation, a Houston company with $100 billion in revenue, became engulfed in an accounting scandal which bankrupted the company in 2001.

==== Healthcare ====

Healthcare has emerged as a major industry in Houston. The Texas Medical Center is now the largest medical complex in the world and employs over 120,000 people.

==== Sports ====

Three new sports stadiums opened downtown in the first decade of the 21st century. In 2000, the Houston Astros opened their new baseball stadium, Daikin Park, in downtown adjacent to the old Union Station. The Houston Texans were formed in 2002 as an NFL expansion team, replacing the Houston Oilers, which had left the city in 1996. NRG Stadium opened the same year. In 2003, the Toyota Center opened as the home for the Houston Rockets. In 2005, the Houston Dynamo soccer team was formed. In 2017, the Houston Astros won their first World Series.

==== Flooding ====

Flooding has been a recurring problem in the Houston area. In June 2001, Tropical Storm Allison dumped up to of rain on parts of Houston, causing what was then the worst flooding in the city&#x27;s history and billions of dollars in damage, and killed 20 people in Texas. In August 2005, Houston became a shelter to more than 150,000 people from New Orleans, who evacuated from Hurricane Katrina. One month later, about 2.5 million Houston-area residents evacuated when Hurricane Rita approached the Gulf Coast, leaving little damage to the Houston area. This was the largest urban evacuation in the history of the United States. In May 2015, seven people died after 12 inches of rain fell in 10 hours during what is known as the Memorial Day Flood. Eight people died in April 2016 during a storm that dropped 17 inches of rain. The worst came in late August 2017, when Hurricane Harvey stalled over southeastern Texas, much like Tropical Storm Allison did sixteen years earlier, causing severe flooding in the Houston area, with some areas receiving over of rain. The rainfall exceeded 50 inches in several areas locally, breaking the national record for rainfall. The damage for the Houston area was estimated at up to $125 billion U.S. dollars, and was considered to be one of the worst natural disasters in the history of the United States, with the death toll exceeding 70 people. Houston&#x27;s lack of zoning laws allowed unregulated building of residential homes and other structures in flood-prone areas. However, it also resulted in more concentrated development in already urban areas than in wetlands and suburbs. Mayor Sylvester Turner tweeted of Hurricane Harvey that &quot;zoning wouldn&#x27;t have changed anything. We would have been a city with zoning that flooded.&quot;

==== 2024 Houston derecho ====

On May 16, 2024, a strong derecho caused widespread damage across the city and surrounding metropolitan area.

==Geography==
Houston is east of Austin, west of the Louisiana border, and south of Dallas. The city has a total area of ; this comprises over of land and covered by water. Most of Houston is on the gulf coastal plain, and its vegetation is classified as Western Gulf coastal grasslands while further north, it transitions into a subtropical jungle, the Big Thicket.

Much of the city was built on forested land, marshes, or swamps, and all are still visible in surrounding areas. Flat terrain and extensive greenfield development have combined to worsen flooding. Downtown stands about above sea level, and the highest point in far northwest Houston is about in elevation. The city once relied on groundwater for its needs, but land subsidence forced the city to turn to ground-level water sources such as Lake Houston, Lake Conroe, and Lake Livingston. The city owns surface water rights for of water a day in addition to a day of groundwater.

Houston has four major bayous passing through the city that accept water from the extensive drainage system. Buffalo Bayou runs through Downtown and the Houston Ship Channel, and has three tributaries: White Oak Bayou, which runs through the Houston Heights community northwest of Downtown and then towards Downtown; Brays Bayou, which runs along the Texas Medical Center; and Sims Bayou, which runs through the south of Houston and Downtown Houston. The ship channel continues past Galveston and then into the Gulf of Mexico.

===Geology===

Houston is a flat, marshy area where an extensive drainage system has been built. The adjoining prairie land drains into the city, which is prone to flooding. Underpinning Houston&#x27;s land surface are unconsolidated clays, clay shales, and poorly cemented sands up to several miles deep. The region&#x27;s geology developed from river deposits formed from the erosion of the Rocky Mountains. These sediments consist of a series of sands and clays deposited on decaying organic marine matter, that over time, transformed into oil and natural gas. Beneath the layers of sediment is a water-deposited layer of halite, a rock salt. The porous layers were compressed over time and forced upward. As it pushed upward, the salt dragged surrounding sediments into salt dome formations, often trapping oil and gas that seeped from the surrounding porous sands. The thick, rich, sometimes black, surface soil is suitable for rice farming in suburban outskirts where the city continues to grow.

The Houston area has over 150 active faults (estimated to be 300 active faults) with an aggregate length of up to , including the Long Point–Eureka Heights fault system which runs through the center of the city. Land in some areas southeast of Houston is sinking because water has been pumped out of the ground for many years. It may be associated with slip along the faults; however, the slippage is slow and not considered an earthquake, where stationary faults must slip suddenly enough to create seismic waves. These faults also tend to move at a smooth rate in what is termed &quot;fault creep&quot;, which further reduces the risk of an earthquake.

===Cityscape===

The city of Houston was incorporated in 1837 and adopted a ward system of representation shortly afterward, in 1840. The six original wards of Houston are the progenitors of the 11 modern-day geographically oriented Houston City Council districts, though the city abandoned the ward system in 1905 in favor of a commission government, and, later, the existing mayor–council government.

Locations in Houston are generally classified as either being inside or outside the Interstate 610 loop. The &quot;Inner Loop&quot; encompasses a area which includes Downtown, pre–World War II residential neighborhoods and streetcar suburbs, and newer high-density apartment and townhouse developments. Outside the loop, the city&#x27;s typology is more suburban, though many major business districts—such as Uptown, Westchase, and the Energy Corridor—lie well outside the urban core. In addition to Interstate 610, two additional loop highways encircle the city: Beltway 8, with a radius of approximately from Downtown, and State Highway 99 (the Grand Parkway), with a radius of . Approximately 470,000 people lived within the Interstate 610 loop, while 1.65 million lived between Interstate 610 and Beltway 8 and 2.25 million lived within Harris County outside Beltway 8 in 2015.

Though Houston is the largest city in the United States without formal zoning regulations, it has developed similarly to other Sun Belt cities because the city&#x27;s land use regulations and legal covenants have played a similar role. Regulations include mandatory lot size for single-family houses and requirements that parking be available to tenants and customers. In 1998, Houston relaxed its mandatory lot sizes from 5,000 square feet to 3,500 square feet, which spurred housing construction in the city dramatically.

Such restrictions have had mixed results. Though some have blamed the city&#x27;s low density, urban sprawl, and lack of pedestrian-friendliness on these policies, others have credited the city&#x27;s land use patterns with providing significant affordable housing, sparing Houston the worst effects of the 2008 real estate crisis. The city issued 42,697 building permits in 2008 and was ranked first in the list of healthiest housing markets for 2009. In 2019, home sales reached a new record of $30 billion.

In referendums in 1948, 1962, and 1993, voters rejected efforts to establish separate residential and commercial land-use districts. Consequently, rather than a single central business district as the center of the city&#x27;s employment, multiple districts and skylines have grown throughout the city in addition to Downtown, which include Uptown, the Texas Medical Center, Midtown, Greenway Plaza, Memorial City, the Energy Corridor, Westchase, and Greenspoint.


===Architecture===
Houston had the fifth-tallest skyline in North America (after New York City, Chicago, Toronto and Miami) and 36th-tallest in the world in 2015. A seven-mile (11 km) system of tunnels and skywalks links Downtown buildings containing shops and restaurants, enabling pedestrians to avoid summer heat and rain while walking between buildings. In the 1960s, Downtown Houston consisted of a collection of mid-rise office structures. Downtown was on the threshold of an energy industryled boom in 1970. A succession of skyscrapers was built throughout the 1970s—many by real estate developer Gerald D. Hines—culminating with Houston&#x27;s tallest skyscraper, the 75-floor, -tall JPMorgan Chase Tower (formerly the Texas Commerce Tower), completed in 1982. It is the tallest structure in Texas, 19th tallest building in the United States, and was previously 85th-tallest skyscraper in the world, based on highest architectural feature. In 1983, the 71-floor, -tall Wells Fargo Plaza (formerly Allied Bank Plaza) was completed, becoming the second-tallest building in Houston and Texas. Based on highest architectural feature, it is the 21st-tallest in the United States. In 2007, Downtown had over of office space.

Centered on Post Oak Boulevard and Westheimer Road, the Uptown District boomed during the 1970s and early 1980s when a collection of midrise office buildings, hotels, and retail developments appeared along I-610 West. Uptown became one of the most prominent instances of an edge city. The tallest building in Uptown is the 64-floor, -tall, Philip Johnson and John Burgee designed landmark Williams Tower (known as the Transco Tower until 1999). At the time of construction, it was believed to be the world&#x27;s tallest skyscraper outside a central business district. The new 20-story Skanska building and BBVA Compass Plaza are the newest office buildings built in Uptown after 30 years. The Uptown District is also home to buildings designed by noted architects I. M. Pei, César Pelli, and Philip Johnson. In the late 1990s and early 2000s, a mini-boom of midrise and highrise residential tower construction occurred, with several over 30 stories tall. Since 2000 over 30 skyscrapers have been developed in Houston; all told, 72 high-rises tower over the city, which adds up to about 8,300 units. In 2002, Uptown had more than of office space with of class A office space.

===Climate===
Houston&#x27;s climate is classified as humid subtropical (&quot;Cfa&quot; in the Köppen climate classification system), typical of the Southern United States. While not in Tornado Alley, like much of Northern Texas, spring supercell thunderstorms sometimes bring tornadoes to the area. Prevailing winds are from the south and southeast during most of the year, which bring heat and tropical moisture from the nearby Gulf of Mexico and Galveston Bay.

During the summer, temperatures reach or exceed an average of 106.5 days per year, including a majority of days from June to September. Additionally, an average of 4.6 days per year reach or exceed . Houston&#x27;s characteristic subtropical humidity often results in a higher apparent temperature, and summer mornings average over 90% relative humidity. Air conditioning is ubiquitous in Houston; in 1981, annual spending on electricity for interior cooling exceeded $600 million (equivalent to $ billion in ), and by the late 1990s, approximately 90% of Houston homes featured air conditioning systems. The record highest temperature recorded in Houston is at Bush Intercontinental Airport, on four occasions: September 4, 2000; August 27, 2011; and August 24 and August 27, 2023.

Houston has mild winters, with occasional cold spells. In January, the normal mean temperature at George Bush Intercontinental Airport is , with an average of 13 days per year with a low at or below , occurring on average between December 3 and February 20, allowing for a growing season of 286 days. Twenty-first century snow events in Houston include a storm on December 24, 2004, which saw of snow accumulate in parts of the metro area, and an event on December 7, 2017, which precipitated of snowfall. Snowfalls of at least on both December 10, 2008, and December 4, 2009, marked the first time measurable snowfall had occurred in two consecutive years in the city&#x27;s recorded history. Overall, Houston has seen measurable snowfall 38 times between 1895 and 2018. On February 14 and 15, 1895, Houston received of snow, its largest snowfall from one storm on record. The coldest temperature officially recorded in Houston was on January 18, 1930. The last time Houston saw single digit temperatures was on December 23, 1989. The temperature dropped to at Bush Airport, marking the coldest temperature ever recorded there. 1.7 inches of snow fell at George Bush Intercontinental Airport the previous day.

Houston generally receives ample rainfall, averaging about annually based on records between 1981 and 2010. Many parts of the city have a high risk of localized flooding due to flat topography, ubiquitous low-permeability clay-silt prairie soils, and inadequate infrastructure. During the mid-2010s, Greater Houston experienced consecutive major flood events in 2015 (&quot;Memorial Day&quot;), 2016 (&quot;Tax Day&quot;), and 2017 (Hurricane Harvey). Overall, there have been more casualties and property loss from floods in Houston than in any other locality in the United States. The majority of rainfall occurs between April and October (the wet season of Southeast Texas), when the moisture from the Gulf of Mexico evaporates extensively over the city.

Houston has excessive ozone levels and is routinely ranked among the most ozone-polluted cities in the United States. Ground-level ozone, or smog, is Houston&#x27;s predominant air pollution problem, with the American Lung Association rating the metropolitan area&#x27;s ozone level twelfth on the &quot;Most Polluted Cities by Ozone&quot; in 2017, after major cities such as Los Angeles, Phoenix, New York City, and Denver. The industries along the ship channel are a major cause of the city&#x27;s air pollution. The rankings are in terms of peak-based standards, focusing strictly on the worst days of the year; the average ozone levels in Houston are lower than what is seen in most other areas of the country, as dominant winds ensure clean, marine air from the Gulf. Excessive man-made emissions in the Houston area led to a persistent increase of atmospheric carbon dioxide over the city. Such an increase, often regarded as &quot;CO2 urban dome&quot;, is driven by a combination of strong emissions and stagnant atmospheric conditions. Moreover, Houston is the only metropolitan area with less than ten million citizens where such a CO2 dome can be detected by satellites.

Because of Houston&#x27;s wet season and proximity to the Gulf Coast, the city is prone to flooding from heavy rains; the most notable flooding events include Tropical Storm Allison in 2001 and Hurricane Harvey in 2017, along with most recent Tropical Storm Imelda in 2019 and Tropical Storm Beta in 2020. In response to Hurricane Harvey, Mayor Sylvester Turner of Houston initiated plans to require developers to build homes that will be less susceptible to flooding by raising them two feet above the 500-year floodplain. Hurricane Harvey damaged hundreds of thousands of homes and dumped trillions of gallons of water into the city. In places this led to feet of standing water that blocked streets and flooded homes. The Houston City Council passed this regulation in 2018 with a vote of 9–7. Had these floodplain development rules had been in place all along, it is estimated that 84% of homes in the 100-year and 500-year floodplains would have been spared damage.

In a recent case testing these regulations, near the Brickhouse Gulley, an old golf course that long served as a floodplain and reservoir for floodwaters, announced a change of heart toward intensifying development. A nationwide developer, Meritage Homes, bought the land and planned to develop the 500-year floodplain into 900 new residential homes. Their plan would bring in $360 million in revenue and boost city population and tax revenue. In order to meet the new floodplain regulations, the developers needed to elevate the lowest floors two feet above the 500-year floodplain, equivalent to five or six feet above the 100-year base flood elevation, and build a channel to direct stormwater runoff toward detention basins. Before Hurricane Harvey, the city had bought $10.7 million in houses in this area specifically to take them out of danger. In addition to developing new streets and single-family housing within a floodplain, a flowing flood-water stream termed a floodway runs through the development area, a most dangerous place to encounter during any future flooding event. Harris County, like other more rural counties, cannot direct developers where to build or not build via land use controls such as a zoning ordinance by Texas law, and instead can only impose general floodplain regulations for enforcement during subdivision approvals and building permit approvals.

==Demographics==


The 2020 U.S. census determined Houston had a population of 2,304,580. In 2017, the census-estimated population was 2,312,717, and in 2018 it was 2,325,502. An estimated 600,000 undocumented immigrants resided in the Houston area in 2017, comprising nearly 9% of the city&#x27;s metropolitan population. At the 2010 United States census, Houston had a population of 2,100,263 residents, up from the city&#x27;s 2,396 at the 1850 census.

Per the 2019 American Community Survey, Houston&#x27;s age distribution was 482,402 under 15; 144,196 aged 15 to 19; 594,477 aged 20 to 34; 591,561 aged 35 to 54; 402,804 aged 55 to 74; and 101,357 aged 75 and older. The median age of the city was 33.4. At the 2014-2018 census estimates, Houston&#x27;s age distribution was 486,083 under 15; 147,710 aged 15 to 19; 603,586 aged 20 to 34; 726,877 aged 35 to 59; and 357,834 aged 60 and older. The median age was 33.1, up from 32.9 in 2017 and down from 33.5 in 2014; the city&#x27;s youthfulness has been attributed to an influx of an African American New Great Migration, Hispanic and Latino American, and Asian immigrants into Texas. For every 100 females, there were 98.5 males.

There were 987,158 housing units in 2019 and 876,504 households. An estimated 42.3% of Houstonians owned housing units, with an average of 2.65 people per household. The median monthly owner costs with a mortgage were $1,646, and $536 without a mortgage. Houston&#x27;s median gross rent from 2015 to 2019 was $1,041. The median household income in 2019 was $52,338 and 20.1% of Houstonians lived at or below the poverty line.

=== Race and ethnicity ===

Houston is a majority-minority city. The Rice University Kinder Institute for Urban Research, a think tank, has described Greater Houston as &quot;one of the most ethnically and culturally diverse metropolitan areas in the country&quot;. Houston&#x27;s diversity, historically fueled by large waves of Hispanic and Latino Americans, and Asian immigrants, has been attributed to its relatively lower cost of living compared to most major cities, strong job market, and role as a hub for refugee resettlement.

Houston has long been known as a popular destination for African Americans due to the city&#x27;s well-established and influential African American community. Houston has become known as a black mecca akin to Atlanta because it is a major living destination for black professionals and entrepreneurs. The Houston area is home to the largest African American community in Texas and west of the Mississippi River. A 2012 Kinder Institute report found that, based on the evenness of population distribution between the four major racial groups in the United States (non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, Hispanic or Latino, and Asian), Greater Houston was the most ethnically diverse metropolitan area in the United States, ahead of New York City.

In 2019, according to the U.S. Census Bureau, non-Hispanic whites made up 23.3% of the population of Houston proper, Hispanics and Latino Americans 45.8%, blacks or African Americans 22.4%, and Asian Americans 6.5%. In 2018, non-Hispanic whites made up 20.7% of the population, Hispanics or Latino Americans 44.9%, blacks or African Americans 30.3%, and Asian Americans 8.2%. The largest Hispanic or Latino American ethnic groups in the city were Mexican Americans (31.6%), Puerto Ricans (0.8%), and Cuban Americans (0.8%) in 2018.

As documented, Houston has a higher proportion of minorities than non-Hispanic whites; in 2010, whites (including Hispanic whites) made up 57.6% of the city of Houston&#x27;s population; 24.6% of the total population was non-Hispanic white. Blacks or African Americans made up 22.5% of Houston&#x27;s population, American Indians made up 0.3% of the population, Asians made up 6.9% (1.7% Vietnamese, 1.3% Chinese, 1.3% Indian, 0.9% Pakistani, 0.4% Filipino, 0.3% Korean, 0.1% Japanese) and Pacific Islanders made up 0.1%. Individuals from some other race made up 15.69% of the city&#x27;s population. Individuals from two or more races made up 2.1% of the city.

At the 2000 U.S. census, the racial makeup of the city was 49.3% White, 25.3% black or African American, 5.3% Asian, 0.7% American Indian, 0.1% Pacific Islander, 16.5% from some other race, and 3.1% from two or more races. In addition, Hispanics and Latinos of any race made up 37.4% of Houston&#x27;s population in 2000, while non-Hispanic whites made up 30.8%. The proportion of non-Hispanic whites in Houston has decreased significantly since 1970, when it was 62.4%.

=== Sexual orientation and gender identity ===
Houston is home to one of the largest LGBT communities and pride parades in the United States. In 2018, the city scored a 70 out of 100 for LGBT friendliness. Jordan Blum of the &quot;Houston Chronicle&quot; stated levels of LGBT acceptance and discrimination varied in 2016 due to some of the region&#x27;s traditionally conservative culture.

Before the 1970s, the city&#x27;s gay bars were spread around Downtown Houston and what is now midtown Houston. LGBT Houstonians needed to have a place to socialize after the closing of the gay bars. They began going to Art Wren, a 24-hour restaurant in Montrose. LGBT community members were attracted to Montrose as a neighborhood after encountering it while patronizing Art Wren, and they began to gentrify the neighborhood and assist its native inhabitants with property maintenance. Within Montrose, new gay bars began to open. By 1985, the flavor and politics of the neighborhood were heavily influenced by the LGBT community, and in 1990, according to Hill, 19% of Montrose residents identified as LGBT. Paul Broussard was murdered in Montrose in 1991.

Before the legalization of same-sex marriage in the United States the marriage of Billie Ert and Antonio Molina, considered the first same-sex marriage in Texas history, took place on October 5, 1972. Houston elected the first openly lesbian mayor of a major city in 2009, and she served until 2016. During her tenure she authorized the Houston Equal Rights Ordinance which was intended to improve anti-discrimination coverage based on sexual orientation and gender identity in the city, specifically in areas such as housing and occupation where no anti-discrimination policy existed.

=== Religion ===
Houston and its metropolitan area are the third-most religious and Christian area by percentage of population in the United States, and second in Texas behind the Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex. Historically, Houston has been a center of Protestant Christianity, being part of the Bible Belt. Other Christian groups including Eastern and Oriental Orthodox Christianity, and non-Christian religions did not grow for much of the city&#x27;s history because immigration was predominantly from Western Europe (which at the time was dominated by Western Christianity and favored by the quotas in federal immigration law). The Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 removed the quotas, allowing for the growth of other religions.

According to a 2014 study by the Pew Research Center, 73% of the population of the Houston area identified themselves as Christians, about 50% of whom claimed Protestant affiliations and about 19% claimed Roman Catholic affiliations. Nationwide, about 71% of respondents identified as Christians. About 20% of Houston-area residents claimed no religious affiliation, compared to about 23% nationwide. The same study says area residents who identify with other religions (including Judaism, Buddhism, Islam, and Hinduism) collectively made up about 7% of the area population.

In 2020, the Public Religion Research Institute estimated 40% were Protestant and 29% Catholic; overall, Christianity represented 72% of the population. In 2020, the Association of Religion Data Archives determined the Catholic Church numbered 1,299,901 for the metropolitan area; the second-largest single Christian denomination (Southern Baptists) numbered 800,688; following, non-denominational Protestant churches represented the third-largest Christian cohort at 666,548. Altogether, however, Baptists of the Southern Baptist Convention, the American Baptist Association, American Baptist Churches USA, Full Gospel Baptist Church Fellowship, National Baptist Convention USA and National Baptist Convention of America, and the National Missionary Baptist Convention numbered 926,554. Non-denominational Protestants, the Disciples of Christ, Christian Churches and Churches of Christ, and the Churches of Christ numbered 723,603 altogether according to this study.

Lakewood Church in Houston, led by Pastor Joel Osteen, is the largest church in the United States. A megachurch, it had 44,800 weekly attendees in 2010, up from 11,000 weekly in 2000. Since 2005, it has occupied the former Compaq Center sports stadium. In September 2010, &quot;Outreach&quot; magazine published a list of the 100 largest Christian churches in the United States, and on the list were the following Houston-area churches: Lakewood, Second Baptist Church Houston, Woodlands Church, Church Without Walls, and First Baptist Church. According to the list, Houston and Dallas were tied as the second-most popular city for megachurches.

The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston, the largest Catholic jurisdiction in Texas and fifth-largest in the United States, was established in 1847. The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston claimed approximately 1.7 million Catholics within its boundaries as of 2019. Its co-cathedral is located within the Houston city limits, while the diocesan see is in Galveston. Other prominent Catholic jurisdictions include the Eastern Catholic Ruthenian Greek Catholic Church and Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church as well as the Personal Ordinariate of the Chair of Saint Peter, whose cathedral is also in Houston.

A variety of Eastern and Oriental Orthodox churches can be found in Houston. Immigrants from Eastern Europe, the Middle East, Ethiopia, India, and other areas have added to Houston&#x27;s Eastern and Oriental Orthodox population. As of 2011 in the entire state, 32,000 people actively attended Orthodox churches. In 2013 Father John Whiteford, the pastor of St. Jonah Orthodox Church near Spring, stated there were about 6,000-9,000 Eastern Orthodox Christians in Houston. The Association of Religion Data Archives numbered 16,526 Eastern and Oriental Orthodox Houstonians in 2020. The most prominent Eastern and Oriental Orthodox jurisdictions are the Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America, the Antiochian Orthodox Archdiocese of North America, the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria, and Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church.

Houston&#x27;s Jewish community, estimated at 47,000 in 2001, has been present in the city since the 1800s. Houstonian Jews have origins from throughout the United States, Israel, Mexico, Russia, and other places. As of 2016, over 40 synagogues were in Greater Houston. The largest synagogues are Congregation Beth Yeshurun, a Conservative Jewish temple, and the Reform Jewish congregations Beth Israel and Emanu-El. According to a study in 2016 by Berman Jewish DataBank, 51,000 Jews lived in the area, an increase of 4,000 since 2001.

Houston has a large and diverse Muslim community; it is the largest in Texas and the Southern United States, as of 2012. It is estimated that Muslims made up 1.2% of Houston&#x27;s population. As of 2016, Muslims in the Houston area included South Asians, Middle Easterners, Africans, Turks, and Indonesians, as well as a growing population of Latino Muslim converts. In 2000 there were over 41 mosques and storefront religious centers, with the largest being the &quot;Al-Noor&quot; Mosque (Mosque of Light) of the Islamic Society of Greater Houston.

The Hindu, Sikh, and Buddhist communities form a growing sector of the religious demographic after Judaism and Islam. Large Hindu temples in the metropolitan area include the BAPS Shri Swaminarayan Mandir Houston, affiliated with the Swaminarayan Sampradaya denomination in Fort Bend County, near the suburb of Stafford as well as the South Indian-style Sri Meenakshi Temple in suburban Pearland, in Brazoria County, which is the oldest Hindu temple in Texas and third-oldest Hindu temple in the United States.

Of the irreligious community 16% practiced nothing in particular, 3% were agnostic, and 2% were atheist in 2014.

==Economy==

Houston is recognized worldwide for its energy industry—particularly for oil and natural gas—as well as for biomedical research and aeronautics. Renewable energy sources—wind and solar—are also growing economic bases in the city, and the City Government purchases 90% of its annual 1 TWh power mostly from wind, and some from solar. Since the 2020s Houston has become a growing hub for technology startup firms and is the fastest growing sector of the city&#x27;s economy. Major technology and software companies within Greater Houston include Crown Castle, KBR, FlightAware, Cybersoft, Houston Wire &amp; Cable, and HostGator. Aylo, Go Daddy, and ByteDance have offices in the Houston area. On April 4, 2022, Hewlett Packard Enterprise relocated its global headquarters from California to the Greater Houston area. The Houston Ship Channel is also a large part of Houston&#x27;s economic base.

Because of these strengths, Houston is designated as a global city by the Globalization and World Cities Study Group and Network and global management consulting firm A.T. Kearney. The Houston area is the top U.S. market for exports, surpassing New York City in 2013, according to data released by the U.S. Department of Commerce&#x27;s International Trade Administration. In 2012, the Houston–The Woodlands–Sugar Land area recorded $110.3 billion in merchandise exports. Petroleum products, chemicals, and oil and gas extraction equipment accounted for roughly two-thirds of the metropolitan area&#x27;s exports last year. The top three destinations for exports were Mexico, Canada, and Brazil.

The Houston area is a leading center for building oilfield equipment. Much of its success as a petrochemical complex is due to its busy ship channel, the Port of Houston. In the United States, the port ranks first in international commerce and 16th among the largest ports in the world. Unlike most places, high oil and gasoline prices are beneficial for Houston&#x27;s economy, as many of its residents are employed in the energy industry. Houston is the beginning or end point of numerous oil, gas, and products pipelines.

The Houston–The Woodlands–Sugar Land metro area&#x27;s gross domestic product (GDP) in 2022 was $633 billion, making it the seventh-largest of any metropolitan area in the United States and larger than Iran&#x27;s, Colombia&#x27;s, or the United Arab Emirates&#x27; GDP. Only 27 countries other than the United States have a gross domestic product exceeding Houston&#x27;s regional gross area product (GAP). In 2010, mining (which consists almost entirely of exploration and production of oil and gas in Houston) accounted for 26.3% of Houston&#x27;s GAP up sharply in response to high energy prices and a decreased worldwide surplus of oil production capacity, followed by engineering services, health services, and manufacturing.

The University of Houston System&#x27;s annual impact on the Houston area&#x27;s economy equates to that of a major corporation: $1.1 billion in new funds attracted annually to the Houston area, $3.13 billion in total economic benefit, and 24,000 local jobs generated. This is in addition to the 12,500 new graduates the U.H. System produces every year who enter the workforce in Houston and throughout Texas. These degree-holders tend to stay in Houston. After five years, 80.5% of graduates are still living and working in the region.

Ninety-one foreign governments have established consular offices in Houston&#x27;s metropolitan area, the third-highest in the nation. Forty foreign governments maintain trade and commercial offices here with 23 active foreign chambers of commerce and trade associations. Twenty-five foreign banks representing 13 nations operate in Houston, providing financial assistance to the international community.

In 2013, Houston was identified as the number one U.S. city for job creation by the U.S. Bureau of Statistics after it was not only the first major city to regain all the jobs lost in the preceding economic downturn, but also after the crash, more than two jobs were added for every one lost. Economist and vice president of research at the Greater Houston Partnership Patrick Jankowski attributed Houston&#x27;s success to the ability of the region&#x27;s real estate and energy industries to learn from historical mistakes. Furthermore, Jankowski stated that &quot;more than 100 foreign-owned companies relocated, expanded or started new businesses in Houston&quot; between 2008 and 2010, and this openness to external business boosted job creation during a period when domestic demand was problematically low.

==Culture==

Located in the American South, Houston is a diverse city with a large and growing international community. The Greater Houston metropolitan area is home to an estimated 1.1 million (21.4 percent) residents who were born outside the United States, with nearly two-thirds of the area&#x27;s foreign-born population from south of the United States–Mexico border since 2009. Additionally, more than one in five foreign-born residents are from Asia. The city is home to the nation&#x27;s third-largest concentration of consular offices, representing 92 countries.

Many annual events celebrate the diverse cultures of Houston. The largest and longest-running is the annual Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo, held over 20 days from early to late March, and is the largest annual livestock show and rodeo in the world. Another large celebration is the annual night-time Houston Gay Pride Parade, held at the end of June. Other notable annual events include the Houston Greek Festival, Art Car Parade, the Houston Auto Show, the Houston International Festival, and the Bayou City Art Festival, which is considered to be one of the top five art festivals in the United States.

Houston is highly regarded for its diverse food and restaurant culture. Houston received the official nickname of &quot;Space City&quot; in 1967 because it is the location of NASA&#x27;s Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center. Other nicknames often used by locals include &quot;Bayou City&quot;, &quot;Clutch City&quot;, &quot;Crush City&quot;, &quot;Magnolia City&quot;, &quot;H-Town&quot;, and &quot;Culinary Capital of the South&quot;.

===Arts and theater===
The Houston Theater District, in Downtown, is home to nine major performing arts organizations and six performance halls. It is the second-largest concentration of theater seats in a Downtown area in the United States.

Houston is one of the few United States cities with permanent, professional, resident companies in all major performing arts disciplines: opera (Houston Grand Opera), ballet (Houston Ballet), music (Houston Symphony Orchestra), and theater (The Alley Theatre, Theatre Under the Stars). Houston is also home to folk artists, art groups and various small progressive arts organizations.

Houston attracts many touring Broadway acts, concerts, shows, and exhibitions for a variety of interests. Facilities in the Theater District include the Jones Hall—home of the Houston Symphony Orchestra and Society for the Performing Arts—and the Hobby Center for the Performing Arts.

The Museum District&#x27;s cultural institutions and exhibits attract more than 7 million visitors a year. Notable facilities include The Museum of Fine Arts, the Houston Museum of Natural Science, the Contemporary Arts Museum Houston, the Station Museum of Contemporary Art, the Holocaust Museum Houston, the Children&#x27;s Museum of Houston, and the Houston Zoo.

Located near the Museum District are The Menil Collection, Rothko Chapel, the Moody Center for the Arts and the Byzantine Fresco Chapel Museum.

Bayou Bend is a facility of the Museum of Fine Arts that houses one of America&#x27;s most prominent collections of decorative art, paintings, and furniture. Bayou Bend is the former home of Houston philanthropist Ima Hogg.

The National Museum of Funeral History is in Houston near the George Bush Intercontinental Airport. The museum houses the original Popemobile used by Pope John Paul II in the 1980s along with numerous hearses, embalming displays, and information on famous funerals.

Venues across Houston regularly host local and touring rock, blues, country, dubstep, and Tejano musical acts. While Houston has never been widely known for its music scene, Houston hip hop has become a significant, independent music scene that is influential nationwide. Houston is the birthplace of the chopped and screwed remixing-technique in hip-hop which was pioneered by DJ Screw from the city. Some other notable hip-hop artists from the area include Destiny&#x27;s Child, Don Toliver, Slim Thug, Paul Wall, Mike Jones, Bun B, Geto Boys, Trae tha Truth, Kirko Bangz, Z-Ro, South Park Mexican, Travis Scott and Megan Thee Stallion.

===Tourism and recreation===
The Theater District is a 17-block area in the center of Downtown Houston that is home to the Bayou Place entertainment complex, restaurants, movies, plazas, and parks. Bayou Place is a large multilevel building containing full-service restaurants, bars, live music, billiards, and Sundance Cinema. The Bayou Music Center stages live concerts, stage plays, and stand-up comedy.

Space Center Houston is the official visitors&#x27; center of NASA&#x27;s Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center. The Space Center has many interactive exhibits including Moon rocks, a Space Shuttle simulator, and presentations about the history of NASA&#x27;s crewed space flight program. Other tourist attractions include the Galleria (Texas&#x27;s largest shopping mall, in the Uptown District), Old Market Square, the Downtown Aquarium, and Sam Houston Race Park.

Houston&#x27;s current Chinatown and the Mahatma Gandhi District are two major ethnic enclaves, reflecting Houston&#x27;s multicultural makeup. Restaurants, bakeries, traditional-clothing boutiques, and specialty shops can be found in both areas.

Houston is home to 337 parks, including Hermann Park, Terry Hershey Park, Lake Houston Park, Memorial Park, Tranquility Park, Sesquicentennial Park, Discovery Green, Buffalo Bayou Park and Sam Houston Park. Within Hermann Park are the Houston Zoo and the Houston Museum of Natural Science. Sam Houston Park contains restored and reconstructed homes which were originally built between 1823 and 1905.

Of the 10 most populous U.S. cities, Houston has the largest total area of parks and green space, . The city also has over 200 additional green spaces—totaling over that are managed by the city—including the Houston Arboretum and Nature Center. The Lee and Joe Jamail Skatepark is a public skatepark owned and operated by the city of Houston, and is one of the largest skateparks in Texas consisting of a in-ground facility.

The Gerald D. Hines Waterwall Park in the Uptown District of the city serves as a popular tourist attraction and for weddings and various celebrations. A 2011 study by Walk Score ranked Houston the 23rd most walkable of the 50 largest cities in the United States.

=== Sports ===

Houston has sports teams for every major professional league except the National Hockey League. The Houston Astros are a Major League Baseball expansion team formed in 1962 (known as the &quot;Colt .45s&quot; until 1965) that have won the World Series in 2017 and 2022 and appeared in it in 2005, 2019, and 2021. It is the only MLB team to have won pennants in both modern leagues. The Houston Rockets are a National Basketball Association franchise based in the city since 1971. They have won two NBA Championships, one in 1994 and another in 1995, under star players Hakeem Olajuwon, Otis Thorpe, Clyde Drexler, Vernon Maxwell, and Kenny Smith. The Houston Texans are a National Football League expansion team formed in 2002. The Houston Dynamo is a Major League Soccer franchise that has been based in Houston since 2006, winning two MLS Cup titles in 2006 and 2007. The Houston Dash team plays in the National Women&#x27;s Soccer League, who won their first title in 2020. The Houston SaberCats are a rugby team that plays in Major League Rugby. The Houston Roughnecks are a future UFL team starting operations in 2024. They were previously in the XFL before it was announced they were moving to the UFL in 2024.

Daikin Park (home of the Astros) and Toyota Center (home of the Rockets), are in Downtown Houston. Houston has the NFL&#x27;s first retractable-roof stadium with natural grass, NRG Stadium (home of the Texans). Daikin Park is also a retractable-roof stadium. Toyota Center also has the largest screen for an indoor arena in the United States built to coincide with the arena&#x27;s hosting of the 2013 NBA All-Star Game. Shell Energy Stadium is a soccer-specific stadium for the Houston Dynamo, the Texas Southern Tigers football team, and Houston Dash, in East Downtown. Aveva Stadium (home of the SaberCats) is in south Houston. In addition, NRG Astrodome was the first indoor stadium in the world, built in 1965. Other sports facilities include Hofheinz Pavilion (Houston Cougars basketball), Rice Stadium (Rice Owls football), and NRG Arena. TDECU Stadium is where the University of Houston&#x27;s Cougars football team plays.

Houston has hosted several major sports events: the 1968, 1986 and 2004 Major League Baseball All-Star Games; the 1989, 2006 and 2013 NBA All-Star Games; Super Bowl VIII, Super Bowl XXXVIII, and Super Bowl LI, as well as hosting the 1981, 1986, 1994 and 1995 NBA Finals, winning the latter two, and hosting the 2005 World Series, 2017 World Series, 2019 World Series, 2021 World Series and 2022 World Series. The city won its first baseball championship during the 2017 event and won again 5 years later. NRG Stadium hosted Super Bowl LI on February 5, 2017. Houston will host multiple matches during the 2026 FIFA World Cup.

The city has hosted several major professional and college sporting events, including the annual Houston Open golf tournament. Houston hosts the annual Houston College Classic baseball tournament every February, and the Texas Kickoff and Bowl in September and December, respectively.

The Grand Prix of Houston, an annual auto race on the IndyCar Series circuit was held on a 1.7-mile temporary street circuit in NRG Park. The October 2013 event was held using a tweaked version of the 2006–2007 course. The event had a five-year race contract through 2017 with IndyCar. In motorcycling, the Astrodome hosted an AMA Supercross Championship round from 1974 to 2003 and the NRG Stadium since 2003.

Houston is also one of the first cities in the world to have a major esports team represent it, in the form of the Houston Outlaws. The Outlaws play in the Overwatch League and are one of two Texan teams, the other being the Dallas Fuel.

==Government==

The city of Houston has a strong mayoral form of municipal government. Houston is a home rule city and all municipal elections in Texas are nonpartisan. The city&#x27;s elected officials are the mayor, city controller and 16 members of the Houston City Council. The current mayor of Houston is John Whitmire, a Democrat elected on a nonpartisan ballot. Houston&#x27;s mayor serves as the city&#x27;s chief administrator, executive officer, and official representative, and is responsible for the general management of the city and for seeing all laws and ordinances are enforced.

The original city council line-up of 14 members (nine district-based and five at-large positions) was based on a U.S. Justice Department mandate which took effect in 1979. At-large council members represent the entire city. Under the city charter, once the population in the city limits exceeded 2.1 million residents, two additional districts were to be added. The city of Houston&#x27;s official 2010 census count was 600 shy of the required number; however, as the city was expected to grow beyond 2.1 million shortly thereafter, the two additional districts were added for, and the positions filled during, the August 2011 elections.

The city controller is elected independently of the mayor and council. The controller&#x27;s duties are to certify available funds prior to committing such funds and processing disbursements. The city&#x27;s fiscal year begins on July 1 and ends on June 30. Chris Brown is the city controller, serving his first term .

As the result of a 2015 referendum in Houston, a mayor is elected for a four-year term and can be elected to as many as two consecutive terms. The term limits were spearheaded in 1991 by conservative political activist Clymer Wright. During 1991–2015, the city controller and city council members were subjected to a two-year, three-term limitation–the 2015 referendum amended term limits to two four-year terms. some council members who served two terms and won a final term will have served eight years in office, whereas a freshman council member who won a position in 2013 can serve up to two additional terms under the previous term limit law–a select few will have at least 10 years of incumbency once their term expires.

Houston is considered to be a politically divided city whose balance of power often sways between Republicans and Democrats. According to the 2005 Houston Area Survey, 68 percent of non-Hispanic whites in Harris County are declared or favor Republicans while 89 percent of non-Hispanic blacks in the area are declared or favor Democrats. About 62 percent of Hispanics (of any nationality) in the area are declared or favor Democrats. The city has often been known to be the most politically diverse city in Texas, a state known for being generally conservative. As a result, the city is often a contested area in statewide elections. In 2009, Houston became the first U.S. city with a population over 1 million citizens to elect a gay mayor, by electing Annise Parker.

Texas has banned sanctuary cities, but Houston Mayor Sylvester Turner said Houston will not assist ICE agents with immigration raids.

===Crime===
Houston&#x27;s crime rate is one of the top three in Texas and notably higher than the national average. Houston&#x27;s murder rate jumped significantly since 2020. In 2021, nearly 500 people were murdered in the city which was almost double the murdered count in 2019. Rising gang activity is blamed for the increased crime rates in the city. Houston leaders are continually discussing and implementing strategies to combat crime in the city.

Houston is a significant hub for trafficking of cocaine, cannabis, heroin, MDMA, and methamphetamine due to its size and proximity to major illegal drug exporting nations.

In the early 1970s, Houston, Pasadena and several coastal towns were the site of the Houston mass murders, which at the time were the deadliest case of serial killing in American history.

In 1853, the first execution in Houston took place in public at Founder&#x27;s Cemetery in the Fourth Ward; initially, the cemetery was the execution site, but post-1868 executions took place in the jail facilities. In 2023, the city of Houston made enforcement of an anti-food sharing ordinance a priority. This has resulted in volunteers receiving over 80 tickets, and a federal lawsuit to be filed against the city of Houston.

==Education==
Nineteen school districts exist within the city of Houston. The Houston Independent School District (HISD) is the seventh-largest school district in the United States and the largest in Texas. HISD has over 100 campuses that serve as magnet or vanguard schools—specializing in such disciplines as health professions, visual and performing arts, and the sciences. There are also many charter schools that are run separately from school districts. In addition, some public school districts also have their own charter schools.

The Houston area encompasses more than 300 private schools, many of which are accredited by Texas Private School Accreditation Commission recognized agencies. The Greater Houston metropolitan area&#x27;s independent schools offer education from a variety of different religious as well as secular viewpoints. The Greater Houston area&#x27;s Catholic schools are operated by the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston.

===Colleges and universities===
Houston has four state universities. The University of Houston (UH) is a research university and the flagship institution of the University of Houston System. The university in Texas, the University of Houston has nearly 44,000 students on its campus in the Third Ward. The University of Houston–Clear Lake and the University of Houston–Downtown are universities within the University of Houston System; they are not branch campuses of the University of Houston. Slightly west of the University of Houston is Texas Southern University (TSU), one of the largest historically black universities in the United States with approximately 10,000 students. Texas Southern University is the first state university in Houston, founded in 1927.

Several private institutions of higher learning are within the city. Rice University, the most selective university in Texas and one of the most selective in the United States, is a private, secular institution with a high level of research activity. Founded in 1912, Rice&#x27;s historic, heavily wooded campus, adjacent to Hermann Park and the Texas Medical Center, hosts approximately 4,000 undergraduate and 3,000 post-graduate students. To the north in Neartown, the University of St. Thomas, founded in 1947, is Houston&#x27;s only Catholic university. St. Thomas provides a liberal arts curriculum for roughly 3,000 students at its historic 19-block campus along Montrose Boulevard. In southwest Houston, Houston Christian University (formerly Houston Baptist University), founded in 1960, offers bachelor&#x27;s and graduate degrees at its Sharpstown campus. The school is affiliated with the Baptist General Convention of Texas and has a student population of approximately 3,000.

Three community college districts have campuses in and around Houston. The Houston Community College System (HCC) serves most of Houston proper; its main campus and headquarters are in Midtown. Suburban northern and western parts of the metropolitan area are served by various campuses of the Lone Star College System, while the southeastern portion of Houston is served by San Jacinto College, and a northeastern portion is served by Lee College. The Houston Community College and Lone Star College systems are among the 10 largest institutions of higher learning in the United States.

Houston also hosts a number of graduate schools in law and healthcare. The University of Houston Law Center and Thurgood Marshall School of Law at Texas Southern University are public, ABA-accredited law schools, while the South Texas College of Law, in Downtown, serves as a private, independent alternative. The Texas Medical Center is home to a high density of health professions schools, including two medical schools: McGovern Medical School, part of The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, and Baylor College of Medicine, a highly selective private institution. Prairie View A&amp;M University&#x27;s nursing school is in the Texas Medical Center. Additionally, both Texas Southern University and the University of Houston have pharmacy schools, and the University of Houston hosts a medical school and a college of optometry.
==Media==
The primary network-affiliated television stations are KPRC-TV channel 2 (NBC), KHOU channel 11 (CBS), KTRK-TV channel 13 (ABC), KTXH channel 20 (MyNetworkTV), KRIV channel 26 (Fox), KIAH channel 39 (The CW), KXLN-DT channel 45 (Univision), KTMD-TV channel 47 (Telemundo), KPXB-TV channel 49 (Ion Television), KYAZ channel 51 (MeTV) and KFTH-DT channel 67 (UniMás). KTRK-TV, KTXH, KRIV, KIAH, KXLN-DT, KTMD-TV, KPXB-TV, KYAZ and KFTH-DT operate as owned-and-operated stations of their networks.

The Houston–The Woodlands–Sugar Land metropolitan area is served by one public television station and two public radio stations. KUHT channel 8 (&quot;Houston Public Media&quot;) is a PBS member station and is the first public television station in the United States. Houston Public Radio is listener-funded and comprises one NPR member station, KUHF (&quot;News 88.7&quot;). The University of Houston System owns and holds broadcasting licenses to KUHT and KUHF. The stations broadcast from the Melcher Center for Public Broadcasting on the campus of the University of Houston. Houston additionally is served by the Pacifica Foundation public radio station KPFT. Commercial radio stations include KKBQ (92.9 FM), KILT (610 AM), KILT-FM (100.3 FM), KKHH (95.7 FM), KTRH (740 AM), KROI (92.1 FM), KODA (99.1 FM), KMJQ (102.1 FM), and KBXX (97.9 FM).

Houston and its metropolitan area are served by the &quot;Houston Chronicle&quot;, its only major daily newspaper with wide distribution. Hearst Communications, which owns and operates the &quot;Houston Chronicle&quot;, bought the assets of the &quot;Houston Post&quot;—its long-time rival and main competition—when &quot;Houston Post&quot; ceased operations in 1995. The &quot;Houston Post&quot; was owned by the family of former Lieutenant Governor Bill Hobby of Houston. The only other major publication to serve the city is the &quot;Houston Press&quot;—which was a free alternative weekly newspaper before the destruction caused by Hurricane Harvey resulted in the publication switching to an online-only format on November 2, 2017. Other notable publications include &quot;Houston Forward Times&quot;, &quot;OutSmart&quot;, and &quot;La Voz de Houston&quot;. &quot;Houston Forward Times&quot; is one of the largest black-owned newspapers in the metropolitan area and owned by Forward Times Publishing Company. &quot;La Voz de Houston&quot; is the &quot;Houston Chronicle&quot;&#x27;s Spanish-language newspaper and the largest in the area.

==Infrastructure==

===Healthcare===
Houston is the seat of the Texas Medical Center, which is the largest medical center in the world, and which describes itself as containing the world&#x27;s largest concentration of research and healthcare institutions. All 49 member institutions of the Texas Medical Center are non-profit organizations. They provide patient and preventive care, research, education, and local, national, and international community well-being. Employing more than 73,600 people, institutions at the medical center include 13 hospitals and two specialty institutions, two medical schools, four nursing schools, and schools of dentistry, public health, pharmacy, and virtually all health-related careers. It is where one of the first—and still the largest—air emergency service, Life Flight, was created, and an inter-institutional transplant program was developed. Around 2007, more heart surgeries were performed at the Texas Medical Center than anywhere else in the world.

Some of the academic and research health institutions at the center include MD Anderson Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, UT Health Science Center, Memorial Hermann Hospital, Houston Methodist Hospital, Texas Children&#x27;s Hospital, and University of Houston College of Pharmacy.

The Menninger Clinic, a psychiatric treatment center, is affiliated with Baylor College of Medicine and the Houston Methodist Hospital System. With hospital locations nationwide and headquarters in Houston, the Triumph Healthcare hospital system was the third largest long term acute care provider nationally in 2005.

Harris Health System (formerly Harris County Hospital District), the hospital district for Harris County, operates public hospitals (Ben Taub General Hospital and Lyndon B. Johnson Hospital) and public clinics. The City of Houston Health Department also operates four clinics. the dental centers of Harris Health System take patients of ages 16 and up with patients under that age referred to the City of Houston&#x27;s dental clinics. Montgomery County Hospital District (MCHD) serves as the hospital district for Houstonians living in Montgomery County. Fort Bend County, in which a portion of Houston resides, does not have a hospital district. OakBend Medical Center serves as the county&#x27;s charity hospital which the county contracts with.

== Transportation ==

Houston is considered an automobile-dependent city, with an estimated 77.2% of commuters driving alone to work in 2016, up from 71.7% in 1990 and 75.6% in 2009. In 2016, another 11.4% of Houstonians carpooled to work, while 3.6% used public transit, 2.1% walked, and 0.5% bicycled. A commuting study estimated the median length of commute in the region was in 2012. According to the 2013 American Community Survey, the average work commute in Houston (city) takes 26.3 minutes. A 1999 Murdoch University study found Houston had both the lengthiest commute and lowest urban density of 13 large American cities surveyed. Harris County is one of the largest consumers of gasoline in the United States, ranking second (behind Los Angeles County) in 2013.

Despite the region&#x27;s high rate of automobile usage, attitudes towards transportation among Houstonians indicate a growing preference for walkability. A 2017 study by the Rice University Kinder Institute for Urban Research found 56% of Harris County residents have a preference for dense housing in a mixed-use, walkable setting as opposed to single-family housing in a low-density area. A plurality of survey respondents also indicated traffic congestion was the most significant problem facing the metropolitan area. In addition, many households in the city of Houston have no car. In 2015, 8.3 percent of Houston households lacked a car, which was virtually unchanged in 2016 (8.1 percent). The national average was 8.7 percent in 2016. Houston averaged 1.59 cars per household in 2016, compared to a national average of 1.8.

===Roadways===
The eight-county Greater Houston metropolitan area contains over of roadway, of which 10%, or approximately , is limited-access highway. The Houston region&#x27;s extensive freeway system handles over 40% of the regional daily vehicle miles traveled (VMT). Arterial roads handle an additional 40% of daily VMT, while toll roads, of which Greater Houston has , handle nearly 10%.

Greater Houston possesses a hub-and-spoke limited-access highway system, in which a number of freeways radiate outward from Downtown, with ring roads providing connections between these radial highways at intermediate distances from the city center. The city is crossed by three Interstate highways, I-10, I-45, and I-69 (commonly known as US 59), as well as a number of other United States routes and state highways. Major freeways in Greater Houston are often referred to by either the cardinal direction or geographic location they travel towards. Highways that follow the cardinal convention include US 290 (&quot;Northwest Freeway&quot;), I-45 north of Downtown (&quot;North Freeway&quot;), I-10 east of Downtown &quot;(East Freeway&quot;), SH 288 (&quot;South&quot; &quot;Freeway&quot;), and I-69 south of Downtown (&quot;Southwest Freeway&quot;). Highways that follow the location convention include Interstate 10 west of Downtown (&quot;Katy Freeway&quot;), Interstate 69 north of Downtown (&quot;Eastex Freeway&quot;), I-45 south of Downtown (&quot;Gulf Freeway&quot;), and SH 225 (&quot;Pasadena Freeway&quot;).

Three loop freeways provide north–south and east–west connectivity between Greater Houston&#x27;s radial highways. The innermost loop is I-610, commonly known as the &quot;Inner Loop&quot;, which encircles Downtown, the Texas Medical Center, Greenway Plaza, the cities of West University Place and Southside Place, and many core neighborhoods. The Beltway 8, often referred to as &quot;the Beltway&quot;, forms the middle loop at a radius of roughly . A third, loop with a radius of approximately , SH 99 (the &quot;Grand Parkway&quot;), is currently under construction, with eight of eleven segments completed . Completed segments D through I-2 provide a continuous limited-access tollway connection between Sugar Land, Richmond, Katy, Cypress, Spring, Porter, New Caney, Cleveland, Dayton, Mont Belvieu, and Baytown .

A system of toll roads, operated by the Harris County Toll Road Authority and Fort Bend County Toll Road Authority, provides additional options for regional commuters. The Sam Houston Tollway, which encompasses the mainlanes of Beltway 8 (as opposed to the frontage roads, which are untolled), is the longest tollway in the system, covering the entirety of the Beltway with the exception of a free section between I-45 and I-69 near George Bush Intercontinental Airport. The region is serviced by four spoke tollways: a set of managed lanes on the Katy Freeway; the Hardy Toll Road, which parallels I-45 north of Downtown up to Spring; the Westpark Tollway, which services Houston&#x27;s western suburbs out to Fulshear; and Fort Bend Parkway, which connects to Sienna Plantation. Westpark Tollway and Fort Bend Parkway are operated conjunctly with the Fort Bend County Toll Road Authority.

Greater Houston&#x27;s freeway system is monitored by Houston TranStar, a partnership of four government agencies which is responsible for providing transportation and emergency management services to the region.

Greater Houston&#x27;s arterial road network is established at the municipal level, with the City of Houston exercising planning control over both its incorporated area and extraterritorial jurisdiction. Therefore, Houston exercises transportation planning authority over a area over five counties, many times larger than its corporate area. The &quot;Major Thoroughfare and Freeway Plan&quot;, updated annually, establishes the city&#x27;s street hierarchy, identifies roadways in need of widening, and proposes new roadways in unserved areas. Arterial roads are organized into four categories, in decreasing order of intensity: &quot;major thoroughfares&quot;, &quot;transit corridor streets&quot;, &quot;collector streets&quot;, and &quot;local streets&quot;. Roadway classification affects anticipated traffic volumes, roadway design, and right of way breadth. Ultimately, the system is designed to ferry traffic from neighborhood streets to major thoroughfares, which connect into the limited-access highway system. Notable arterial roads in the region include Westheimer Road, Memorial Drive, SH 6, FM 1960, Bellaire Boulevard, and Telephone Road.

===Transit===
The Metropolitan Transit Authority of Harris County (METRO) provides public transportation in the form of buses, light rail, high-occupancy vehicle (HOV) lanes, and paratransit to fifteen municipalities throughout the Greater Houston area and parts of unincorporated Harris County. METRO&#x27;s service area covers containing a population of 3.6 million.

METRO&#x27;s local bus network services approximately 275,000 riders daily with a fleet of over 1,200 buses. The agency&#x27;s 75 local routes contain nearly 8,900 stops and saw nearly 67 million boardings during the 2016 fiscal year. A park and ride system provides commuter bus service from 34 transit centers scattered throughout the region&#x27;s suburban areas; these express buses operate independently of the local bus network and utilize the region&#x27;s extensive system of HOV lanes. Downtown and the Texas Medical Center have the highest rates of transit use in the region, largely due to the park and ride system, with nearly 60% of commuters in each district utilizing public transit to get to work.

METRO began light rail service in 2004 with the opening of the north-south Red Line connecting Downtown, Midtown, the Museum District, the Texas Medical Center, and NRG Park. In the early 2010s, two additional lines—the Green Line, servicing the East End, and the Purple Line, servicing the Third Ward—opened, and the Red Line was extended northward to Northline, bringing the total length of the system to . Two light rail lines outlined in a five-line system approved by voters in a 2003 referendum have yet to be constructed. The Uptown Line, which runs along Post Oak Boulevard in Uptown, was under construction as a bus rapid transit line—the city&#x27;s first—while the University Line has been postponed indefinitely. The light rail system saw approximately 16.8 million boardings in fiscal year 2016.

Amtrak&#x27;s thrice-weekly Los Angeles–New Orleans serves Houston at a station northwest of Downtown. There were 14,891 boardings and alightings in FY2008, 20,327 in FY2012, and 20,205 in FY2018. A daily Amtrak Thruway connects Houston with Amtrak&#x27;s Chicago–San Antonio at Longview.

===Cycling===
Houston has the largest number of bike commuters in Texas with over 160 miles of dedicated bikeways. In 2015, Downtown Houston added a cycle track on Lamar Street, running from Sam Houston Park to Discovery Green. Houston City Council approved the Houston Bike Plan in March 2017, at that time entering the plan into the Houston Code of Ordinances. In August 2017, Houston City Council approved spending for construction of 13 additional miles of bike trails.

Houston had a bicycle sharing system until June 2024. Houston Bcycle (also known as B-Cycle), a local non-profit, ran the subscription program, supplying bicycles and docking stations, while partnering with other companies to maintain the system. The network expanded to 29 stations and 225 bicycles in 2014, registering over 43,000 checkouts of equipment during the first half of the same year. In 2017, Bcycle logged over 142,000 check outs while expanding to 56 docking stations.

===Airports===
The Houston Airport System, a branch of the municipal government, oversees the operation of three major public airports in the city. Two of these airports, George Bush Intercontinental Airport and William P. Hobby Airport, offer commercial aviation service to a variety of domestic and international destinations and served 55 million passengers in 2016. The third, Ellington Airport, is home to the Ellington Field Joint Reserve Base. The Federal Aviation Administration and the state of Texas selected the Houston Airport System as &quot;Airport of the Year&quot; in 2005, largely due to the implementation of a $3.1 billion airport improvement program for both major airports in Houston.

George Bush Intercontinental Airport (IAH), north of Downtown Houston between Interstates 45 and 69, is the eighth busiest commercial airport in the United States (by total passengers and aircraft movements) and forty-third busiest globally. The five-terminal, five-runway, airport served 40 million passengers in 2016, including 10 million international travelers. In 2006, the United States Department of Transportation named IAH the fastest-growing of the top ten airports in the United States. The Houston Air Route Traffic Control Center is at Bush Intercontinental.

Houston was the headquarters of Continental Airlines until its 2010 merger with United Airlines with headquarters in Chicago; regulatory approval for the merger was granted in October of that year. Bush Intercontinental is currently United Airlines&#x27; second largest hub, behind O&#x27;Hare International Airport. United Airlines&#x27; share of the Houston Airport System&#x27;s commercial aviation market was nearly 60% in 2017 with 16 million enplaned passengers. In early 2007, Bush Intercontinental Airport was named a model &quot;port of entry&quot; for international travelers by U.S. Customs and Border Protection.

William P. Hobby Airport (HOU), known as Houston International Airport until 1967, operates primarily short- to medium-haul domestic and international flights to 60 destinations. The four-runway, facility is approximately southeast of Downtown Houston. In 2015, Southwest Airlines launched service from a new international terminal at Hobby to several destinations in Mexico, Central America, and the Caribbean. These were the first international flights flown from Hobby since the opening of Bush Intercontinental in 1969. Houston&#x27;s aviation history is showcased in the 1940 Air Terminal Museum in the old terminal building on the west side of the airport. In 2009, Hobby Airport was recognized with two awards for being one of the top five performing airports globally and for customer service by Airports Council International. In 2022 Hobby Airport was certified as the first 5-Star Airport in North America by Skytrax. It became the first Airport in North America to do so and just the 16th airport worldwide to receive the accomplishment.

Houston&#x27;s third municipal airport is Ellington Airport, used by the military, government (including NASA) and general aviation sectors.

==Notable people==
==International relations==
The Mayor&#x27;s Office of Trade and International Affairs (MOTIA) is the city&#x27;s liaison to Houston&#x27;s sister cities and to the national governing organization, Sister Cities International. Through their official city-to-city relationships, these volunteer associations promote people-to-people diplomacy and encourage citizens to develop mutual trust and understanding through commercial, cultural, educational, and humanitarian exchanges.

Houston&#x27;s sister cities are:
* Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates (2001)
* Baku, Azerbaijan (1976)
* Basrah, Iraq (2015)
* Chiba, Japan (1972)
* Grampian Region, Aberdeen, Scotland (1979)
* Guayaquil, Ecuador (1987)
* Huelva, Spain (1969)
* Istanbul, Turkey (1988)
* Karachi, Pakistan (2009)
* Leipzig, Germany (1992)
* Luanda, Angola (2003)
* Nice, France (1973)
* Perth, Australia (1984)
* Shenzhen, China (1986)
* Stavanger, Norway (1988)
* Taipei, Taiwan (1961)
* Tampico, Mexico (2003)
* Tyumen, Russia (1995)
* Ulsan Metropolitan City, South Korea (2021)
==See also==
* List of diplomatic missions in Houston
* List of people from Houston
* List of U.S. cities with large Hispanic populations
* USS &quot;Houston&quot;, 4 ships

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==

* 174 Years of Historic Houston &quot;Houstonhistory.com&quot;. 2007. Retrieved on 2007-01-13.
* 
* 
* Phelps, Wesley G. &quot;A People&#x27;s War on Poverty: Urban Politics and Grassroots Activists in Houston.&quot; Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press, 2014.
* Pruitt, Bernadette. &quot;The Other Great Migration: The Movement of Rural African-Americans to Houston, 1900–1941.&quot; College Station, TX: Texas A&amp;M University Press, 2013.
* 
* Digital republication by the Portal to Texas History Portal to Texas History. Reprinted in 2007 by Copano Bay Press.
* Digital republication by the Portal to Texas History. Reprinted in 2007 by Copano Bay Press.
==External links==
* Greater Houston Convention &amp; Visitors Bureau
* Greater Houston Partnership (GHP) Houston Chamber
* Greater Houston Transportation and Emergency Management Center</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="0" end="7" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q106973361" start="19" end="37" title="List of cities in Texas by population" label="most populous city"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="45" end="55" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="59" end="64" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="76" end="98" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985389" start="111" end="126" title="Southeast Texas" label="Southeast Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560406" start="132" end="145" title="Galveston Bay" label="Galveston Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="154" end="168" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="180" end="184" title="county seat" label="seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q26676" start="188" end="201" title="Harris County, Texas" label="Harris County"/>
<link wikidata="Q426435" start="240" end="255" title="Greater Houston" label="Greater Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768043" start="299" end="328" title="metropolitan statistical area" label="metropolitan statistical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4431788" start="358" end="387" title="List of Texas metropolitan areas" label="second-most populous in Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q179295" start="394" end="411" title="Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex" label="Dallas–Fort Worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q131079" start="468" end="514" title="List of United States cities by population" label="fourth-most populous city in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="521" end="534" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="536" end="547" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="553" end="560" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q13644088" start="570" end="611" title="List of North American cities by population" label="sixth-most populous city in North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028703" start="684" end="698" title="Texas Triangle" label="Texas Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602742" start="744" end="790" title="List of United States cities by area" label="ninth-most expansive city in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301053" start="802" end="828" title="consolidated city-counties" label="consolidated city-counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="1035" end="1044" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q26756" start="1049" end="1059" title="Montgomery County, Texas" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q93340" start="1135" end="1145" title="Sugar Land, Texas" label="Sugar Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q982421" start="1150" end="1163" title="The Woodlands, Texas" label="The Woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q751638" start="1245" end="1258" title="Buffalo Bayou" label="Buffalo Bayou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995132" start="1263" end="1278" title="White Oak Bayou" label="White Oak Bayou"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731457" start="1301" end="1321" title="Allen&amp;#x27;s Landing" label="Allen&amp;#x27;s Landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q216547" start="1406" end="1417" title="Sam Houston" label="Sam Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q170588" start="1444" end="1461" title="Republic of Texas" label="Republic of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q638530" start="1474" end="1511" title="Texas Revolution" label="Texas&amp;#x27;s independence from Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q841278" start="1519" end="1540" title="Battle of San Jacinto" label="Battle of San Jacinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="1600" end="1607" title="Capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q135744" start="1903" end="1912" title="Galveston, Texas" label="Galveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q186166" start="1952" end="1980" title="1900 Galveston hurricane" label="a devastating 1900 hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640210" start="2017" end="2037" title="Houston Ship Channel" label="Houston Ship Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707889" start="2047" end="2061" title="Texas oil boom" label="Texas oil boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323511" start="2149" end="2169" title="Texas Medical Center" label="Texas Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="2253" end="2257" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="2265" end="2285" title="Johnson Space Center" label="Johnson Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112041" start="2299" end="2321" title="Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Mission Control Center" label="Mission Control Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333680" start="2353" end="2375" title="Economy of Houston" label="Houston&amp;#x27;s economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333680" start="2411" end="2417" title="Energy in Houston" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333680" start="2419" end="2432" title="Manufacturing in Houston" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835224" start="2451" end="2465" title="Transportation in Houston" label="transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="2558" end="2581" title="Fortune 500" label="&amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921365" start="2648" end="2663" title="Port of Houston" label="Port of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q767697" start="2881" end="2884" title="713 area code" label="713"/>
<link wikidata="Q208511" start="2913" end="2924" title="global city" label="global city"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256016" start="3127" end="3157" title="Demographics of Houston" label="most diverse metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644021" start="3324" end="3347" title="Houston Museum District" label="Houston Museum District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141400" start="3356" end="3380" title="Houston Theater District" label="Houston Theater District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728967" start="3459" end="3468" title="Karankawa people" label="Karankawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q56962" start="3477" end="3484" title="Atakapa" label="Atakapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309839" start="3777" end="3788" title="uninhabited" label="uninhabited"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340000" start="3905" end="3921" title="Augustus Chapman Allen" label="Augustus Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340024" start="3926" end="3936" title="John Kirby Allen" label="John Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560406" start="3978" end="3991" title="Galveston Bay" label="Galveston Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600705" start="4390" end="4413" title="Charlotte Baldwin Allen" label="Charlotte Baldwin Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157683" start="4615" end="4624" title="President of the Republic of Texas" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160911" start="4672" end="4698" title="Congress of the Republic of Texas" label="Republic of Texas Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4499149" start="5072" end="5087" title="James Sanders Holman" label="James S. Holman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="5260" end="5266" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="5891" end="5902" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="5999" end="6007" title="Slavery in the United States" label="enslaved"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="6052" end="6070" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="6405" end="6417" title="Railroad" label="railroad hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q128282" start="6559" end="6567" title="Beaumont, Texas" label="Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298040" start="6663" end="6679" title="John B. Magruder" label="John B. Magruder"/>
<link wikidata="Q609495" start="6732" end="6751" title="Battle of Galveston" label="Battle of Galveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q186166" start="7059" end="7068" title="Galveston Hurricane of 1900" label="hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="7179" end="7182" title="petroleum" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602814" start="7190" end="7200" title="Spindletop" label="Spindletop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845437" start="7201" end="7210" title="oil field" label="oil field"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="7302" end="7320" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="7648" end="7662" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="7860" end="7878" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4464386" start="7998" end="8010" title="United States home front during World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q841771" start="8354" end="8369" title="Ellington Airport (Texas)" label="Ellington Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="8394" end="8405" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976260" start="8490" end="8516" title="Brown Shipbuilding Company" label="Brown Shipbuilding Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="8560" end="8569" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q221810" start="8786" end="8803" title="Anti-discrimination law" label="nondiscrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323511" start="9165" end="9185" title="Texas Medical Center" label="Texas Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357541" start="9544" end="9553" title="Northern United States" label="the North"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="9880" end="9910" title="Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center" label="Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025406" start="10006" end="10015" title="Astrodome" label="Astrodome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265619" start="10037" end="10063" title="Eighth Wonder of the World" label="Eighth Wonder of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q781973" start="10214" end="10223" title="Rust Belt" label="Rust Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="10379" end="10395" title="1973 oil crisis" label="Arab oil embargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007852" start="10552" end="10575" title="New Great Migration" label="reverse Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q866128" start="10627" end="10639" title="Lee P. Brown" label="Lee P. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656230" start="10974" end="10985" title="Phillips 66" label="Phillips 66"/>
<link wikidata="Q214763" start="10987" end="11001" title="ConocoPhillips" label="ConocoPhillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013357" start="11003" end="11023" title="Occidental Petroleum" label="Occidental Petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q656165" start="11025" end="11036" title="Halliburton" label="Halliburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q156238" start="11042" end="11052" title="ExxonMobil" label="ExxonMobil"/>
<link wikidata="Q327646" start="11109" end="11126" title="Enron Corporation" label="Enron Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723024" start="11198" end="11216" title="Enron scandal" label="accounting scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323511" start="11337" end="11357" title="Texas Medical Center" label="Texas Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q848117" start="11554" end="11568" title="Houston Astros" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193671" start="11604" end="11615" title="Daikin Park" label="Daikin Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q16902348" start="11649" end="11662" title="Union Station (Houston)" label="Union Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q223514" start="11668" end="11682" title="Houston Texans" label="Houston Texans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="11709" end="11712" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439096" start="11743" end="11757" title="Houston Oilers" label="Houston Oilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058864" start="11792" end="11803" title="NRG Stadium" label="NRG Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166157" start="11839" end="11852" title="Toyota Center" label="Toyota Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q161345" start="11880" end="11895" title="Houston Rockets" label="Houston Rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q328313" start="11910" end="11924" title="Houston Dynamo" label="Houston Dynamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q30632053" start="11952" end="11956" title="2017 World Series" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="11993" end="12005" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="12028" end="12036" title="Flooding" label="Flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179558" start="12101" end="12123" title="Tropical Storm Allison" label="Tropical Storm Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="12406" end="12423" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q737890" start="12498" end="12512" title="Hurricane Rita" label="Hurricane Rita"/>
<link wikidata="Q55241" start="12528" end="12538" title="Gulf Coast of the United States" label="Gulf Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q37933184" start="12898" end="12914" title="Hurricane Harvey" label="Hurricane Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="13262" end="13274" title="U.S. dollars" label="U.S. dollars"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932465" start="13318" end="13371" title="List of natural disasters in the United States" label="natural disasters in the history of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023711" start="13877" end="13884" title="derecho" label="derecho"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="13995" end="14001" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="14015" end="14024" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="14046" end="14052" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401264" start="14161" end="14179" title="Western Gulf coastal grasslands" label="gulf coastal plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401264" start="14217" end="14248" title="Western Gulf coastal grasslands" label="Western Gulf coastal grasslands"/>
<link wikidata="Q34696004" start="14316" end="14327" title="Big Thicket" label="Big Thicket"/>
<link wikidata="Q849953" start="14696" end="14706" title="subsidence" label="subsidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614513" start="14769" end="14781" title="Lake Houston" label="Lake Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231229" start="14783" end="14794" title="Lake Conroe" label="Lake Conroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4261031" start="14800" end="14815" title="Lake Livingston" label="Lake Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q812585" start="14932" end="14937" title="bayou" label="bayou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640210" start="15062" end="15082" title="Houston Ship Channel" label="Houston Ship Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q29470806" start="15226" end="15237" title="Brays Bayou" label="Brays Bayou"/>
<link wikidata="Q49561892" start="15286" end="15296" title="Sims Bayou" label="Sims Bayou"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="15471" end="15477" title="marshy" label="marshy"/>
<link wikidata="Q107503638" start="15656" end="15670" title="Consolidation (geology)" label="unconsolidated"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="15830" end="15845" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="15853" end="15861" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314" start="16062" end="16068" title="halite" label="halite"/>
<link wikidata="Q477449" start="16211" end="16220" title="salt dome" label="salt dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="16477" end="16483" title="Fault (geology)" label="faults"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089248" start="16505" end="16517" title="active fault" label="active fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673096" start="16570" end="16608" title="Long Point–Eureka Heights fault system" label="Long Point–Eureka Heights fault system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804124" start="17027" end="17038" title="Aseismic creep" label="fault creep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="17172" end="17183" title="Ward (politics)" label="ward system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916428" start="17329" end="17349" title="Houston City Council" label="Houston City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q19592272" start="17425" end="17446" title="City commission government" label="commission government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308596" start="17473" end="17497" title="mayor–council government" label="mayor–council government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453529" start="17584" end="17603" title="Interstate 610 (Texas)" label="Interstate 610 loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623078" start="17723" end="17739" title="streetcar suburb" label="streetcar suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091971" start="17854" end="17862" title="Suburbanization" label="suburban"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899434" start="17909" end="17915" title="Uptown Houston" label="Uptown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987225" start="17917" end="17926" title="Westchase, Houston" label="Westchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916501" start="17936" end="17951" title="Houston Energy Corridor" label="Energy Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505727" start="18064" end="18073" title="Texas State Highway Beltway 8" label="Beltway 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503844" start="18125" end="18141" title="Texas State Highway 99" label="State Highway 99"/>
<link wikidata="Q702232" start="18454" end="18460" title="zoning" label="zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058501" start="18510" end="18518" title="Sun Belt" label="Sun Belt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18575" end="18590" title="Covenant (law)#In a legal context" label="legal covenants"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="19003" end="19015" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928006" start="19215" end="19238" title="United States housing bubble" label="2008 real estate crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038339" start="19736" end="19744" title="Downtown Houston" label="Downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323511" start="19772" end="19792" title="Texas Medical Center" label="Texas Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843062" start="19794" end="19801" title="Midtown, Houston, Texas" label="Midtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604788" start="19803" end="19817" title="Greenway Plaza" label="Greenway Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815367" start="19819" end="19832" title="Memorial City" label="Memorial City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987225" start="19855" end="19864" title="Westchase, Houston, Texas" label="Westchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604556" start="19870" end="19881" title="Greenspoint, Houston, Texas" label="Greenspoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="19981" end="19988" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="19990" end="19997" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="20002" end="20007" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q15144570" start="20069" end="20099" title="Houston Downtown Tunnel System" label="system of tunnels and skywalks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038339" start="20257" end="20273" title="Downtown Houston" label="Downtown Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549048" start="20489" end="20504" title="Gerald D. Hines" label="Gerald D. Hines"/>
<link wikidata="Q935919" start="20577" end="20597" title="JPMorgan Chase Tower (Houston)" label="JPMorgan Chase Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q930338" start="20692" end="20704" title="List of tallest buildings in the United States" label="19th tallest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779466" start="20755" end="20767" title="List of tallest buildings in the world" label="85th-tallest"/>
<link wikidata="Q57767" start="20862" end="20879" title="Wells Fargo Plaza (Houston)" label="Wells Fargo Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899434" start="21169" end="21184" title="Uptown Houston" label="Uptown District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266029" start="21387" end="21396" title="edge city" label="edge city"/>
<link wikidata="Q183528" start="21453" end="21467" title="Philip Johnson" label="Philip Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5590225" start="21472" end="21483" title="John Burgee" label="John Burgee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357650" start="21502" end="21516" title="Williams Tower" label="Williams Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q46868" start="21878" end="21887" title="I. M. Pei" label="I. M. Pei"/>
<link wikidata="Q309483" start="21889" end="21900" title="César Pelli" label="César Pelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q18142" start="21993" end="22010" title="Tower block" label="residential tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q182060" start="22267" end="22287" title="class A office space" label="class A office space"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="22344" end="22361" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="22386" end="22422" title="Köppen climate classification system" label="Köppen climate classification system"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="22440" end="22462" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q923442" start="22477" end="22490" title="Tornado Alley" label="Tornado Alley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493922" start="22505" end="22519" title="North Texas" label="Northern Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q747894" start="22528" end="22551" title="Supercell" label="supercell thunderstorms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293777" start="23033" end="23053" title="apparent temperature" label="apparent temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="23092" end="23109" title="relative humidity" label="relative humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q173725" start="23111" end="23127" title="Air conditioning" label="Air conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4602637" start="23904" end="23921" title="2004 Christmas Eve Snowstorm" label="December 24, 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q256699" start="24961" end="24973" title="Permeability (earth sciences)" label="permeability"/>
<link wikidata="Q19979999" start="25120" end="25144" title="2015 Texas–Oklahoma flood and tornado outbreak" label="&amp;quot;Memorial Day&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q24191771" start="25153" end="25172" title="April 2016 North American storm complex" label="&amp;quot;Tax Day&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q37933184" start="25185" end="25201" title="Hurricane Harvey" label="Hurricane Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q36933" start="25533" end="25538" title="ozone" label="ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q446094" start="25720" end="25745" title="American Lung Association" label="American Lung Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="25887" end="25898" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="25900" end="25907" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="25909" end="25922" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="25928" end="25934" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117517" start="26719" end="26729" title="wet season" label="wet season"/>
<link wikidata="Q55241" start="26751" end="26761" title="Gulf Coast of the United States" label="Gulf Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179558" start="26852" end="26874" title="Tropical Storm Allison" label="Tropical Storm Allison"/>
<link wikidata="Q37933184" start="26887" end="26903" title="Hurricane Harvey" label="Hurricane Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q67975133" start="26936" end="26957" title="Tropical Storm Imelda" label="Tropical Storm Imelda"/>
<link wikidata="Q99541844" start="26970" end="26989" title="Tropical Storm Beta (2020)" label="Tropical Storm Beta"/>
<link wikidata="Q336797" start="27196" end="27215" title="100-year flood" label="500-year floodplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819538" start="27905" end="27919" title="Meritage Homes" label="Meritage Homes"/>
<link wikidata="Q26676" start="28754" end="28767" title="Harris County, Texas" label="Harris County"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="29076" end="29092" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 U.S. census"/>
<link wikidata="Q185367" start="29250" end="29273" title="Illegal immigration to the United States" label="undocumented immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="29383" end="29408" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 United States census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975543" start="29496" end="29507" title="1850 United States census" label="1850 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q463769" start="29523" end="29548" title="American Community Survey" label="American Community Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007852" start="30112" end="30131" title="New Great Migration" label="New Great Migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372903" start="30656" end="30668" title="Poverty in the United States" label="poverty line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526752" start="30712" end="30729" title="Majority minority in the United States" label="majority-minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q155271" start="30795" end="30805" title="think tank" label="think tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q575619" start="31098" end="31112" title="cost of living" label="cost of living"/>
<link wikidata="Q17591443" start="31185" end="31205" title="Third country resettlement" label="refugee resettlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922378" start="31397" end="31408" title="black mecca" label="black mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="31417" end="31424" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600887" start="31541" end="31575" title="List of U.S. cities with large African-American populations" label="largest African American community"/>
<link wikidata="Q27661488" start="31589" end="31593" title="List of largest cities west of the Mississippi River" label="west"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="31601" end="31618" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="31940" end="31953" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="31982" end="32000" title="United States Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048763" start="32002" end="32021" title="non-Hispanic whites" label="non-Hispanic whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="32403" end="32420" title="Mexican Americans" label="Mexican Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q893594" start="32430" end="32443" title="Puerto Ricans" label="Puerto Ricans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790886" start="32456" end="32471" title="Cuban Americans" label="Cuban Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="32585" end="32591" title="White Americans" label="whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="32802" end="32818" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="American Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657969" start="32877" end="32887" title="Vietnamese Americans" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146100" start="32894" end="32901" title="Chinese Americans" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643509" start="32908" end="32914" title="Indian Americans" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125803" start="32921" end="32930" title="Pakistani Americans" label="Pakistani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413685" start="32937" end="32945" title="Filipino Americans" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q276879" start="32952" end="32958" title="Korean Americans" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156766" start="32965" end="32973" title="Japanese Americans" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065556" start="32979" end="32995" title="Pacific Islander" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935055" start="33107" end="33124" title="Multiracial Americans" label="two or more races"/>
<link wikidata="Q166998" start="33159" end="33175" title="2000 United States Census" label="2000 U.S. census"/>
<link wikidata="Q51393" start="33709" end="33725" title="LGBT community" label="LGBT communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q51404" start="33730" end="33742" title="pride parade" label="pride parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q595564" start="33855" end="33872" title="Houston Chronicle" label="Houston Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043639" start="34050" end="34057" title="gay bar" label="gay bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843062" start="34111" end="34126" title="midtown Houston" label="midtown Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="34416" end="34424" title="Gentrification" label="gentrify"/>
<link wikidata="Q4468596" start="34726" end="34740" title="Murder of Paul Broussard" label="Paul Broussard"/>
<link wikidata="Q17476" start="34803" end="34841" title="same-sex marriage in the United States" label="same-sex marriage in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q24894881" start="34846" end="34887" title="marriage of Billie Ert and Antonio Molina" label="marriage of Billie Ert and Antonio Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q213847" start="34997" end="35023" title="Annise Parker" label="first openly lesbian mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q22022705" start="35113" end="35143" title="2015 Houston, Texas Proposition 1" label="Houston Equal Rights Ordinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="35615" end="35638" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q210181" start="35658" end="35668" title="Bible Belt" label="Bible Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="35703" end="35710" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="35715" end="35732" title="Oriental Orthodoxy" label="Oriental Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="35867" end="35881" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q842798" start="35918" end="35938" title="Western Christianity" label="Western Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q505311" start="35998" end="36037" title="Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965" label="Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="36136" end="36155" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="36224" end="36234" title="Christianity" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="36308" end="36322" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="36444" end="36468" title="Irreligion" label="no religious affiliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="36584" end="36591" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="36593" end="36601" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="36603" end="36608" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="36614" end="36622" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257538" start="36692" end="36726" title="Public Religion Research Institute" label="Public Religion Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810029" start="36845" end="36882" title="Association of Religion Data Archives" label="Association of Religion Data Archives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351880" start="37010" end="37027" title="Southern Baptists" label="Southern Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049261" start="37058" end="37096" title="Nondenominational Christianity" label="non-denominational Protestant churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743136" start="37226" end="37254" title="American Baptist Association" label="American Baptist Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q463455" start="37256" end="37285" title="American Baptist Churches USA" label="American Baptist Churches USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508059" start="37287" end="37324" title="Full Gospel Baptist Church Fellowship" label="Full Gospel Baptist Church Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q496651" start="37326" end="37357" title="National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc." label="National Baptist Convention USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970937" start="37362" end="37400" title="National Baptist Convention of America International, Inc." label="National Baptist Convention of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974370" start="37410" end="37448" title="National Missionary Baptist Convention of America" label="National Missionary Baptist Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541206" start="37503" end="37522" title="Christian Church (Disciples of Christ)" label="Disciples of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110310" start="37524" end="37565" title="Christian churches and churches of Christ" label="Christian Churches and Churches of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272775" start="37575" end="37593" title="Churches of Christ" label="Churches of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q72176" start="37648" end="37663" title="Lakewood Church" label="Lakewood Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q468048" start="37690" end="37701" title="Joel Osteen" label="Joel Osteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q781549" start="37749" end="37759" title="megachurch" label="megachurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112905" start="37926" end="37934" title="Outreach (magazine)" label="Outreach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443060" start="38095" end="38124" title="Second Baptist Church Houston" label="Second Baptist Church Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q538791" start="38299" end="38346" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Galveston–Houston" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577114" start="38590" end="38602" title="co-cathedral" label="co-cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q49376" start="38737" end="38753" title="Eastern Catholic Churches" label="Eastern Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q657390" start="38754" end="38785" title="Ruthenian Greek Catholic Church" label="Ruthenian Greek Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q472189" start="38790" end="38821" title="Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church" label="Ukrainian Greek Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188584" start="38837" end="38885" title="Personal Ordinariate of the Chair of Saint Peter" label="Personal Ordinariate of the Chair of Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714690" start="38887" end="38902" title="Cathedral of Our Lady of Walsingham (Houston)" label="whose cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q981346" start="39313" end="39319" title="Spring, Texas" label="Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670245" start="39577" end="39614" title="Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America" label="Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860128" start="39620" end="39668" title="Antiochian Orthodox Christian Archdiocese of North America" label="Antiochian Orthodox Archdiocese of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q198998" start="39674" end="39710" title="Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria" label="Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q179829" start="39716" end="39750" title="Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church" label="Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160636" start="40050" end="40076" title="Congregation Beth Yeshurun (Houston, Texas)" label="Congregation Beth Yeshurun"/>
<link wikidata="Q205644" start="40080" end="40099" title="Conservative Judaism" label="Conservative Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133485" start="40116" end="40129" title="Reform Judaism" label="Reform Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160614" start="40144" end="40155" title="Congregation Beth Israel (Houston)" label="Beth Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189838" start="40202" end="40224" title="Berman Jewish DataBank" label="Berman Jewish DataBank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060646" start="40533" end="40545" title="South Asian ethnic groups" label="South Asians"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366180" start="40547" end="40564" title="Ethnic groups in the Middle East" label="Middle Easterners"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183734" start="40566" end="40574" title="List of ethnic groups of Africa" label="Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="40576" end="40581" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200853" start="40587" end="40598" title="Indonesians" label="Indonesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997339" start="40807" end="40841" title="Islamic Society of Greater Houston" label="Islamic Society of Greater Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="40855" end="40859" title="Sikhism" label="Sikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q842402" start="40968" end="40980" title="Hindu temple" label="Hindu temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834610" start="41019" end="41056" title="BAPS Shri Swaminarayan Mandir Houston" label="BAPS Shri Swaminarayan Mandir Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4155728" start="41078" end="41101" title="Swaminarayan Sampradaya" label="Swaminarayan Sampradaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q26895" start="41118" end="41134" title="Fort Bend County, Texas" label="Fort Bend County"/>
<link wikidata="Q982395" start="41155" end="41163" title="Stafford, Texas" label="Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="41179" end="41190" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q171309" start="41192" end="41197" title="Dravidian architecture" label="style"/>
<link wikidata="Q113114920" start="41198" end="41218" title="Sri Meenakshi Temple (Pearland, Texas)" label="Sri Meenakshi Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q982550" start="41231" end="41239" title="Pearland, Texas" label="Pearland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27034" start="41244" end="41259" title="Brazoria County, Texas" label="Brazoria County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573242" start="41307" end="41332" title="List of Hindu temples in the United States" label="third-oldest Hindu temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q288928" start="41430" end="41438" title="Agnosticism" label="agnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="41452" end="41459" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q182098" start="41767" end="41770" title="Watt-hour" label="TWh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189320" start="42027" end="42039" title="Crown Castle" label="Crown Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q596499" start="42041" end="42044" title="KBR (company)" label="KBR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459118" start="42046" end="42057" title="FlightAware" label="FlightAware"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197840" start="42059" end="42068" title="Cybersoft" label="Cybersoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595393" start="42100" end="42109" title="HostGator" label="HostGator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250111" start="42111" end="42115" title="Aylo" label="Aylo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416215" start="42117" end="42125" title="Go Daddy" label="Go Daddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55606242" start="42131" end="42140" title="ByteDance" label="ByteDance"/>
<link wikidata="Q19923099" start="42193" end="42219" title="Hewlett Packard Enterprise" label="Hewlett Packard Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640210" start="42303" end="42323" title="Houston Ship Channel" label="Houston Ship Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q208511" start="42434" end="42445" title="global city" label="global city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531726" start="42453" end="42507" title="Globalization and World Cities Research Network" label="Globalization and World Cities Study Group and Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921365" start="43230" end="43245" title="Port of Houston" label="Port of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="43804" end="43808" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="43817" end="43825" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="43841" end="43861" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q569446" start="44339" end="44367" title="University of Houston System" label="University of Houston System"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="46121" end="46135" title="Southern United States" label="American South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="46437" end="46464" title="Mexico–United States border" label="United States–Mexico border"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787044" start="46774" end="46806" title="Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo" label="Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916553" start="46968" end="46992" title="Houston Gay Pride Parade" label="Houston Gay Pride Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769770" start="47059" end="47081" title="Houston Greek Festival" label="Houston Greek Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916374" start="47083" end="47097" title="Houston Art Car Parade" label="Art Car Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995960" start="47103" end="47120" title="Houston Auto Show" label="Houston Auto Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874719" start="47166" end="47189" title="Bayou City Art Festival" label="Bayou City Art Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q208371" start="47461" end="47491" title="Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center" label="Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380134" start="47493" end="47508" title="Nicknames of Houston" label="Other nicknames"/>
<link wikidata="Q5136728" start="47568" end="47579" title="Clutch City" label="Clutch City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141400" start="47733" end="47757" title="Houston Theater District" label="Houston Theater District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113726" start="48094" end="48113" title="Houston Grand Opera" label="Houston Grand Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3787020" start="48124" end="48138" title="Houston Ballet" label="Houston Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631506" start="48148" end="48174" title="Houston Symphony" label="Houston Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3612530" start="48190" end="48207" title="The Alley Theatre" label="The Alley Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777456" start="48209" end="48232" title="Theatre Under The Stars (Houston)" label="Theatre Under the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153484" start="48259" end="48267" title="folk art" label="folk art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400264" start="48273" end="48283" title="art groups" label="art groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q6275204" start="48488" end="48498" title="Jones Hall" label="Jones Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631506" start="48511" end="48537" title="Houston Symphony Orchestra" label="Houston Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874936" start="48582" end="48618" title="Hobby Center for the Performing Arts" label="Hobby Center for the Performing Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644021" start="48625" end="48640" title="Houston Museum District" label="Museum District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565911" start="48755" end="48778" title="The Museum of Fine Arts, Houston" label="The Museum of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q610401" start="48784" end="48817" title="Houston Museum of Natural Science" label="Houston Museum of Natural Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q93691" start="48823" end="48855" title="Contemporary Arts Museum Houston" label="Contemporary Arts Museum Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604262" start="48861" end="48895" title="Station Museum of Contemporary Art" label="Station Museum of Contemporary Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q325689" start="48901" end="48925" title="Holocaust Museum Houston" label="Holocaust Museum Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098176" start="48931" end="48964" title="Children&amp;#x27;s Museum of Houston" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Museum of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2753621" start="48974" end="48985" title="Houston Zoo" label="Houston Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888308" start="49025" end="49045" title="Menil Collection" label="The Menil Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956755" start="49047" end="49060" title="Rothko Chapel" label="Rothko Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004699" start="49100" end="49130" title="Byzantine Fresco Chapel Museum" label="Byzantine Fresco Chapel Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892295" start="49133" end="49143" title="Bayou Bend Collection and Gardens" label="Bayou Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q459784" start="49347" end="49355" title="Ima Hogg" label="Ima Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q744748" start="49420" end="49456" title="George Bush Intercontinental Airport" label="George Bush Intercontinental Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q739445" start="49489" end="49499" title="Popemobile" label="Popemobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="49508" end="49525" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253172" start="49799" end="49814" title="Houston hip hop" label="Houston hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q743478" start="50003" end="50011" title="DJ Screw" label="DJ Screw"/>
<link wikidata="Q153056" start="50084" end="50104" title="Destiny&amp;#x27;s Child" label="Destiny&amp;#x27;s Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q56513383" start="50106" end="50117" title="Don Toliver" label="Don Toliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q512592" start="50119" end="50128" title="Slim Thug" label="Slim Thug"/>
<link wikidata="Q709640" start="50130" end="50139" title="Paul Wall" label="Paul Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q954623" start="50141" end="50151" title="Mike Jones (rapper)" label="Mike Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q528323" start="50153" end="50158" title="Bun B" label="Bun B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519986" start="50160" end="50169" title="Geto Boys" label="Geto Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378825" start="50171" end="50185" title="Trae tha Truth" label="Trae tha Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711339" start="50187" end="50198" title="Kirko Bangz" label="Kirko Bangz"/>
<link wikidata="Q135794" start="50200" end="50204" title="Z-Ro" label="Z-Ro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080711" start="50206" end="50224" title="South Park Mexican" label="South Park Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q13605596" start="50226" end="50238" title="Travis Scott" label="Travis Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q59268408" start="50243" end="50262" title="Megan Thee Stallion" label="Megan Thee Stallion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141400" start="50298" end="50314" title="Houston Theater District" label="Theater District"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874734" start="50388" end="50399" title="Bayou Place" label="Bayou Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q7639172" start="50576" end="50591" title="Sundance Cinema" label="Sundance Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874731" start="50597" end="50615" title="Bayou Music Center" label="Bayou Music Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749172" start="50673" end="50693" title="Space Center Houston" label="Space Center Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q318438" start="50836" end="50846" title="Moon rocks" label="Moon rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="50850" end="50863" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141392" start="50993" end="51001" title="The Galleria (Houston)" label="Galleria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253251" start="51016" end="51023" title="List of largest shopping malls in the United States" label="largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303351" start="51087" end="51104" title="Downtown Aquarium, Houston" label="Downtown Aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407646" start="51110" end="51131" title="Sam Houston Race Park" label="Sam Houston Race Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100139" start="51149" end="51166" title="Chinatown, Houston" label="current Chinatown"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914641" start="51175" end="51198" title="Mahatma Gandhi District" label="Mahatma Gandhi District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610510" start="51213" end="51228" title="ethnic enclaves" label="ethnic enclaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134180" start="51422" end="51434" title="Hermann Park" label="Hermann Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704513" start="51436" end="51454" title="Terry Hershey Park" label="Terry Hershey Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614513" start="51456" end="51473" title="Lake Houston" label="Lake Houston Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305507" start="51475" end="51488" title="Memorial Park, Houston, Texas" label="Memorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537308" start="51490" end="51506" title="Tranquility Park" label="Tranquility Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456095" start="51508" end="51529" title="Sesquicentennial Park" label="Sesquicentennial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281916" start="51531" end="51546" title="Discovery Green" label="Discovery Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q104844896" start="51548" end="51566" title="Buffalo Bayou Park" label="Buffalo Bayou Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407645" start="51571" end="51587" title="Sam Houston Park" label="Sam Houston Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2753621" start="51617" end="51628" title="Houston Zoo" label="Houston Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q610401" start="51637" end="51670" title="Houston Museum of Natural Science" label="Houston Museum of Natural Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886576" start="51991" end="52026" title="Houston Arboretum and Nature Center" label="Houston Arboretum and Nature Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6515680" start="52032" end="52060" title="Lee and Joe Jamail Skatepark" label="Lee and Joe Jamail Skatepark"/>
<link wikidata="Q909906" start="52073" end="52082" title="skatepark" label="skatepark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549050" start="52213" end="52243" title="Gerald D. Hines Waterwall Park" label="Gerald D. Hines Waterwall Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="52562" end="52584" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q848117" start="52590" end="52604" title="Houston Astros" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="52611" end="52632" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420795" start="52633" end="52647" title="expansion team" label="expansion team"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="52729" end="52741" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q30632053" start="52745" end="52749" title="2017 World Series" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q113580778" start="52754" end="52758" title="2022 World Series" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316792" start="52781" end="52785" title="2005 World Series" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q66364576" start="52787" end="52791" title="2019 World Series" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q108864102" start="52797" end="52801" title="2021 World Series" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q161345" start="52876" end="52891" title="Houston Rockets" label="Houston Rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="52898" end="52929" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294127" start="52964" end="52968" title="1971–72 NBA season" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626167" start="52988" end="53005" title="List of NBA champions" label="NBA Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589592" start="53014" end="53018" title="1994 NBA Finals" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590500" start="53034" end="53038" title="1995 NBA Finals" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q273256" start="53059" end="53074" title="Hakeem Olajuwon" label="Hakeem Olajuwon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392517" start="53076" end="53087" title="Otis Thorpe" label="Otis Thorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q295340" start="53089" end="53102" title="Clyde Drexler" label="Clyde Drexler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307611" start="53104" end="53118" title="Vernon Maxwell" label="Vernon Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168929" start="53124" end="53135" title="Kenny Smith" label="Kenny Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q223514" start="53141" end="53155" title="Houston Texans" label="Houston Texans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="53162" end="53186" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960114" start="53212" end="53216" title="2002 NFL season" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q328313" start="53222" end="53236" title="Houston Dynamo" label="Houston Dynamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="53242" end="53261" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886152" start="53309" end="53313" title="2006 Major League Soccer season" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577307" start="53327" end="53334" title="List of MLS Cup finals" label="MLS Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2854249" start="53345" end="53349" title="2006 MLS Cup" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515812" start="53354" end="53358" title="2007 MLS Cup" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303416" start="53364" end="53376" title="Houston Dash" label="Houston Dash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101443" start="53395" end="53430" title="National Women&amp;#x27;s Soccer League" label="National Women&amp;#x27;s Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q43080384" start="53471" end="53488" title="Houston SaberCats" label="Houston SaberCats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="53495" end="53500" title="Rugby union" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q30592108" start="53520" end="53538" title="Major League Rugby" label="Major League Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q60767105" start="53544" end="53562" title="Houston Roughnecks (2020)" label="Houston Roughnecks"/>
<link wikidata="Q124057379" start="53576" end="53579" title="United Football League (2024)" label="UFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q47496155" start="53642" end="53645" title="XFL (2020)" label="XFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193671" start="53708" end="53719" title="Daikin Park" label="Daikin Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166157" start="53745" end="53758" title="Toyota Center (Houston)" label="Toyota Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058864" start="53885" end="53896" title="NRG Stadium" label="NRG Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q71926" start="54105" end="54127" title="2013 NBA All-Star Game" label="2013 NBA All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q176460" start="54129" end="54149" title="Shell Energy Stadium" label="Shell Energy Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154710" start="54155" end="54178" title="soccer-specific stadium" label="soccer-specific stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708007" start="54207" end="54237" title="Texas Southern Tigers football" label="Texas Southern Tigers football"/>
<link wikidata="Q55604545" start="54280" end="54293" title="Aveva Stadium" label="Aveva Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q43080384" start="54307" end="54316" title="Houston SaberCats" label="SaberCats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025406" start="54352" end="54365" title="Reliant Astrodome" label="NRG Astrodome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5876764" start="54456" end="54473" title="Hofheinz Pavilion" label="Hofheinz Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857419" start="54504" end="54516" title="Rice Stadium (Rice University)" label="Rice Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752547" start="54518" end="54527" title="Rice Owls" label="Rice Owls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311038" start="54543" end="54552" title="NRG Arena" label="NRG Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711138" start="54554" end="54567" title="TDECU Stadium" label="TDECU Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472358" start="54581" end="54602" title="University of Houston" label="University of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752534" start="54610" end="54617" title="Houston Cougars" label="Cougars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573143" start="54692" end="54696" title="1968 Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298307" start="54698" end="54702" title="1986 Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298342" start="54707" end="54711" title="2004 Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="54712" end="54747" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="Major League Baseball All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332813" start="54754" end="54758" title="1989 NBA All-Star Game" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715430" start="54760" end="54764" title="2006 NBA All-Star Game" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q71926" start="54769" end="54773" title="2013 NBA All-Star Game" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q137341" start="54774" end="54791" title="NBA All-Star Game" label="NBA All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188158" start="54794" end="54809" title="Super Bowl VIII" label="Super Bowl VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049630" start="54811" end="54829" title="Super Bowl XXXVIII" label="Super Bowl XXXVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642194" start="54835" end="54848" title="Super Bowl LI" label="Super Bowl LI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072475" start="54873" end="54877" title="1981 NBA Finals" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072479" start="54879" end="54883" title="1986 NBA Finals" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589592" start="54885" end="54889" title="1994 NBA Finals" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590500" start="54894" end="54909" title="1995 NBA Finals" label="1995 NBA Finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316792" start="54951" end="54968" title="2005 World Series" label="2005 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q30632053" start="54970" end="54987" title="2017 World Series" label="2017 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q66364576" start="54989" end="55006" title="2019 World Series" label="2019 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q108864102" start="55008" end="55025" title="2021 World Series" label="2021 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q113580778" start="55030" end="55047" title="2022 World Series" label="2022 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642194" start="55164" end="55177" title="Super Bowl LI" label="Super Bowl LI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020214" start="55245" end="55264" title="2026 FIFA World Cup" label="2026 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778122" start="55364" end="55376" title="Shell Houston Open" label="Houston Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916437" start="55419" end="55442" title="Houston College Classic" label="Houston College Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16158135" start="55487" end="55500" title="Texas Kickoff" label="Texas Kickoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519336" start="55505" end="55509" title="Texas Bowl" label="Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594968" start="55556" end="55577" title="Grand Prix of Houston" label="Grand Prix of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q832052" start="55606" end="55620" title="IndyCar Series" label="IndyCar Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q735236" start="55680" end="55688" title="NRG Park" label="NRG Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504613" start="55879" end="55906" title="AMA Supercross Championship" label="AMA Supercross Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q300920" start="56033" end="56040" title="esports" label="esports"/>
<link wikidata="Q48838994" start="56079" end="56094" title="Houston Outlaws" label="Houston Outlaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454335" start="56120" end="56136" title="Overwatch League" label="Overwatch League"/>
<link wikidata="Q42308104" start="56189" end="56200" title="Dallas Fuel" label="Dallas Fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308596" start="56245" end="56259" title="mayor–council government" label="strong mayoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888675" start="56303" end="56312" title="Home rule in the United States" label="home rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q637217" start="56359" end="56370" title="Non-partisan democracy" label="nonpartisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916428" start="56459" end="56479" title="Houston City Council" label="Houston City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6263891" start="56513" end="56526" title="John Whitmire" label="John Whitmire"/>
<link wikidata="Q673633" start="57448" end="57458" title="comptroller" label="controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137109" start="57978" end="57991" title="Clymer Wright" label="Clymer Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314663" start="58586" end="58597" title="Republican Party of Texas" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707623" start="58602" end="58611" title="Democratic Party of Texas" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q213847" start="59242" end="59255" title="Annise Parker" label="Annise Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559093" start="59275" end="59291" title="Sanctuary city" label="sanctuary cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q16751186" start="59311" end="59327" title="Sylvester Turner" label="Sylvester Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q943091" start="59357" end="59360" title="U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement" label="ICE"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="59898" end="59905" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="59907" end="59915" title="cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q69488" start="59925" end="59929" title="MDMA" label="MDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="59935" end="59950" title="methamphetamine" label="methamphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q51695" start="60052" end="60060" title="Pasadena, Texas" label="Pasadena"/>
<link wikidata="Q944611" start="60108" end="60128" title="Dean Corll" label="Houston mass murders"/>
<link wikidata="Q484188" start="60175" end="60189" title="serial killing" label="serial killing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476195" start="60307" end="60318" title="Fourth Ward, Houston" label="Fourth Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q6637281" start="60657" end="60682" title="List of school districts in Houston" label="Nineteen school districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029560" start="60721" end="60756" title="Houston Independent School District" label="Houston Independent School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573594" start="60864" end="60876" title="List of Houston Independent School District schools" label="100 campuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q538791" start="61561" end="61608" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston" label="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472358" start="61684" end="61705" title="University of Houston" label="University of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="" start="61716" end="61735" title="List of research universities in the United States#Universities classified as &amp;quot;R1: Doctoral Universities – Highest Research Activity&amp;quot;" label="research university"/>
<link wikidata="Q569446" start="61772" end="61800" title="University of Houston System" label="University of Houston System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784997" start="61901" end="61911" title="Third Ward, Houston" label="Third Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895505" start="61917" end="61949" title="University of Houston–Clear Lake" label="University of Houston–Clear Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895509" start="61958" end="61988" title="University of Houston–Downtown" label="University of Houston–Downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q626591" start="62152" end="62177" title="Texas Southern University" label="Texas Southern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620945" start="62204" end="62235" title="Historically black colleges and universities" label="historically black universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q842909" start="62448" end="62463" title="Rice University" label="Rice University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028707" start="62684" end="62690" title="Campus of Rice University" label="campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134180" start="62704" end="62716" title="Hermann Park" label="Hermann Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323511" start="62725" end="62745" title="Texas Medical Center" label="Texas Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337596" start="62837" end="62845" title="Neartown Houston" label="Neartown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495922" start="62851" end="62875" title="University of St. Thomas (Texas)" label="University of St. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q189329" start="62960" end="62972" title="Liberal arts education" label="liberal arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916417" start="63091" end="63119" title="Houston Christian University" label="Houston Christian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490440" start="63227" end="63237" title="Sharpstown, Houston" label="Sharpstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361290" start="63445" end="63477" title="Houston Community College" label="Houston Community College System"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843062" start="63555" end="63562" title="Midtown, Houston" label="Midtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117087" start="63663" end="63687" title="Lone Star College System" label="Lone Star College System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414339" start="63744" end="63763" title="San Jacinto College" label="San Jacinto College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6513309" start="63805" end="63816" title="Lee College" label="Lee College"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63892" end="63934" title="List of United States colleges and universities by enrollment#US Department of Education Ranking" label="10 largest institutions of higher learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895499" start="64033" end="64065" title="University of Houston Law Center" label="University of Houston Law Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799288" start="64070" end="64101" title="Thurgood Marshall School of Law" label="Thurgood Marshall School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q463465" start="64143" end="64157" title="American Bar Association" label="ABA-accredited"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568638" start="64181" end="64207" title="South Texas College of Law" label="South Texas College of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323511" start="64272" end="64292" title="Texas Medical Center" label="Texas Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q494230" start="64364" end="64378" title="medical school" label="medical school"/>
<link wikidata="Q96418922" start="64381" end="64404" title="McGovern Medical School" label="McGovern Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896431" start="64414" end="64470" title="The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston" label="The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892284" start="64476" end="64502" title="Baylor College of Medicine" label="Baylor College of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306469" start="64544" end="64575" title="Prairie View A&amp;amp;M University" label="Prairie View A&amp;amp;M University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085148" start="64710" end="64725" title="pharmacy school" label="pharmacy school"/>
<link wikidata="Q96419599" start="64764" end="64780" title="University of Houston College of Medicine" label="a medical school"/>
<link wikidata="Q618211" start="64798" end="64807" title="optometry" label="optometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335827" start="64874" end="64881" title="KPRC-TV" label="KPRC-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="64893" end="64896" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q731804" start="64899" end="64903" title="KHOU" label="KHOU"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="64916" end="64919" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q381717" start="64922" end="64929" title="KTRK-TV" label="KTRK-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="64942" end="64945" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339339" start="64948" end="64952" title="KTXH" label="KTXH"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148579" start="64965" end="64976" title="MyNetworkTV" label="MyNetworkTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6336743" start="64979" end="64983" title="KRIV (TV)" label="KRIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="64996" end="64999" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6330510" start="65002" end="65006" title="KIAH" label="KIAH"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="65019" end="65025" title="The CW" label="The CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q6341324" start="65028" end="65035" title="KXLN-DT" label="KXLN-DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q731824" start="65048" end="65057" title="Univision" label="Univision"/>
<link wikidata="Q6338873" start="65060" end="65067" title="KTMD-TV" label="KTMD-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q136538" start="65080" end="65089" title="Telemundo" label="Telemundo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6336009" start="65092" end="65099" title="KPXB-TV" label="KPXB-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q210500" start="65112" end="65126" title="Ion Television" label="Ion Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q6341749" start="65129" end="65133" title="KYAZ" label="KYAZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303733" start="65146" end="65150" title="MeTV" label="MeTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6329286" start="65156" end="65163" title="KFTH-DT" label="KFTH-DT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106818" start="65176" end="65182" title="UniMás" label="UniMás"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359017" start="65267" end="65293" title="owned-and-operated station" label="owned-and-operated station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339541" start="65444" end="65448" title="KUHT" label="KUHT"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="65499" end="65502" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="65641" end="65644" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339535" start="65661" end="65665" title="KUHF" label="KUHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045587" start="65932" end="65951" title="Pacifica Foundation" label="Pacifica Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718911" start="65973" end="65977" title="KPFT" label="KPFT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6331749" start="66013" end="66017" title="KKBQ" label="KKBQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6330884" start="66029" end="66033" title="KILT (AM)" label="KILT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6330882" start="66044" end="66051" title="KILT-FM" label="KILT-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6331860" start="66064" end="66068" title="KKHH" label="KKHH"/>
<link wikidata="Q6339090" start="66080" end="66084" title="KTRH" label="KTRH"/>
<link wikidata="Q14710756" start="66095" end="66099" title="KROI" label="KROI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334820" start="66111" end="66115" title="KODA" label="KODA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6333640" start="66127" end="66131" title="KMJQ" label="KMJQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q6326420" start="66148" end="66152" title="KBXX" label="KBXX"/>
<link wikidata="Q595564" start="66223" end="66240" title="Houston Chronicle" label="Houston Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065024" start="66303" end="66324" title="Hearst Communications" label="Hearst Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390845" start="66416" end="66428" title="Houston Post" label="Houston Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q5808226" start="66616" end="66626" title="Bill Hobby" label="Bill Hobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141398" start="66703" end="66716" title="Houston Press" label="Houston Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q37933184" start="66802" end="66818" title="Hurricane Harvey" label="Hurricane Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995983" start="66944" end="66965" title="Houston Forward Times" label="Houston Forward Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q24890812" start="66979" end="66987" title="OutSmart" label="OutSmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6465908" start="67005" end="67022" title="La Voz de Houston" label="La Voz de Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689686" start="67086" end="67108" title="African-American newspapers" label="black-owned newspapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544792" start="68111" end="68122" title="Memorial Hermann Life Flight" label="Life Flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525831" start="68385" end="68410" title="University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center" label="MD Anderson Cancer Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892284" start="68412" end="68438" title="Baylor College of Medicine" label="Baylor College of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896431" start="68440" end="68464" title="University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston" label="UT Health Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815447" start="68466" end="68491" title="Memorial Hermann-Texas Medical Center" label="Memorial Hermann Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751188" start="68493" end="68519" title="Houston Methodist Hospital" label="Houston Methodist Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707563" start="68521" end="68551" title="Texas Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Texas Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472358" start="68557" end="68598" title="University of Houston College of Pharmacy" label="University of Houston College of Pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735235" start="68605" end="68621" title="Menninger Clinic" label="Menninger Clinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q501738" start="68920" end="68940" title="Harris Health System" label="Harris Health System"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886546" start="69053" end="69078" title="Ben Taub General Hospital" label="Ben Taub General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q786773" start="69717" end="69737" title="Automobile dependency" label="automobile-dependent"/>
<link wikidata="Q749649" start="69891" end="69898" title="carpool" label="carpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375146" start="70177" end="70195" title="Murdoch University" label="Murdoch University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069949" start="70259" end="70272" title="urban density" label="urban density"/>
<link wikidata="Q39558" start="70360" end="70368" title="gasoline" label="gasoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q104994" start="70414" end="70432" title="Los Angeles County, California" label="Los Angeles County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822691" start="70586" end="70597" title="walkability" label="walkability"/>
<link wikidata="Q842909" start="70619" end="70634" title="Rice University" label="Rice University"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875255" start="71406" end="71428" title="Limited-access road" label="limited-access highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434630" start="71514" end="71542" title="Units of transportation measurement" label="daily vehicle miles traveled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304276" start="71550" end="71563" title="Arterial road" label="Arterial road"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939396" start="71610" end="71619" title="toll road" label="toll road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292180" start="71701" end="71714" title="Spoke–hub distribution paradigm" label="hub-and-spoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q510662" start="71812" end="71821" title="ring road" label="ring road"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="71952" end="71971" title="Interstate Highway System" label="Interstate highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442501" start="71973" end="71977" title="Interstate 10 in Texas" label="I-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q94297" start="71979" end="71983" title="Interstate 45" label="I-45"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446872" start="71989" end="71993" title="Interstate 69 in Texas" label="I-69"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505525" start="72013" end="72018" title="U.S. Route 59 in Texas" label="US 59"/>
<link wikidata="Q408192" start="72050" end="72070" title="United States Numbered Highway System" label="United States routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503621" start="72075" end="72089" title="Texas state highway system" label="state highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505541" start="72277" end="72283" title="U.S. Route 290" label="US 290"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504189" start="72419" end="72425" title="Texas State Highway 288" label="SH 288"/>
<link wikidata="Q981796" start="72618" end="72622" title="Katy, Texas" label="Katy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576428" start="72678" end="72684" title="East Texas" label="Eastex"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="72731" end="72735" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504113" start="72756" end="72762" title="Texas State Highway 225" label="SH 225"/>
<link wikidata="Q51695" start="72770" end="72778" title="Pasadena, Texas" label="Pasadena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453529" start="72933" end="72938" title="Interstate 610 (Texas)" label="I-610"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323511" start="73016" end="73036" title="Texas Medical Center" label="Texas Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604788" start="73038" end="73052" title="Greenway Plaza" label="Greenway Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q982459" start="73068" end="73089" title="West University Place, Texas" label="West University Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q971124" start="73094" end="73109" title="Southside Place, Texas" label="Southside Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505727" start="73144" end="73153" title="Texas State Highway Beltway 8" label="Beltway 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503844" start="73295" end="73300" title="Texas State Highway 99" label="SH 99"/>
<link wikidata="Q93340" start="73505" end="73515" title="Sugar Land, Texas" label="Sugar Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q961272" start="73517" end="73525" title="Richmond, Texas" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q981796" start="73527" end="73531" title="Katy, Texas" label="Katy"/>
<link wikidata="Q36379" start="73533" end="73540" title="Cypress, Texas" label="Cypress"/>
<link wikidata="Q981346" start="73542" end="73548" title="Spring, Texas" label="Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477733" start="73550" end="73556" title="Porter, Texas" label="Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7006363" start="73558" end="73567" title="New Caney, Texas" label="New Caney"/>
<link wikidata="Q982045" start="73569" end="73578" title="Cleveland, Texas" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q981810" start="73580" end="73586" title="Dayton, Texas" label="Dayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q981185" start="73588" end="73600" title="Mont Belvieu, Texas" label="Mont Belvieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q812646" start="73606" end="73613" title="Baytown, Texas" label="Baytown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664855" start="73657" end="73690" title="Harris County Toll Road Authority" label="Harris County Toll Road Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470803" start="73695" end="73731" title="Fort Bend County Toll Road Authority" label="Fort Bend County Toll Road Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881503" start="73874" end="73887" title="frontage road" label="frontage road"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906690" start="74144" end="74156" title="managed lane" label="managed lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506052" start="74183" end="74198" title="Hardy Toll Road" label="Hardy Toll Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q981346" start="74245" end="74251" title="Spring, Texas" label="Spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989548" start="74257" end="74273" title="Westpark Tollway" label="Westpark Tollway"/>
<link wikidata="Q920528" start="74328" end="74336" title="Fulshear, Texas" label="Fulshear"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470804" start="74342" end="74359" title="Fort Bend Parkway" label="Fort Bend Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q981608" start="74379" end="74396" title="Sienna Plantation, Texas" label="Sienna Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460420" start="74677" end="74697" title="emergency management" label="emergency management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304276" start="74746" end="74759" title="arterial road" label="arterial road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097994" start="74874" end="74886" title="Municipal corporation" label="incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422267" start="74896" end="74925" title="extraterritorial jurisdiction" label="extraterritorial jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623012" start="75164" end="75180" title="street hierarchy" label="street hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17128254" start="75566" end="75578" title="Right-of-way (property access)" label="right of way"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988883" start="75789" end="75804" title="Westheimer Road" label="Westheimer Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815394" start="75806" end="75820" title="Memorial Drive (Houston)" label="Memorial Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503631" start="75822" end="75826" title="Texas State Highway 6" label="SH 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505175" start="75828" end="75835" title="Farm to Market Road 1960" label="FM 1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883434" start="75837" end="75855" title="Bellaire Boulevard" label="Bellaire Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696480" start="75861" end="75875" title="Telephone Road" label="Telephone Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015387" start="75896" end="75943" title="Metropolitan Transit Authority of Harris County" label="Metropolitan Transit Authority of Harris County"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="75961" end="75977" title="public transport" label="public transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="76005" end="76015" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q285496" start="76017" end="76051" title="High-occupancy vehicle lane" label="high-occupancy vehicle (HOV) lanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564783" start="76057" end="76068" title="paratransit" label="paratransit"/>
<link wikidata="Q738031" start="76485" end="76498" title="park and ride" label="park and ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934038" start="77038" end="77046" title="METRORail Red Line" label="Red Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q735236" start="77128" end="77136" title="NRG Park" label="NRG Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262189" start="77183" end="77193" title="METRORail Green Line" label="Green Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328286" start="77209" end="77217" title="East End, Houston" label="East End"/>
<link wikidata="Q4533683" start="77227" end="77238" title="METRORail Purple Line" label="Purple Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784997" start="77254" end="77264" title="Third Ward, Houston" label="Third Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q17083981" start="77316" end="77325" title="Northline, Houston" label="Northline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899437" start="77496" end="77507" title="METRORail Uptown Line" label="Uptown Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899434" start="77548" end="77554" title="Uptown Houston" label="Uptown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878855" start="77584" end="77601" title="bus rapid transit" label="bus rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894806" start="77639" end="77654" title="METRORail University Line" label="University Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="77773" end="77779" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294212" start="77845" end="77852" title="Houston station (Texas)" label="station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748907" start="77978" end="77992" title="Amtrak Thruway" label="Amtrak Thruway"/>
<link wikidata="Q852645" start="78052" end="78060" title="Longview, Texas" label="Longview"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407645" start="78254" end="78270" title="Sam Houston Park" label="Sam Houston Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281916" start="78274" end="78289" title="Discovery Green" label="Discovery Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358919" start="78552" end="78574" title="bicycle sharing system" label="bicycle sharing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995962" start="78592" end="78606" title="Houston Bcycle" label="Houston Bcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916359" start="79041" end="79063" title="Houston Airport System" label="Houston Airport System"/>
<link wikidata="Q744748" start="79193" end="79229" title="George Bush Intercontinental Airport" label="George Bush Intercontinental Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q771340" start="79234" end="79258" title="William P. Hobby Airport" label="William P. Hobby Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640723" start="79266" end="79285" title="commercial aviation" label="commercial aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q841771" start="79403" end="79420" title="Ellington Airport (Texas)" label="Ellington Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365417" start="79437" end="79471" title="Ellington Field Joint Reserve Base" label="Ellington Field Joint Reserve Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q335357" start="79477" end="79508" title="Federal Aviation Administration" label="Federal Aviation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q744748" start="79729" end="79765" title="George Bush Intercontinental Airport" label="George Bush Intercontinental Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q852211" start="80108" end="80150" title="United States Department of Transportation" label="United States Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916356" start="80231" end="80271" title="Houston Air Route Traffic Control Center" label="Houston Air Route Traffic Control Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q216486" start="80334" end="80354" title="Continental Airlines" label="Continental Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q174769" start="80382" end="80397" title="United Airlines" label="United Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811588" start="80572" end="80575" title="airline hub" label="hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q213717" start="80584" end="80617" title="O&amp;#x27;Hare International Airport" label="O&amp;#x27;Hare International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q368804" start="80891" end="80925" title="U.S. Customs and Border Protection" label="U.S. Customs and Border Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q771340" start="80928" end="80952" title="William P. Hobby Airport" label="William P. Hobby Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q503308" start="81190" end="81208" title="Southwest Airlines" label="Southwest Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="81325" end="81338" title="the Caribbean" label="the Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4564680" start="81504" end="81528" title="1940 Air Terminal Museum" label="1940 Air Terminal Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q409068" start="81732" end="81762" title="Airports Council International" label="Airports Council International"/>
<link wikidata="Q841771" start="82021" end="82038" title="Ellington Airport (Texas)" label="Ellington Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="82084" end="82088" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639784" start="82338" end="82365" title="Sister Cities International" label="Sister Cities International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519" start="82655" end="82664" title="Abu Dhabi" label="Abu Dhabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9248" start="82696" end="82700" title="Baku" label="Baku"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="82722" end="82727" title="Basra" label="Basra"/>
<link wikidata="Q170616" start="82744" end="82749" title="Chiba (city)" label="Chiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542364" start="82766" end="82781" title="Grampian" label="Grampian Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q43509" start="82811" end="82820" title="Guayaquil" label="Guayaquil"/>
<link wikidata="Q12246" start="82839" end="82845" title="Huelva" label="Huelva"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="82862" end="82870" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q8660" start="82888" end="82895" title="Karachi" label="Karachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="82915" end="82922" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3897" start="82941" end="82947" title="Luanda" label="Luanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="82965" end="82969" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183" start="82987" end="82992" title="Perth" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q15174" start="83013" end="83021" title="Shenzhen" label="Shenzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25416" start="83038" end="83047" title="Stavanger" label="Stavanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="83065" end="83071" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q273014" start="83089" end="83096" title="Tampico" label="Tampico"/>
<link wikidata="Q5815" start="83114" end="83120" title="Tyumen" label="Tyumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q41278" start="83138" end="83161" title="Ulsan" label="Ulsan Metropolitan City"/>
<link wikidata="Q24260782" start="83197" end="83235" title="List of diplomatic missions in Houston" label="List of diplomatic missions in Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q956084" start="83238" end="83265" title="List of people from Houston" label="List of people from Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6600888" start="83268" end="83319" title="List of U.S. cities with large Hispanic populations" label="List of U.S. cities with large Hispanic populations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469678" start="83322" end="83345" title="USS Houston" label="USS &amp;quot;Houston&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13776" wikidata="Q348996" url="?curid=13776" title="Head (disambiguation)">
<text>The [[head]] is the part of an animal or human that usually includes the brain, eyes, ears, nose, and mouth.

Head or Heads may also refer to:
* Human head

== Arts, entertainment, and media ==
=== Music ===
==== Albums ====
* &quot;Heads&quot; (Bob James album), 1977
* &quot;Head&quot; (The Jesus Lizard album), 1990
* &quot;Head&quot; (The Monkees album), a 1968 soundtrack of the movie
* &quot;Heads&quot; (Osibisa album), 1972

==== Songs ====

* &quot;Head&quot; (Julian Cope song), 1991
* &quot;Head&quot; (Prince song)
* &quot;Head&quot;, a song by Mark Lanegan from &quot;Bubblegum&quot;
* &quot;Head&quot;, a song by Static-X from &quot;Beneath... Between... Beyond...&quot;
* &quot;Head&quot;, a song by Todd Sheaffer from &quot;The Black Bear Sessions&quot; and &quot;Elko&quot;
* &quot;Head&quot;, a song by Lotion from &quot;full Isaac&quot;
* &quot;Head&quot;, a song by Nicola Roberts from &quot;Cinderella&#x27;s Eyes&quot;
* &quot;Head&quot;, a song by The Cooper Temple Clause from the album &quot;Make This Your Own&quot;
* &quot;Head&quot;, a song by Don Patterson from the album &quot;Mellow Soul&quot;
* &quot;Heads&quot;, a song by Hawkwind from &quot;The Xenon Codex&quot;
* &quot;Heads&quot;, a song by James from the album &quot;Living in Extraordinary Times&quot;

==== Other music ====
* Head (band), an English rock band
* The Head (band), an indie rock band from Atlanta, Georgia
* Head (music), a main theme in jazz
* Drumhead, a membrane on a drum
* Headstock, a part of an instrument
* Brian Welch (born 1970), American musician better known as Head

=== Film and television ===
* &quot;Head&quot; (film), a 1968 film starring The Monkees
* &quot;Heads&quot; (film), a 1994 black comedy about a reporter investigating decapitations
* &quot;The Head&quot; (1959 film), a German horror film directed by Victor Trivas
*&quot;The Head&quot; (2003 film), a Russian black comedy
* &quot;The Head&quot; (1994 TV series), a 1994–1996 American animated television series
* &quot;The Head&quot; (2020 TV series), a 2020 psychological thriller series
* &quot;Head&quot; (&quot;Blackadder&quot;), a 1986 episode of &quot;Blackadder&quot;
* &quot;Head&quot; (&quot;American Horror Story&quot;), a 2013 episode of the anthology television series

=== Other arts ===
* &quot;Head&quot; (Csaky), a 1913 Cubist sculpture by Joseph Csaky
* Head (DC Comics), a minor character in the fictional DC universe

== Business ==
* Head (company), a manufacturer and marketer of skiing, snowboarding, swimming, tennis and other racket sports equipment
* Head Entertainment, a former British entertainment retailer
* Head Records, a British entertainment retailer
* Head Shampoo, an American organic hair product

== Computing ==
* head (Unix), a UNIX command
* &lt;head&gt;, an HTML document structure element
* HEAD, an HTTP request method
* Head, a reference to a commit object to a Repository

== Maritime ==
* Head (watercraft), the toilet on a watercraft
* Head (sail), the uppermost corner part of a sail
* Head race or &quot;crew race&quot;, a time-trial rowing competition and related events called &#x27;Head of the __ River&#x27;
* Headsail, any sail set forward of the foremost mast

== Science ==
* Head (botany), a structure composed of numerous individual flowers
* Head (geology), a recent near-surface deposit
* Head (linguistics), the word that determines the syntactic type of the phrase of which it is a member
* Head of tide, the highest point on a river affected by tidal fluctuations
* Head (hydrology), the point on a watercourse, up to which it has been changed by damming
* Headland, also known as a head, a type of peninsula
* High Energy Astrophysics Division, a division of the American Astronomical Society
* Hydraulic head, an elevation difference between two fluid surfaces that drives flow
** Pressure head, a term used in fluid mechanics to represent the internal energy of a fluid due to the pressure exerted on its container
** Total dynamic head, the total equivalent height that a fluid is to be pumped, taking into account friction losses in the pipe

== Technology ==
* Cylinder head, a part of an internal combustion engine
* Head (vessel), an end cap on a pressure vessel
* Head unit, a component of an automobile or home stereo system
* Recording head, the physical interface between a recording apparatus and a moving recording medium
** Disk read-and-write head, part of a disk drive
* Sprinkler head, a component of a fire sprinkler system

== Titles ==
* Head coach, senior coach of an athletic team
* Head girl and head boy, positions in student government
* Head of government, the most senior executive of a cabinet and government
* Head of mission, the senior diplomat in a foreign post
* Head of state, the most senior public representative of a state
* Head teacher, the most senior teacher and leader of a school
* Head, a person who uses psychoactive drugs, such as a cokehead

== Other uses ==
* Head (surname), a surname (and list of people with that name)
* The Head, Queensland, a locality in Australia
* Beer head, a frothy emulsion at the top of a serving of beer
* Head of radius, part of the forearm bone
* Sydney Heads or simply The Heads, headlands that form the entrance to Sydney Harbour
* Viscount Head, a title in the Peerage of the United Kingdom
* Head baronets, two titles, one extinct in the Baronetage of England, the other extant in the Baronetage of the UK
* Head, the flat end of a barrel
* Head, slang for fellatio
* Heads, the obverse of a coin; as in &quot;heads or tails&quot;

== See also ==
* Headed (disambiguation)
* Header (disambiguation)
* Heading (disambiguation)
* Heads in heraldry
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q348996" start="4" end="12" title="Head (disambiguation)" label="[[head]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q348996" start="110" end="114" title="Head (disambiguation)" label="Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q348996" start="118" end="123" title="Head (disambiguation)" label="Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409626" start="145" end="155" title="Human head" label="Human head"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129000" start="227" end="262" title="Heads (Bob James album)" label="&amp;quot;Heads&amp;quot; (Bob James album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128974" start="271" end="312" title="Head (The Jesus Lizard album)" label="&amp;quot;Head&amp;quot; (The Jesus Lizard album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009487" start="321" end="357" title="Head (The Monkees album)" label="&amp;quot;Head&amp;quot; (The Monkees album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689944" start="392" end="425" title="Heads (Osibisa album)" label="&amp;quot;Heads&amp;quot; (Osibisa album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689088" start="452" end="487" title="Head (Julian Cope song)" label="&amp;quot;Head&amp;quot; (Julian Cope song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228240" start="496" end="526" title="Head (Prince song)" label="&amp;quot;Head&amp;quot; (Prince song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405360" start="581" end="590" title="Bubblegum (Mark Lanegan album)" label="Bubblegum"/>
<link wikidata="Q940534" start="647" end="678" title="Beneath... Between... Beyond..." label="Beneath... Between... Beyond..."/>
<link wikidata="Q7718246" start="740" end="763" title="The Black Bear Sessions" label="The Black Bear Sessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508085" start="839" end="849" title="full Isaac" label="full Isaac"/>
<link wikidata="Q867408" start="912" end="934" title="Cinderella&amp;#x27;s Eyes" label="Cinderella&amp;#x27;s Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6739096" start="1017" end="1035" title="Make This Your Own" label="Make This Your Own"/>
<link wikidata="Q17041090" start="1107" end="1118" title="Mellow Soul" label="Mellow Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153555" start="1176" end="1191" title="The Xenon Codex" label="The Xenon Codex"/>
<link wikidata="Q96390593" start="1256" end="1285" title="Living in Extraordinary Times" label="Living in Extraordinary Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689096" start="1317" end="1328" title="Head (band)" label="Head (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25056287" start="1353" end="1368" title="The Head (band)" label="The Head (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689105" start="1413" end="1425" title="Head (music)" label="Head (music)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116731" start="1450" end="1458" title="Drumhead" label="Drumhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033547" start="1483" end="1492" title="Headstock" label="Headstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q331733" start="1520" end="1531" title="Brian Welch" label="Brian Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280621" start="1615" end="1638" title="Head (film)" label="&amp;quot;Head&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4142046" start="1675" end="1699" title="Heads (film)" label="&amp;quot;Heads&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208750" start="1768" end="1800" title="The Head (1959 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Head&amp;quot; (1959 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3213375" start="1850" end="1882" title="The Head (2003 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Head&amp;quot; (2003 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163537" start="1909" end="1946" title="The Head (1994 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Head&amp;quot; (1994 TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q97160028" start="1998" end="2035" title="The Head (2020 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;The Head&amp;quot; (2020 TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385959" start="2076" end="2117" title="Head (Blackadder)" label="&amp;quot;Head&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Blackadder&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15730958" start="2162" end="2214" title="Head (American Horror Story)" label="&amp;quot;Head&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;American Horror Story&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55613526" start="2288" end="2312" title="Head (Csaky)" label="&amp;quot;Head&amp;quot; (Csaky)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6568332" start="2356" end="2372" title="Head (DC Comics)" label="Head (DC Comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q631894" start="2439" end="2453" title="Head (company)" label="Head (company)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689141" start="2561" end="2579" title="Head Entertainment" label="Head Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q19903312" start="2623" end="2635" title="Head Records" label="Head Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995020" start="2672" end="2684" title="Head Shampoo" label="Head Shampoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q283926" start="2738" end="2749" title="head (Unix)" label="head (Unix)"/>
<link wikidata="Q179551" start="2785" end="2816" title="List of HTML tags" label="HTML document structure element"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2828" end="2847" title="HTTP#Request methods" label="HTTP request method"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133368" start="2892" end="2902" title="Repository (version control)" label="Repository"/>
<link wikidata="Q282405" start="2921" end="2938" title="Head (watercraft)" label="Head (watercraft)"/>
<link wikidata="Q352376" start="2969" end="2980" title="Head (sail)" label="Head (sail)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689461" start="3020" end="3029" title="Head race" label="Head race"/>
<link wikidata="Q116986945" start="3149" end="3157" title="Headsail" label="Headsail"/>
<link wikidata="Q587369" start="3218" end="3231" title="Head (botany)" label="Head (botany)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689100" start="3287" end="3301" title="Head (geology)" label="Head (geology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277394" start="3335" end="3353" title="Head (linguistics)" label="Head (linguistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689431" start="3439" end="3451" title="Head of tide" label="Head of tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334900" start="3515" end="3531" title="Head (hydrology)" label="Head (hydrology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q191992" start="3606" end="3614" title="Headland" label="Headland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133697" start="3660" end="3693" title="High Energy Astrophysics Division" label="High Energy Astrophysics Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q369743" start="3745" end="3759" title="Hydraulic head" label="Hydraulic head"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190625" start="3832" end="3845" title="Pressure head" label="Pressure head"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128639" start="3970" end="3988" title="Total dynamic head" label="Total dynamic head"/>
<link wikidata="Q217312" start="4116" end="4129" title="Cylinder head" label="Cylinder head"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021644" start="4173" end="4186" title="Head (vessel)" label="Head (vessel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q124871" start="4222" end="4231" title="Head unit" label="Head unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501010" start="4286" end="4300" title="Recording head" label="Recording head"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165056" start="4388" end="4412" title="Disk read-and-write head" label="Disk read-and-write head"/>
<link wikidata="Q16285362" start="4437" end="4451" title="Sprinkler head" label="Sprinkler head"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246315" start="4508" end="4518" title="Head coach" label="Head coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689310" start="4555" end="4577" title="Head girl and head boy" label="Head girl and head boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="4613" end="4631" title="Head of government" label="Head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251687" start="4689" end="4704" title="Head of mission" label="Head of mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="4746" end="4759" title="Head of state" label="Head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056391" start="4812" end="4824" title="Head teacher" label="Head teacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743188" start="4929" end="4937" title="cokehead" label="cokehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q13560595" start="4958" end="4972" title="Head (surname)" label="Head (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55807881" start="5022" end="5042" title="The Head, Queensland" label="The Head, Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879988" start="5070" end="5079" title="Beer head" label="Beer head"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331828" start="5133" end="5147" title="Head of radius" label="Head of radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659962" start="5176" end="5188" title="Sydney Heads" label="Sydney Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528198" start="5263" end="5276" title="Viscount Head" label="Viscount Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689271" start="5325" end="5338" title="Head baronets" label="Head baronets"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289" start="5465" end="5471" title="barrel" label="barrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8401" start="5490" end="5498" title="fellatio" label="fellatio"/>
<link wikidata="Q20725526" start="5512" end="5519" title="obverse" label="obverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689540" start="5582" end="5605" title="Headed (disambiguation)" label="Headed (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q747318" start="5608" end="5631" title="Header (disambiguation)" label="Header (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27787138" start="5634" end="5658" title="Heading (disambiguation)" label="Heading (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15824240" start="5661" end="5678" title="Heads in heraldry" label="Heads in heraldry"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13777" wikidata="Q4439" url="?curid=13777" title="Hard disk drive">
<text>A hard disk drive (HDD), hard disk, hard drive, or fixed disk is an electro-mechanical data storage device that stores and retrieves digital data using magnetic storage with one or more rigid rapidly rotating platters coated with magnetic material. The platters are paired with magnetic heads, usually arranged on a moving actuator arm, which read and write data to the platter surfaces. Data is accessed in a random-access manner, meaning that individual blocks of data can be stored and retrieved in any order. HDDs are a type of non-volatile storage, retaining stored data when powered off. Modern HDDs are typically in the form of a small rectangular box.

Hard disk drives were introduced by IBM in 1956, and were the dominant secondary storage device for general-purpose computers beginning in the early 1960s. HDDs maintained this position into the modern era of servers and personal computers, though personal computing devices produced in large volume, like mobile phones and tablets, rely on flash memory storage devices. More than 224 companies have produced HDDs historically, though after extensive industry consolidation, most units are manufactured by Seagate, Toshiba, and Western Digital. HDDs dominate the volume of storage produced (exabytes per year) for servers. Though production is growing slowly (by exabytes shipped), sales revenues and unit shipments are declining, because solid-state drives (SSDs) have higher data-transfer rates, higher areal storage density, somewhat better reliability, and much lower latency and access times.

The revenues for SSDs, most of which use NAND flash memory, slightly exceeded those for HDDs in 2018. Flash storage products had more than twice the revenue of hard disk drives . Though SSDs have four to nine times higher cost per bit, they are replacing HDDs in applications where speed, power consumption, small size, high capacity and durability are important. , the cost per bit of SSDs is falling, and the price premium over HDDs has narrowed.

The primary characteristics of an HDD are its capacity and performance. Capacity is specified in unit prefixes corresponding to powers of : a 1-terabyte (TB) drive has a capacity of gigabytes, where 1 gigabyte = 1 000 megabytes = 1 000 000 kilobytes (1 million) = 1 000 000 000 bytes (1 billion). Typically, some of an HDD&#x27;s capacity is unavailable to the user because it is used by the file system and the computer operating system, and possibly inbuilt redundancy for error correction and recovery. There can be confusion regarding storage capacity since capacities are stated in decimal gigabytes (powers of 1000) by HDD manufacturers, whereas the most commonly used operating systems report capacities in powers of 1024, which results in a smaller number than advertised. Performance is specified as the time required to move the heads to a track or cylinder (average access time), the time it takes for the desired sector to move under the head (average latency, which is a function of the physical rotational speed in revolutions per minute), and finally, the speed at which the data is transmitted (data rate).

The two most common form factors for modern HDDs are 3.5-inch, for desktop computers, and 2.5-inch, primarily for laptops. HDDs are connected to systems by standard interface cables such as SATA (Serial ATA), USB, SAS (Serial Attached SCSI), or PATA (Parallel ATA) cables.

== History ==

The first production IBM hard disk drive, the 350 disk storage, shipped in 1957 as a component of the IBM 305 RAMAC system. It was approximately the size of two large refrigerators and stored five million six-bit characters (3.75 megabytes) on a stack of 52 disks (100 surfaces used). The 350 had a single arm with two read/write heads, one facing up and the other down, that moved both horizontally between a pair of adjacent platters and vertically from one pair of platters to a second set. Variants of the IBM 350 were the IBM 355, IBM 7300 and IBM 1405.

In 1961, IBM announced, and in 1962 shipped, the IBM 1301 disk storage unit, which superseded
the IBM 350 and similar drives. The 1301 consisted of one (for Model 1) or two (for model 2) modules, each containing 25 platters, each platter about thick and in diameter. While the earlier IBM disk drives used only two read/write heads per arm, the 1301 used an array of 48 heads (comb), each array moving horizontally as a single unit, one head per surface used. Cylinder-mode read/write operations were supported, and the heads flew about 250 micro-inches (about 6 μm) above the platter surface. Motion of the head array depended upon a binary adder system of hydraulic actuators which assured repeatable positioning. The 1301 cabinet was about the size of three large refrigerators placed side by side, storing the equivalent of about 21 million eight-bit bytes per module. Access time was about a quarter of a second.

Also in 1962, IBM introduced the model 1311 disk drive, which was about the size of a washing machine and stored two million characters on a removable disk pack. Users could buy additional packs and interchange them as needed, much like reels of magnetic tape. Later models of removable pack drives, from IBM and others, became the norm in most computer installations and reached capacities of 300 megabytes by the early 1980s. Non-removable HDDs were called &quot;fixed disk&quot; drives.

In 1963, IBM introduced the 1302, with twice the track capacity and twice as many tracks per cylinder as the 1301. The 1302 had one (for Model 1) or two (for Model 2) modules, each containing a separate comb for the first 250 tracks and the last 250 tracks.

Some high-performance HDDs were manufactured with one head per track, &quot;e.g.&quot;, Burroughs B-475 in 1964, IBM 2305 in 1970, so that no time was lost physically moving the heads to a track and the only latency was the time for the desired block of data to rotate into position under the head. Known as fixed-head or head-per-track disk drives, they were very expensive and are no longer in production.

In 1973, IBM introduced a new type of HDD code-named &quot;Winchester&quot;. Its primary distinguishing feature was that the disk heads were not withdrawn completely from the stack of disk platters when the drive was powered down. Instead, the heads were allowed to &quot;land&quot; on a special area of the disk surface upon spin-down, &quot;taking off&quot; again when the disk was later powered on. This greatly reduced the cost of the head actuator mechanism but precluded removing just the disks from the drive as was done with the disk packs of the day. Instead, the first models of &quot;Winchester technology&quot; drives featured a removable disk module, which included both the disk pack and the head assembly, leaving the actuator motor in the drive upon removal. Later &quot;Winchester&quot; drives abandoned the removable media concept and returned to non-removable platters.

In 1974, IBM introduced the swinging arm actuator, made feasible because the Winchester recording heads function well when skewed to the recorded tracks. The simple design of the IBM GV (Gulliver) drive, invented at IBM&#x27;s UK Hursley Labs, became IBM&#x27;s most licensed electro-mechanical invention of all time, the actuator and filtration system being adopted in the 1980s eventually for all HDDs, and still universal nearly 40 years and 10 billion arms later.

Like the first removable pack drive, the first &quot;Winchester&quot; drives used platters in diameter. In 1978, IBM introduced a swing arm drive, the IBM 0680 (Piccolo), with eight-inch platters, exploring the possibility that smaller platters might offer advantages. Other eight-inch drives followed, then drives, sized to replace the contemporary floppy disk drives. The latter were primarily intended for the then fledgling personal computer (PC) market.

Over time, as recording densities were greatly increased, further reductions in disk diameter to 3.5&quot; and 2.5&quot; were found to be optimum. Powerful rare earth magnet materials became affordable during this period and were complementary to the swing arm actuator design to make possible the compact form factors of modern HDDs.

As the 1980s began, HDDs were a rare and very expensive additional feature in PCs, but by the late 1980s, their cost had been reduced to the point where they were standard on all but the cheapest computers.

Most HDDs in the early 1980s were sold to PC end users as an external, add-on subsystem. The subsystem was not sold under the drive manufacturer&#x27;s name but under the subsystem manufacturer&#x27;s name such as Corvus Systems and Tallgrass Technologies, or under the PC system manufacturer&#x27;s name such as the Apple ProFile. The IBM PC/XT in 1983 included an internal 10 MB HDD, and soon thereafter, internal HDDs proliferated on personal computers.

External HDDs remained popular for much longer on the Apple Macintosh. Many Macintosh computers made between 1986 and 1998 featured a SCSI port on the back, making external expansion simple. Older compact Macintosh computers did not have user-accessible hard drive bays (indeed, the Macintosh 128K, Macintosh 512K, and Macintosh Plus did not feature a hard drive bay at all), so on those models, external SCSI disks were the only reasonable option for expanding upon any internal storage.

HDD improvements have been driven by increasing areal density, listed in the table above. Applications expanded through the 2000s, from the mainframe computers of the late 1950s to most mass storage applications including computers and consumer applications such as storage of entertainment content.

In the 2000s and 2010s, NAND began supplanting HDDs in applications requiring portability or high performance. NAND performance is improving faster than HDDs, and applications for HDDs are eroding. In 2018, the largest hard drive had a capacity of 15 TB, while the largest capacity SSD had a capacity of 100 TB. , HDDs were forecast to reach 100 TB capacities around 2025, but , the expected pace of improvement was pared back to 50 TB by 2026. Smaller form factors, 1.8-inches and below, were discontinued around 2010. The cost of solid-state storage (NAND), represented by Moore&#x27;s law, is improving faster than HDDs. NAND has a higher price elasticity of demand than HDDs, and this drives market growth. During the late 2000s and 2010s, the product life cycle of HDDs entered a mature phase, and slowing sales may indicate the onset of the declining phase.

The 2011 Thailand floods damaged the manufacturing plants and impacted hard disk drive cost adversely between 2011 and 2013.

In 2019, Western Digital closed its last Malaysian HDD factory due to decreasing demand, to focus on SSD production. All three remaining HDD manufacturers have had decreasing demand for their HDDs since 2014.

== Technology ==
=== Magnetic recording ===
A modern HDD records data by magnetizing a thin film of ferromagnetic material on both sides of a disk. Sequential changes in the direction of magnetization represent binary data bits. The data is read from the disk by detecting the transitions in magnetization. User data is encoded using an encoding scheme, such as run-length limited encoding, which determines how the data is represented by the magnetic transitions.

A typical HDD design consists of a &quot;&quot; that holds flat circular disks, called platters, which hold the recorded data. The platters are made from a non-magnetic material, usually aluminum alloy, glass, or ceramic. They are coated with a shallow layer of magnetic material typically 10–20 nm in depth, with an outer layer of carbon for protection. For reference, a standard piece of copy paper is thick.


The platters in contemporary HDDs are spun at speeds varying from in energy-efficient portable devices, to 15,000 rpm for high-performance servers. The first HDDs spun at 1,200 rpm and, for many years, 3,600 rpm was the norm. , the platters in most consumer-grade HDDs spin at 5,400 or 7,200 rpm.

Information is written to and read from a platter as it rotates past devices called read-and-write heads that are positioned to operate very close to the magnetic surface, with their flying height often in the range of tens of nanometers. The read-and-write head is used to detect and modify the magnetization of the material passing immediately under it.

In modern drives, there is one head for each magnetic platter surface on the spindle, mounted on a common arm. An actuator arm (or access arm) moves the heads on an arc (roughly radially) across the platters as they spin, allowing each head to access almost the entire surface of the platter as it spins. The arm is moved using a voice coil actuator or, in some older designs, a stepper motor. Early hard disk drives wrote data at some constant bits per second, resulting in all tracks having the same amount of data per track, but modern drives (since the 1990s) use zone bit recording, increasing the write speed from inner to outer zone and thereby storing more data per track in the outer zones.

In modern drives, the small size of the magnetic regions creates the danger that their magnetic state might be lost because of thermal effects⁠ ⁠— thermally induced magnetic instability which is commonly known as the &quot;superparamagnetic limit&quot;. To counter this, the platters are coated with two parallel magnetic layers, separated by a three-atom layer of the non-magnetic element ruthenium, and the two layers are magnetized in opposite orientation, thus reinforcing each other. Another technology used to overcome thermal effects to allow greater recording densities is perpendicular recording (PMR), first shipped in 2005, and , used in certain HDDs. Perpendicular recording may be accompanied by changes in the manufacturing of the read/write heads to increase the strength of the magnetic field created by the heads.

In 2004, a higher-density recording media was introduced, consisting of coupled soft and hard magnetic layers. So-called &quot;exchange spring media&quot; magnetic storage technology, also known as &quot;exchange coupled composite media&quot;, allows good writability due to the write-assist nature of the soft layer. However, the thermal stability is determined only by the hardest layer and not influenced by the soft layer.

Flux control MAMR (FC-MAMR) allows a hard drive to have increased recording capacity without the need for new hard disk drive platter materials. MAMR hard drives have a microwave-generating spin torque generator (STO) on the read/write heads which allows physically smaller bits to be recorded to the platters, increasing areal density. Normally hard drive recording heads have a pole called a main pole that is used for writing to the platters, and adjacent to this pole is an air gap and a shield. The write coil of the head surrounds the pole. The STO device is placed in the air gap between the pole and the shield to increase the strength of the magnetic field created by the pole; FC-MAMR technically doesn&#x27;t use microwaves but uses technology employed in MAMR. The STO has a Field Generation Layer (FGL) and a Spin Injection Layer (SIL), and the FGL produces a magnetic field using spin-polarised electrons originating in the SIL, which is a form of spin torque energy.

=== Components ===


A typical HDD has two electric motors: a spindle motor that spins the disks and an actuator (motor) that positions the read/write head assembly across the spinning disks. The disk motor has an external rotor attached to the disks; the stator windings are fixed in place. Opposite the actuator at the end of the head support arm is the read-write head; thin printed-circuit cables connect the read-write heads to amplifier electronics mounted at the pivot of the actuator. The head support arm is very light, but also stiff; in modern drives, acceleration at the head reaches 550 &quot;g&quot;.


The &quot;&quot; is a permanent magnet and moving coil motor that swings the heads to the desired position. A metal plate supports a squat neodymium–iron–boron (NIB) high-flux magnet. Beneath this plate is the moving coil, often referred to as the &quot;voice coil&quot; by analogy to the coil in loudspeakers, which is attached to the actuator hub, and beneath that is a second NIB magnet, mounted on the bottom plate of the motor (some drives have only one magnet).

The voice coil itself is shaped rather like an arrowhead and is made of doubly coated copper magnet wire. The inner layer is insulation, and the outer is thermoplastic, which bonds the coil together after it is wound on a form, making it self-supporting. The portions of the coil along the two sides of the arrowhead (which point to the center of the actuator bearing) then interact with the magnetic field of the fixed magnet. Current flowing radially outward along one side of the arrowhead and radially inward on the other produces the tangential force. If the magnetic field were uniform, each side would generate opposing forces that would cancel each other out. Therefore, the surface of the magnet is half north pole and half south pole, with the radial dividing line in the middle, causing the two sides of the coil to see opposite magnetic fields and produce forces that add instead of canceling. Currents along the top and bottom of the coil produce radial forces that do not rotate the head.

The HDD&#x27;s electronics controls the movement of the actuator and the rotation of the disk and transfers data to or from a disk controller. Feedback of the drive electronics is accomplished by means of special segments of the disk dedicated to servo feedback. These are either complete concentric circles (in the case of dedicated servo technology) or segments interspersed with real data (in the case of embedded servo, otherwise known as sector servo technology). The servo feedback optimizes the signal-to-noise ratio of the GMR sensors by adjusting the voice coil motor to rotate the arm. A more modern servo system also employs milli or micro actuators to more accurately position the read/write heads. The spinning of the disks uses fluid-bearing spindle motors. Modern disk firmware is capable of scheduling reads and writes efficiently on the platter surfaces and remapping sectors of the media that have failed.

=== Error rates and handling ===
Modern drives make extensive use of error correction codes (ECCs), particularly Reed–Solomon error correction. These techniques store extra bits, determined by mathematical formulas, for each block of data; the extra bits allow many errors to be corrected invisibly. The extra bits themselves take up space on the HDD, but allow higher recording densities to be employed without causing uncorrectable errors, resulting in much larger storage capacity. For example, a typical 1 TB hard disk with 512-byte sectors provides additional capacity of about 93 GB for the ECC data.

In the newest drives, , low-density parity-check codes (LDPC) were supplanting Reed–Solomon; LDPC codes enable performance close to the Shannon limit and thus provide the highest storage density available.

Typical hard disk drives attempt to &quot;remap&quot; the data in a physical sector that is failing to a spare physical sector provided by the drive&#x27;s &quot;spare sector pool&quot; (also called &quot;reserve pool&quot;), while relying on the ECC to recover stored data while the number of errors in a bad sector is still low enough. The S.M.A.R.T (Self-Monitoring, Analysis and Reporting Technology) feature counts the total number of errors in the entire HDD fixed by ECC (although not on all hard drives as the related S.M.A.R.T attributes &quot;Hardware ECC Recovered&quot; and &quot;Soft ECC Correction&quot; are not consistently supported), and the total number of performed sector remappings, as the occurrence of many such errors may predict an HDD failure.

The &quot;No-ID Format&quot;, developed by IBM in the mid-1990s, contains information about which sectors are bad and where remapped sectors have been located.

Only a tiny fraction of the detected errors end up as not correctable. Examples of specified uncorrected bit read error rates include:
*2013 specifications for enterprise SAS disk drives state the error rate to be one uncorrected bit read error in every 1016 bits read, 
*2018 specifications for consumer SATA hard drives state the error rate to be one uncorrected bit read error in every 1014 bits.
Within a given manufacturers model the uncorrected bit error rate is typically the same regardless of capacity of the drive.

The worst type of errors are silent data corruptions which are errors undetected by the disk firmware or the host operating system; some of these errors may be caused by hard disk drive malfunctions while others originate elsewhere in the connection between the drive and the host.

=== Development ===
The rate of areal density advancement was similar to Moore&#x27;s law (doubling every two years) through 2010: 60% per year during 1988–1996, 100% during 1996–2003 and 30% during 2003–2010. Speaking in 1997, Gordon Moore called the increase &quot;flabbergasting&quot;, while observing later that growth cannot continue forever. Price improvement decelerated to −12% per year during 2010–2017, as the growth of areal density slowed. The rate of advancement for areal density slowed to 10% per year during 2010–2016, and there was difficulty in migrating from perpendicular recording to newer technologies.

As bit cell size decreases, more data can be put onto a single drive platter. In 2013, a production desktop 3 TB HDD (with four platters) would have had an areal density of about 500 Gbit/in2 which would have amounted to a bit cell comprising about 18 magnetic grains (11 by 1.6 grains). Since the mid-2000s, areal density progress has been challenged by a superparamagnetic trilemma involving grain size, grain magnetic strength and ability of the head to write. In order to maintain acceptable signal-to-noise, smaller grains are required; smaller grains may self-reverse (electrothermal instability) unless their magnetic strength is increased, but known write head materials are unable to generate a strong enough magnetic field sufficient to write the medium in the increasingly smaller space taken by grains.

Magnetic storage technologies are being developed to address this trilemma, and compete with flash memory–based solid-state drives (SSDs). In 2013, Seagate introduced shingled magnetic recording (SMR), intended as something of a &quot;stopgap&quot; technology between PMR and Seagate&#x27;s intended successor heat-assisted magnetic recording (HAMR). SMR utilizes overlapping tracks for increased data density, at the cost of design complexity and lower data access speeds (particularly write speeds and random access 4k speeds).

By contrast, HGST (now part of Western Digital) focused on developing ways to seal helium-filled drives instead of the usual filtered air. Since turbulence and friction are reduced, higher areal densities can be achieved due to using a smaller track width, and the energy dissipated due to friction is lower as well, resulting in a lower power draw. Furthermore, more platters can be fit into the same enclosure space, although helium gas is notoriously difficult to prevent escaping. Thus, helium drives are completely sealed and do not have a breather port, unlike their air-filled counterparts.

Other recording technologies are either under research or have been commercially implemented to increase areal density, including Seagate&#x27;s heat-assisted magnetic recording (HAMR). HAMR requires a different architecture with redesigned media and read/write heads, new lasers, and new near-field optical transducers. HAMR is expected to ship commercially in late 2024, after technical issues delayed its introduction by more than a decade, from earlier projections as early as 2009. HAMR&#x27;s planned successor, bit-patterned recording (BPR), has been removed from the roadmaps of Western Digital and Seagate. Western Digital&#x27;s microwave-assisted magnetic recording (MAMR), also referred to as energy-assisted magnetic recording (EAMR), was sampled in 2020, with the first EAMR drive, the Ultrastar HC550, shipping in late 2020. Two-dimensional magnetic recording (TDMR) and &quot;current perpendicular to plane&quot; giant magnetoresistance (CPP/GMR) heads have appeared in research papers. 

Some drives have adopted dual independent actuator arms to increase read/write speeds and compete with SSDs.
A 3D-actuated vacuum drive (3DHD) concept and 3D magnetic recording have been proposed.

Depending upon assumptions on feasibility and timing of these technologies, Seagate forecasts that areal density will grow 20% per year during 2020–2034.

== Capacity ==
The highest-capacity HDDs shipping commercially are 36 TB. The capacity of a hard disk drive, as reported by an operating system to the end user, is smaller than the amount stated by the manufacturer for several reasons, e.g. the operating system using some space, use of some space for data redundancy, space use for file system structures. Confusion of decimal prefixes and binary prefixes can also lead to errors.

=== Calculation ===
Modern hard disk drives appear to their host controller as a contiguous set of logical blocks, and the gross drive capacity is calculated by multiplying the number of blocks by the block size. This information is available from the manufacturer&#x27;s product specification, and from the drive itself through use of operating system functions that invoke low-level drive commands. Older IBM and compatible drives, e.g. IBM 3390 using the CKD record format, have variable length records; such drive capacity calculations must take into account the characteristics of the records. Some newer DASD simulate CKD, and the same capacity formulae apply.

The gross capacity of older sector-oriented HDDs is calculated as the product of the number of cylinders per recording zone, the number of bytes per sector (most commonly 512), and the count of zones of the drive. Some modern SATA drives also report cylinder-head-sector (CHS) capacities, but these are not physical parameters because the reported values are constrained by historic operating system interfaces. The C/H/S scheme has been replaced by logical block addressing (LBA), a simple linear addressing scheme that locates blocks by an integer index, which starts at LBA 0 for the first block and increments thereafter. When using the C/H/S method to describe modern large drives, the number of heads is often set to 64, although a typical modern hard disk drive has between one and four platters. In modern HDDs, spare capacity for defect management is not included in the published capacity; however, in many early HDDs, a certain number of sectors were reserved as spares, thereby reducing the capacity available to the operating system. Furthermore, many HDDs store their firmware in a reserved service zone, which is typically not accessible by the user, and is not included in the capacity calculation.

For RAID subsystems, data integrity and fault-tolerance requirements also reduce the realized capacity. For example, a RAID 1 array has about half the total capacity as a result of data mirroring, while a RAID 5 array with drives loses of capacity (which equals to the capacity of a single drive) due to storing parity information. RAID subsystems are multiple drives that appear to be one drive or more drives to the user, but provide fault tolerance. Most RAID vendors use checksums to improve data integrity at the block level. Some vendors design systems using HDDs with sectors of 520 bytes to contain 512 bytes of user data and eight checksum bytes, or by using separate 512-byte sectors for the checksum data.

Some systems may use hidden partitions for system recovery, reducing the capacity available to the end user without knowledge of special disk partitioning utilities like diskpart in Windows.

=== Formatting ===

Data is stored on a hard drive in a series of logical blocks. Each block is delimited by markers identifying its start and end, error detecting and correcting information, and space between blocks to allow for minor timing variations. These blocks often contained 512 bytes of usable data, but other sizes have been used. As drive density increased, an initiative known as Advanced Format extended the block size to 4096 bytes of usable data, with a resulting significant reduction in the amount of disk space used for block headers, error-checking data, and spacing.

The process of initializing these logical blocks on the physical disk platters is called &quot;low-level formatting&quot;, which is usually performed at the factory and is not normally changed in the field. &quot;High-level formatting&quot; writes data structures used by the operating system to organize data files on the disk. This includes writing partition and file system structures into selected logical blocks. For example, some of the disk space will be used to hold a directory of disk file names and a list of logical blocks associated with a particular file.

Examples of partition mapping scheme include Master boot record (MBR) and GUID Partition Table (GPT). Examples of data structures stored on disk to retrieve files include the File Allocation Table (FAT) in the DOS file system and inodes in many UNIX file systems, as well as other operating system data structures (also known as metadata). As a consequence, not all the space on an HDD is available for user files, but this system overhead is usually small compared with user data.

=== Units ===


In the early days of computing, the total capacity of HDDs was specified in seven to nine decimal digits frequently truncated with the idiom &quot;millions&quot;.
By the 1970s, the total capacity of HDDs was given by manufacturers using SI decimal prefixes such as megabytes (1 MB = 1,000,000 bytes), gigabytes (1 GB = 1,000,000,000 bytes) and terabytes (1 TB = 1,000,000,000,000 bytes). However, capacities of memory are usually quoted using a binary interpretation of the prefixes, i.e. using powers of 1024 instead of 1000.

Software reports hard disk drive or memory capacity in different forms using either decimal or binary prefixes. The Microsoft Windows family of operating systems uses the binary convention when reporting storage capacity, so an HDD offered by its manufacturer as a 1 TB drive is reported by these operating systems as a 931 GB HDD. Mac OS X 10.6 (&quot;Snow Leopard&quot;) uses decimal convention when reporting HDD capacity. The default behavior of the command-line utility on Linux is to report the HDD capacity as a number of 1024-byte units.

The difference between the decimal and binary prefix interpretation caused some consumer confusion and led to class action suits against HDD manufacturers. The plaintiffs argued that the use of decimal prefixes effectively misled consumers, while the defendants denied any wrongdoing or liability, asserting that their marketing and advertising complied in all respects with the law and that no class member sustained any damages or injuries. In 2020, a California court ruled that use of the decimal prefixes with a decimal meaning was not misleading.

== Form factors ==


IBM&#x27;s first hard disk drive, the IBM 350, used a stack of fifty 24-inch platters, stored 3.75 MB of data (approximately the size of one modern digital picture), and was of a size comparable to two large refrigerators. In 1962, IBM introduced its model 1311 disk, which used six 14-inch (nominal size) platters in a removable pack and was roughly the size of a washing machine. This became a standard platter size for many years, used also by other manufacturers. The IBM 2314 used platters of the same size in an eleven-high pack and introduced the &quot;drive in a drawer&quot; layout, sometimes called the &quot;pizza oven&quot;, although the &quot;drawer&quot; was not the complete drive. Into the 1970s, HDDs were offered in standalone cabinets of varying dimensions containing from one to four HDDs.

Beginning in the late 1960s, drives were offered that fit entirely into a chassis that would mount in a 19-inch rack. Digital&#x27;s RK05 and RL01 were early examples using single 14-inch platters in removable packs, the entire drive fitting in a 10.5-inch-high rack space (six rack units). In the mid-to-late 1980s, the similarly sized Fujitsu Eagle, which used (coincidentally) 10.5-inch platters, was a popular product.

With increasing sales of microcomputers having built-in floppy-disk drives (FDDs), HDDs that would fit to the FDD mountings became desirable. Starting with the Shugart Associates SA1000, HDD &quot;form factors&quot; initially followed those of 8-inch, 5¼-inch, and 3½-inch floppy disk drives. Although referred to by these nominal sizes, the actual sizes for those three drives respectively are 9.5&quot;, 5.75&quot; and 4&quot; wide. Because there were no smaller floppy disk drives, smaller HDD form factors such as 2½-inch drives (actually 2.75&quot; wide) developed from product offerings or industry standards.

, 2½-inch and 3½-inch hard disks are the most popular sizes. By 2009, all manufacturers had discontinued the development of new products for the 1.3-inch, 1-inch and 0.85-inch form factors due to falling prices of flash memory, which has no moving parts. While nominal sizes are in inches, actual dimensions are specified in millimeters.

== Performance characteristics ==

The factors that limit the time to access the data on an HDD are mostly related to the mechanical nature of the rotating disks and moving heads, including:
* Seek time is a measure of how long it takes the head assembly to travel to the track of the disk that contains data. 
* Rotational latency is incurred because the desired disk sector may not be directly under the head when data transfer is requested. Average rotational latency is shown in the table, based on the statistical relation that the average latency is one-half the rotational period.
* The bit rate or data transfer rate (once the head is in the right position) creates delay which is a function of the number of blocks transferred; typically relatively small, but can be quite long with the transfer of large contiguous files.

Delay may also occur if the drive disks are stopped to save energy.

Defragmentation is a procedure used to minimize delay in retrieving data by moving related items to physically proximate areas on the disk. Some computer operating systems perform defragmentation automatically. Although automatic defragmentation is intended to reduce access delays, performance will be temporarily reduced while the procedure is in progress.

Time to access data can be improved by increasing rotational speed (thus reducing latency) or by reducing the time spent seeking. Increasing areal density increases throughput by increasing data rate and by increasing the amount of data under a set of heads, thereby potentially reducing seek activity for a given amount of data. The time to access data has not kept up with throughput increases, which themselves have not kept up with growth in bit density and storage capacity.

=== Latency ===
=== Data transfer rate ===
, a typical 7,200-rpm desktop HDD has a sustained &quot;disk-to-buffer&quot; data transfer rate up to . This rate depends on the track location; the rate is higher for data on the outer tracks (where there are more data sectors per rotation) and lower toward the inner tracks (where there are fewer data sectors per rotation); and is generally somewhat higher for 10,000-rpm drives. A current, widely used standard for the &quot;buffer-to-computer&quot; interface is SATA, which can send about 300 megabyte/s (10-bit encoding) from the buffer to the computer, and thus is still comfortably ahead of today&#x27;s disk-to-buffer transfer rates. Data transfer rate (read/write) can be measured by writing a large file to disk using special file-generator tools, then reading back the file. Transfer rate can be influenced by file system fragmentation and the layout of the files.

HDD data transfer rate depends upon the rotational speed of the platters and the data recording density. Because heat and vibration limit rotational speed, advancing density becomes the main method to improve sequential transfer rates. Higher speeds require a more powerful spindle motor, which creates more heat. While areal density advances by increasing both the number of tracks across the disk and the number of sectors per track, only the latter increases the data transfer rate for a given rpm. Since data transfer rate performance tracks only one of the two components of areal density, its performance improves at a lower rate.

=== Other considerations ===
Other performance considerations include quality-adjusted price, power consumption, audible noise, and both operating and non-operating shock resistance.

== Access and interfaces ==


Current hard drives connect to a computer over one of several bus types, including parallel ATA, Serial ATA, SCSI, Serial Attached SCSI (SAS), and Fibre Channel. Some drives, especially external portable drives, use IEEE 1394, or USB. All of these interfaces are digital; electronics on the drive process the analog signals from the read/write heads. Current drives present a consistent interface to the rest of the computer, independent of the data encoding scheme used internally, and independent of the physical number of disks and heads within the drive.

Typically, a DSP in the electronics inside the drive takes the raw analog voltages from the read head and uses PRML and Reed–Solomon error correction to decode the data, then sends that data out the standard interface. That DSP also watches the error rate detected by error detection and correction, and performs bad sector remapping, data collection for Self-Monitoring, Analysis, and Reporting Technology, and other internal tasks.

Modern interfaces connect the drive to the host interface with a single data/control cable. Each drive also has an additional power cable, usually direct to the power supply unit. Older interfaces had separate cables for data signals and for drive control signals.
* Small Computer System Interface (SCSI), originally named SASI for Shugart Associates System Interface, was standard on servers, workstations, Commodore Amiga, Atari ST and Apple Macintosh computers through the mid-1990s, by which time most models had been transitioned to newer interfaces. The length limit of the data cable allows for external SCSI devices. The SCSI command set is still used in the more modern SAS interface.
* Integrated Drive Electronics (IDE), later standardized under the name AT Attachment (ATA, with the alias PATA (Parallel ATA) retroactively added upon introduction of SATA) moved the HDD controller from the interface card to the disk drive. This helped to standardize the host/controller interface, reduce the programming complexity in the host device driver, and reduced system cost and complexity. The 40-pin IDE/ATA connection transfers 16 bits of data at a time on the data cable. The data cable was originally 40-conductor, but later higher speed requirements led to an &quot;ultra DMA&quot; (UDMA) mode using an 80-conductor cable with additional wires to reduce crosstalk at high speed.
* EIDE was an unofficial update (by Western Digital) to the original IDE standard, with the key improvement being the use of direct memory access (DMA) to transfer data between the disk and the computer without the involvement of the CPU, an improvement later adopted by the official ATA standards. By directly transferring data between memory and disk, DMA eliminates the need for the CPU to copy byte per byte, therefore allowing it to process other tasks while the data transfer occurs.
* Fibre Channel (FC) is a successor to parallel SCSI interface on enterprise market. It is a serial protocol. In disk drives usually the Fibre Channel Arbitrated Loop (FC-AL) connection topology is used. FC has much broader usage than mere disk interfaces, and it is the cornerstone of storage area networks (SANs). Recently other protocols for this field, like iSCSI and ATA over Ethernet have been developed as well. Confusingly, drives usually use &quot;copper&quot; twisted-pair cables for Fibre Channel, not fiber optics. The latter are traditionally reserved for larger devices, such as servers or disk array controllers.
* Serial Attached SCSI (SAS). The SAS is a new generation serial communication protocol for devices designed to allow for much higher speed data transfers and is compatible with SATA. SAS uses a mechanically compatible data and power connector to standard 3.5-inch SATA1/SATA2 HDDs, and many server-oriented SAS RAID controllers are also capable of addressing SATA HDDs. SAS uses serial communication instead of the parallel method found in traditional SCSI devices but still uses SCSI commands.
* Serial ATA (SATA). The SATA data cable has one data pair for differential transmission of data to the device, and one pair for differential receiving from the device, just like EIA-422. That requires that data be transmitted serially. A similar differential signaling system is used in RS485, LocalTalk, USB, FireWire, and differential SCSI. SATA I to III are designed to be compatible with, and use, a subset of SAS commands, and compatible interfaces. Therefore, a SATA hard drive can be connected to and controlled by a SAS hard drive controller (with some minor exceptions such as drives/controllers with limited compatibility). However, they cannot be connected the other way round—a SATA controller cannot be connected to a SAS drive.

== Integrity and failure ==



Due to the extremely close spacing between the heads and the disk surface, HDDs are vulnerable to being damaged by a head crash – a failure of the disk in which the head scrapes across the platter surface, often grinding away the thin magnetic film and causing data loss. Head crashes can be caused by electronic failure, a sudden power failure, physical shock, contamination of the drive&#x27;s internal enclosure, wear and tear, corrosion, or poorly manufactured platters and heads.

The HDD&#x27;s spindle system relies on air density inside the disk enclosure to support the heads at their proper flying height while the disk rotates. HDDs require a certain range of air densities to operate properly. The connection to the external environment and density occurs through a small hole in the enclosure (about 0.5 mm in breadth), usually with a filter on the inside (the &quot;breather filter&quot;). If the air density is too low, then there is not enough lift for the flying head, so the head gets too close to the disk, and there is a risk of head crashes and data loss. Specially manufactured sealed and pressurized disks are needed for reliable high-altitude operation, above about . Modern disks include temperature sensors and adjust their operation to the operating environment. Breather holes can be seen on most disk drives, excluding sealed drives, such as drives that use helium, where any exposure to outside air would cause a failure – they usually have a sticker next to them, warning the user not to cover the holes. The air inside the operating drive is constantly moving too, being swept in motion by friction with the spinning platters. This air passes through an internal recirculation filter to remove any leftover contaminants from manufacture, any particles or chemicals that may have somehow entered the enclosure, and any particles or outgassing generated internally in normal operation. Very high humidity present for extended periods of time can corrode the heads and platters. An exception to this are hermetically sealed, helium-filled HDDs that largely eliminate environmental issues that can arise due to humidity or atmospheric pressure changes. Such HDDs were introduced by HGST in their first successful high-volume implementation in 2013.

For giant magnetoresistive (GMR) heads in particular, a minor head crash from contamination (that does not remove the magnetic surface of the disk) still results in the head temporarily overheating, due to friction with the disk surface and can render the data unreadable for a short period until the head temperature stabilizes (so-called &quot;thermal asperity&quot;, a problem which can partially be dealt with by proper electronic filtering of the read signal).

When the logic board of a hard disk fails, the drive can often be restored to functioning order and the data recovered by replacing the circuit board with one of an identical hard disk. In the case of read-write head faults, they can be replaced using specialized tools in a dust-free environment. If the disk platters are undamaged, they can be transferred into an identical enclosure and the data can be copied or cloned onto a new drive. In the event of disk-platter failures, disassembly and imaging of the disk platters may be required. For logical damage to file systems, a variety of tools, including fsck on UNIX-like systems and CHKDSK on Windows, can be used for data recovery. Recovery from logical damage can require file carving.

A common expectation is that hard disk drives designed and marketed for server use will fail less frequently than consumer-grade drives usually used in desktop computers. However, two independent studies by Carnegie Mellon University and Google found that the &quot;grade&quot; of a drive does not relate to the drive&#x27;s failure rate.

A 2011 summary of research, into SSD and magnetic disk failure patterns by Tom&#x27;s Hardware summarized research findings as follows:
* Mean time between failures (MTBF) does not indicate reliability; the annualized failure rate is higher and usually more relevant. 
* HDDs do not tend to fail during early use, and temperature has only a minor effect; instead, failure rates steadily increase with age.
* S.M.A.R.T. warns of mechanical issues but not other issues affecting reliability, and is therefore not a reliable indicator of condition.
* Failure rates of drives sold as &quot;enterprise&quot; and &quot;consumer&quot; are &quot;very much similar&quot;, although these drive types are customized for their different operating environments.
* In drive arrays, one drive&#x27;s failure significantly increases the short-term risk of a second drive failing.

, Backblaze, a storage provider, reported an annualized failure rate of two percent per year for a storage farm with 110,000 off-the-shelf HDDs with the reliability varying widely between models and manufacturers. Backblaze subsequently reported that the failure rate for HDDs and SSD of equivalent age was similar.

To minimize cost and overcome failures of individual HDDs, storage systems providers rely on redundant HDD arrays. HDDs that fail are replaced on an ongoing basis.

== Market segments ==
===Consumer segment===
; Desktop HDDs
: Desktop HDDs typically have one to five internal platters, rotate at 5,400 to 10,000 rpm, and have a media transfer rate of or higher (1 GB = 109 bytes; = ). Earlier (1980–1990s) drives tend to be slower in rotation speed. , the highest-capacity desktop HDDs stored 16 TB, with plans to release 18 TB drives later in 2019. 18 TB HDDs were released in 2020. , the typical speed of a hard drive in an average desktop computer is 7,200 rpm, whereas low-cost desktop computers may use 5,900 rpm or 5,400 rpm drives. For some time in the 2000s and early 2010s some desktop users and data centers also used 10,000 rpm drives such as Western Digital Raptor but such drives have become much rarer and are not commonly used now, having been replaced by NAND flash-based SSDs.

; Mobile (laptop) HDDs
: Smaller than their desktop and enterprise counterparts, they tend to be slower and have lower capacity, because typically has one internal platter and were 2.5&quot; or 1.8&quot; physical size instead of more common for desktops 3.5&quot; form-factor. Mobile HDDs spin at 4,200 rpm, 5,200 rpm, 5,400 rpm, or 7,200 rpm, with 5,400 rpm being the most common; 7,200 rpm drives tend to be more expensive and have smaller capacities, while 4,200 rpm models usually have very high storage capacities. Because of smaller platter(s), mobile HDDs generally have lower capacity than their desktop counterparts.

; Consumer electronics HDDs
These drives typically spin at 5400 rpm and include:
* Video hard drives, sometimes called &quot;surveillance hard drives&quot;, are embedded into digital video recorders and provide a guaranteed streaming capacity, even in the face of read and write errors.
* Drives embedded into automotive vehicles; they are typically built to resist larger amounts of shock and operate over a larger temperature range.
; External and portable HDDs


: Current external hard disk drives typically connect via USB-C; earlier models use USB-B (sometimes with using of a pair of ports for better bandwidth) or (rarely) eSATA connection. Variants using USB 2.0 interface generally have slower data transfer rates when compared to internally mounted hard drives connected through SATA. Plug and play drive functionality offers system compatibility and features large storage options and portable design. , available capacities for external hard disk drives ranged from 500 GB to 10 TB. External hard disk drives are usually available as assembled integrated products, but may be also assembled by combining an external enclosure (with USB or other interface) with a separately purchased drive. They are available in 2.5-inch and 3.5-inch sizes; 2.5-inch variants are typically called &quot;portable external drives&quot;, while 3.5-inch variants are referred to as &quot;desktop external drives&quot;. &quot;Portable&quot; drives are packaged in smaller and lighter enclosures than the &quot;desktop&quot; drives; additionally, &quot;portable&quot; drives use power provided by the USB connection, while &quot;desktop&quot; drives require external power bricks. Features such as encryption, Wi-Fi connectivity, biometric security or multiple interfaces (for example, FireWire) are available at a higher cost. There are pre-assembled external hard disk drives that, when taken out from their enclosures, cannot be used internally in a laptop or desktop computer due to embedded USB interface on their printed circuit boards, and lack of SATA (or Parallel ATA) interfaces.

===Enterprise and business segment===
; Server and workstation HDDs
: Typically used with multiple-user computers running enterprise software. Examples are: transaction processing databases, internet infrastructure (email, webserver, e-commerce), scientific computing software, and nearline storage management software. Enterprise drives commonly operate continuously (&quot;24/7&quot;) in demanding environments while delivering the highest possible performance without sacrificing reliability. Maximum capacity is not the primary goal, and as a result the drives are often offered in capacities that are relatively low in relation to their cost.
: The fastest enterprise HDDs spin at 10,000 or 15,000 rpm, and can achieve sequential media transfer speeds above and a sustained transfer rate up to . Drives running at 10,000 or 15,000 rpm use smaller platters to mitigate increased power requirements (as they have less air drag) and therefore generally have lower capacity than the highest capacity desktop drives. Enterprise HDDs are commonly connected through Serial Attached SCSI (SAS) or Fibre Channel (FC). Some support multiple ports, so they can be connected to a redundant host bus adapter.
: Enterprise HDDs can have sector sizes larger than 512 bytes (often 520, 524, 528 or 536 bytes). The additional per-sector space can be used by hardware RAID controllers or applications for storing Data Integrity Field (DIF) or Data Integrity Extensions (DIX) data, resulting in higher reliability and prevention of silent data corruption.

;Surveillance hard drives; 
: Video recording HDDs used in network video recorders.

== Economy ==
=== Price evolution ===
HDD price per byte decreased at the rate of 40% per year during 1988–1996, 51% per year during 1996–2003 and 34% per year during 2003–2010. The price decrease slowed down to 13% per year during 2011–2014, as areal density increase slowed and the 2011 Thailand floods damaged manufacturing facilities and have held at 11% per year during 2010–2017.

The Federal Reserve Board has published a quality-adjusted price index for large-scale enterprise storage systems including three or more enterprise HDDs and associated controllers, racks and cables. Prices for these large-scale storage systems decreased at the rate of 30% per year during 2004–2009 and 22% per year during 2009–2014.

=== Manufacturers and sales ===

More than 200 companies have manufactured HDDs over time, but consolidations have concentrated production to just three manufacturers today: Western Digital, Seagate, and Toshiba. Production is mainly in the Pacific rim.

HDD unit shipments peaked at 651 million units in 2010 and have been declining since then to 166 million units in 2022. Seagate at 43% of units had the largest market share.
==Competition from SSDs==

HDDs are being superseded by solid-state drives (SSDs) in markets where the higher speed (up to 7 gigabytes per second for M.2 (NGFF) NVMe drives and 2.5 gigabytes per second for PCIe expansion card drives)), ruggedness, and lower power of SSDs are more important than price, since the bit cost of SSDs is four to nine times higher than HDDs. , HDDs are reported to have a failure rate of 2–9% per year, while SSDs have fewer failures: 1–3% per year. However, SSDs have more un-correctable data errors than HDDs.

SSDs are available in larger capacities (up to 100 TB) than the largest HDD, as well as higher storage densities (100 TB and 30 TB SSDs are housed in 2.5 inch HDD cases with the same height as a 3.5-inch HDD), although such large SSDs are very expensive.

A laboratory demonstration of a 1.33 Tb 3D NAND chip with 96 layers (NAND commonly used in solid-state drives (SSDs)) had 5.5 Tbit/in2 ), while the maximum areal density for HDDs is 1.5 Tbit/in2. The areal density of flash memory is doubling every two years, similar to Moore&#x27;s law (40% per year) and faster than the 10–20% per year for HDDs. , the maximum capacity was 16 terabytes for an HDD, and 100 terabytes for an SSD. HDDs were used in 70% of the desktop and notebook computers produced in 2016, and SSDs were used in 30%. The usage share of HDDs is declining and could drop below 50% in 2018–2019 according to one forecast, because SSDs are replacing smaller-capacity (less than one terabyte) HDDs in desktop and notebook computers and MP3 players.

The market for silicon-based flash memory (NAND) chips, used in SSDs and other applications, is growing faster than for HDDs. Worldwide NAND revenue grew 16% per year from $22 billion to $57 billion during 2011–2017, while production grew 45% per year from 19 exabytes to 175 exabytes.

== See also ==

* Automatic acoustic management
* Cleanroom
* Click of death
* Comparison of disk encryption software
* Data erasure
* Drive mapping
* Error recovery control
* Hard disk drive performance characteristics
* Hybrid drive
* Microdrive
* Network drive (file server, shared resource)
* Object storage
* Write precompensation
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 

== External links ==
* Hard Disk Drives Encyclopedia
* Video showing an opened HD working
* Average seek time of a computer disk (archived)
* Timeline: 50 Years of Hard Drives. .
* HDD from inside: Tracks and Zones. How hard it can be?
* Hard disk hacking firmware modifications, in eight parts, going as far as booting a Linux kernel on an ordinary HDD controller board
* Hiding Data in Hard Drive&#x27;s Service Areas (PDF), February 14, 2013, by Ariel Berkman (archived)
* Rotary Acceleration Feed Forward (RAFF) Information Sheet (PDF), Western Digital, January 2013
* PowerChoice Technology for Hard Disk Drive Power Savings and Flexibility (PDF), Seagate Technology, March 2010
* Shingled Magnetic Recording (SMR), HGST, Inc., 2015
* The Road to Helium, HGST, Inc., 2015
* Research paper about perspective usage of magnetic photoconductors in magneto-optical data storage.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="2" end="17" title="Hard disk drive" label="hard disk drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="19" end="22" title="Hard disk drive" label="HDD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="25" end="34" title="Hard disk drive" label="hard disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="36" end="46" title="Hard disk drive" label="hard drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="51" end="61" title="Hard disk drive" label="fixed disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q57515336" start="87" end="106" title="data storage device" label="data storage device"/>
<link wikidata="Q173285" start="133" end="145" title="digital data" label="digital data"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364527" start="152" end="168" title="magnetic storage" label="magnetic storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195211" start="209" end="217" title="hard disk platter" label="platters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165056" start="278" end="292" title="disk read-and-write head" label="magnetic heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q423488" start="323" end="331" title="actuator" label="actuator"/>
<link wikidata="Q218825" start="410" end="423" title="random-access" label="random-access"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146944" start="456" end="462" title="Block (data storage)" label="blocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q10997658" start="532" end="552" title="non-volatile storage" label="non-volatile storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q55397879" start="643" end="658" title="disk enclosure" label="rectangular box"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="697" end="700" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="732" end="749" title="secondary storage" label="secondary storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5867906" start="761" end="786" title="History of general-purpose CPUs" label="general-purpose computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q44127" start="870" end="877" title="server (computing)" label="servers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="882" end="899" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="967" end="979" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="985" end="992" title="Tablet computer" label="tablets"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="1002" end="1014" title="flash memory" label="flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434348" start="1061" end="1087" title="List of defunct hard disk manufacturers" label="produced HDDs historically"/>
<link wikidata="Q705392" start="1167" end="1174" title="Seagate Technology" label="Seagate"/>
<link wikidata="Q49125" start="1176" end="1183" title="Toshiba" label="Toshiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q738770" start="1189" end="1204" title="Western Digital" label="Western Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="1252" end="1259" title="exabyte" label="exabyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q487343" start="1400" end="1417" title="solid-state drive" label="solid-state drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="1601" end="1618" title="NAND flash memory" label="NAND flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655518" start="2069" end="2080" title="Hard disk drive performance characteristics" label="performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q15132612" start="2107" end="2118" title="unit prefix" label="unit prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="2154" end="2162" title="terabyte" label="terabyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q79738" start="2192" end="2200" title="gigabyte" label="gigabyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="2288" end="2292" title="byte" label="byte"/>
<link wikidata="Q174989" start="2402" end="2413" title="file system" label="file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="2431" end="2447" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771903" start="2974" end="2981" title="Latency (engineering)" label="latency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256787" start="3019" end="3035" title="rotational speed" label="rotational speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q206037" start="3039" end="3061" title="revolutions per minute" label="revolutions per minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808" start="3299" end="3308" title="computer interface" label="interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q188639" start="3324" end="3328" title="SATA" label="SATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="3343" end="3346" title="USB" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135301" start="3353" end="3373" title="Serial Attached SCSI" label="Serial Attached SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q230360" start="3379" end="3383" title="Parallel ATA" label="PATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712755" start="3469" end="3485" title="IBM 350" label="350 disk storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q79735" start="3653" end="3661" title="megabyte" label="megabyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712755" start="3950" end="3957" title="IBM 355" label="IBM 355"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712755" start="3959" end="3967" title="IBM 7300" label="IBM 7300"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712755" start="3972" end="3980" title="IBM 1405" label="IBM 1405"/>
<link wikidata="Q637368" start="4443" end="4456" title="Cylinder-head-sector" label="Cylinder-mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712755" start="4935" end="4945" title="IBM 1311" label="model 1311"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282316" start="5053" end="5062" title="disk pack" label="disk pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q193663" start="5148" end="5161" title="magnetic tape" label="magnetic tape"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5765" end="5773" title="History of IBM magnetic disk drives#IBM 2305" label="IBM 2305"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712755" start="6120" end="6130" title="IBM 3340" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="7770" end="7787" title="floppy disk drive" label="floppy disk drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988736" start="8638" end="8652" title="Corvus Systems" label="Corvus Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680128" start="8657" end="8679" title="Tallgrass Technologies" label="Tallgrass Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781218" start="8741" end="8754" title="Apple ProFile" label="Apple ProFile"/>
<link wikidata="Q34349" start="8760" end="8769" title="IBM PC/XT" label="IBM PC/XT"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="8936" end="8951" title="Apple Macintosh" label="Apple Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q220868" start="9016" end="9020" title="SCSI" label="SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137478" start="9165" end="9179" title="Macintosh 128K" label="Macintosh 128K"/>
<link wikidata="Q654114" start="9181" end="9195" title="Macintosh 512K" label="Macintosh 512K"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255728" start="9201" end="9215" title="Macintosh Plus" label="Macintosh Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q337445" start="9420" end="9433" title="Areal density (computer storage)" label="areal density"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="9512" end="9530" title="mainframe computer" label="mainframe computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426186" start="9558" end="9570" title="mass storage" label="mass storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q178655" start="10248" end="10264" title="Moore&amp;#x27;s law" label="Moore&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194154" start="10315" end="10341" title="price elasticity of demand" label="price elasticity of demand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10421" end="10439" title="Marketing#Product life cycle" label="product life cycle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10542" end="10562" title="2011 Thailand floods" label="2011 Thailand floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q738770" start="10673" end="10688" title="Western Digital" label="Western Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q184207" start="10974" end="10996" title="ferromagnetic material" label="ferromagnetic material"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="11097" end="11100" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q281884" start="11236" end="11254" title="run-length limited" label="run-length limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195211" start="11427" end="11435" title="hard disk platter" label="platters"/>
<link wikidata="Q447725" start="11527" end="11541" title="aluminum alloy" label="aluminum alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="11543" end="11548" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="11553" end="11560" title="ceramic" label="ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="11636" end="11638" title="nanometer" label="nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165056" start="12135" end="12155" title="disk read-and-write head" label="read-and-write heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463579" start="12234" end="12247" title="flying height" label="flying height"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369121" start="12738" end="12748" title="voice coil" label="voice coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q235790" start="12787" end="12800" title="stepper motor" label="stepper motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q144772" start="12976" end="12994" title="zone bit recording" label="zone bit recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122780" start="13236" end="13251" title="superparamagnetism" label="thermal effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122780" start="13332" end="13355" title="superparamagnetic limit" label="superparamagnetic limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086" start="13499" end="13508" title="ruthenium" label="ruthenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755844" start="13690" end="13713" title="perpendicular recording" label="perpendicular recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312976" start="14068" end="14089" title="exchange spring media" label="exchange spring media"/>
<link wikidata="Q211554" start="15785" end="15794" title="amplifier" label="amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q284602" start="15952" end="15965" title="g-force" label="&amp;quot;g&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11421" start="15991" end="16007" title="permanent magnet" label="permanent magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581044" start="16012" end="16023" title="moving coil" label="moving coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q908880" start="16108" end="16128" title="neodymium magnet" label="neodymium–iron–boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11421" start="16145" end="16151" title="magnet" label="magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369121" start="16223" end="16233" title="voice coil" label="voice coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q570" start="16266" end="16277" title="loudspeaker" label="loudspeaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788730" start="16531" end="16542" title="magnet wire" label="magnet wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="16830" end="16844" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16977" end="16993" title="magnetic field#Force on a charged particle" label="tangential force"/>
<link wikidata="Q891128" start="17568" end="17583" title="disk controller" label="disk controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137255" start="17689" end="17694" title="servomotor" label="servo"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611017" start="18436" end="18457" title="error correction code" label="error correction code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061598" start="18480" end="18509" title="Reed–Solomon error correction" label="Reed–Solomon error correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="18877" end="18879" title="Terabyte" label="TB"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="18953" end="18955" title="Gibibyte" label="GB"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611017" start="18964" end="18967" title="Forward error correction" label="ECC"/>
<link wikidata="Q187444" start="18999" end="19028" title="low-density parity-check code" label="low-density parity-check code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345282" start="19111" end="19124" title="Shannon limit" label="Shannon limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q168370" start="19250" end="19281" title="Bad sector" label="physical sector that is failing"/>
<link wikidata="Q673709" start="19535" end="19585" title="Self-Monitoring, Analysis and Reporting Technology" label="Self-Monitoring, Analysis and Reporting Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408770" start="19939" end="19950" title="HDD failure" label="HDD failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326322" start="20669" end="20691" title="silent data corruption" label="silent data corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q178655" start="20996" end="21012" title="Moore&amp;#x27;s law" label="Moore&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q243969" start="21151" end="21163" title="Gordon Moore" label="Gordon Moore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21906" end="21923" title="Superparamagnetism#Effect on hard drives" label="superparamagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151657" start="22124" end="22150" title="electrothermal instability" label="electrothermal instability"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="22458" end="22470" title="flash memory" label="flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q487343" start="22477" end="22494" title="solid-state drive" label="solid-state drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q705392" start="22513" end="22520" title="Seagate Technology" label="Seagate"/>
<link wikidata="Q18358007" start="22532" end="22559" title="shingled magnetic recording" label="shingled magnetic recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592494" start="22675" end="22707" title="heat-assisted magnetic recording" label="heat-assisted magnetic recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q218825" start="22869" end="22882" title="random access" label="random access"/>
<link wikidata="Q775196" start="22909" end="22913" title="HGST" label="HGST"/>
<link wikidata="Q738770" start="22927" end="22942" title="Western Digital" label="Western Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="22979" end="22985" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q190132" start="23041" end="23051" title="turbulence" label="turbulence"/>
<link wikidata="Q82580" start="23056" end="23064" title="friction" label="friction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592494" start="23640" end="23672" title="heat-assisted magnetic recording" label="heat-assisted magnetic recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q4444360" start="24013" end="24036" title="bit-patterned recording" label="bit-patterned recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q85811259" start="24335" end="24369" title="Two-dimensional magnetic recording" label="Two-dimensional magnetic recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q58353" start="24424" end="24447" title="giant magnetoresistance" label="giant magnetoresistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q131299" start="25223" end="25237" title="decimal prefix" label="decimal prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583973" start="25244" end="25257" title="binary prefix" label="binary prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712755" start="25725" end="25733" title="IBM 3390" label="IBM 3390"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176674" start="25744" end="25747" title="Count Key Data" label="CKD"/>
<link wikidata="Q637368" start="26049" end="26058" title="cylinder (disk drive)" label="cylinders"/>
<link wikidata="Q144772" start="26148" end="26153" title="Zone bit recording" label="zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q637368" start="26204" end="26224" title="cylinder-head-sector" label="cylinder-head-sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162337" start="26404" end="26428" title="logical block addressing" label="logical block addressing"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963867" start="26793" end="26810" title="Internal hard-drive defect management" label="defect management"/>
<link wikidata="Q179299" start="27174" end="27178" title="RAID" label="RAID"/>
<link wikidata="Q461671" start="27191" end="27205" title="data integrity" label="data integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q218341" start="27645" end="27653" title="checksum" label="checksum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474857" start="27909" end="27915" title="Host protected area" label="hidden"/>
<link wikidata="Q624167" start="27916" end="27926" title="disk partitioning" label="partitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616926" start="28017" end="28052" title="List of disk partitioning software" label="special disk partitioning utilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4490809" start="28058" end="28066" title="diskpart" label="diskpart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="28070" end="28077" title="Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q506271" start="28473" end="28488" title="Advanced Format" label="Advanced Format"/>
<link wikidata="Q624167" start="29020" end="29029" title="Disk partitioning" label="partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q174989" start="29034" end="29045" title="file system" label="file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q624752" start="29285" end="29303" title="Master boot record" label="Master boot record"/>
<link wikidata="Q603889" start="29314" end="29334" title="GUID Partition Table" label="GUID Partition Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q190167" start="29415" end="29436" title="File Allocation Table" label="File Allocation Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q170434" start="29450" end="29453" title="DOS" label="DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q306170" start="29470" end="29475" title="inode" label="inode"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="29485" end="29489" title="UNIX" label="UNIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q180160" start="29569" end="29577" title="metadata" label="metadata"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="29976" end="29978" title="SI" label="SI"/>
<link wikidata="Q79735" start="30004" end="30012" title="megabyte" label="megabyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q79738" start="30040" end="30048" title="gigabyte" label="gigabyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="30083" end="30091" title="terabyte" label="terabyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="30150" end="30156" title="main memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583973" start="30184" end="30205" title="binary prefixes" label="binary interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="30383" end="30400" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="30599" end="30607" title="Mac OS X" label="Mac OS X"/>
<link wikidata="Q381215" start="30620" end="30632" title="Mac OS X Snow Leopard" label="Snow Leopard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461523" start="30721" end="30741" title="command-line utility" label="command-line utility"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30943" end="30968" title="Binary prefix#Legal disputes" label="against HDD manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31427" end="31434" title="IBM 350" label="IBM 350"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="31621" end="31624" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712755" start="31640" end="31650" title="IBM 1311" label="model 1311"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712755" start="31861" end="31869" title="IBM 2314" label="IBM 2314"/>
<link wikidata="Q431000" start="32304" end="32316" title="19-inch rack" label="19-inch rack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276875" start="32333" end="32337" title="RK05" label="RK05"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507499" start="32537" end="32550" title="Fujitsu Eagle" label="Fujitsu Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="32680" end="32705" title="floppy disk" label="floppy-disk drives (FDDs)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344715" start="32784" end="32809" title="Shugart Associates" label="Shugart Associates SA1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q174077" start="33455" end="33467" title="flash memory" label="flash memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q46306" start="33642" end="33665" title="access time" label="time to access the data"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33773" end="33782" title="Hard disk drive performance characteristics#Seek time" label="Seek time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043737" start="33944" end="33955" title="disk sector" label="disk sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q194158" start="34174" end="34182" title="bit rate" label="bit rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q406391" start="34482" end="34497" title="Defragmentation" label="Defragmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383412" start="35007" end="35017" title="throughput" label="throughput"/>
<link wikidata="Q375176" start="35430" end="35436" title="disk buffer" label="buffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4089244" start="36188" end="36213" title="file system fragmentation" label="file system fragmentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q631360" start="36969" end="36974" title="price index" label="price"/>
<link wikidata="Q178048" start="37158" end="37161" title="bus (computing)" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q230360" start="37188" end="37191" title="Advanced Technology Attachment" label="ATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q188639" start="37193" end="37203" title="Serial ATA" label="Serial ATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q220868" start="37205" end="37209" title="SCSI" label="SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135301" start="37211" end="37231" title="Serial Attached SCSI" label="Serial Attached SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q376827" start="37243" end="37256" title="Fibre Channel" label="Fibre Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q181693" start="37312" end="37321" title="IEEE 1394 interface" label="IEEE 1394"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="37326" end="37329" title="USB" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q106370" start="37669" end="37672" title="Digital signal processor" label="DSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783694" start="37767" end="37771" title="PRML" label="PRML"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061598" start="37776" end="37805" title="Reed–Solomon error correction" label="Reed–Solomon error correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062839" start="37924" end="37954" title="error detection and correction" label="error detection and correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q168370" start="37969" end="37979" title="bad sector" label="bad sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q673709" start="38011" end="38062" title="Self-Monitoring, Analysis, and Reporting Technology" label="Self-Monitoring, Analysis, and Reporting Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q220868" start="38358" end="38389" title="Small Computer System Interface" label="Small Computer System Interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="38500" end="38515" title="Amiga peripherals" label="Commodore Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="38517" end="38525" title="Atari ST" label="Atari ST"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="38530" end="38545" title="Apple Macintosh" label="Apple Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135301" start="38771" end="38784" title="Serial Attached SCSI" label="SAS interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q230360" start="38788" end="38816" title="Integrated Drive Electronics" label="Integrated Drive Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q230360" start="38858" end="38871" title="AT Attachment" label="AT Attachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q230360" start="38899" end="38911" title="Parallel ATA" label="Parallel ATA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39362" end="39390" title="AT Attachment#Parallel ATA interface" label="&amp;quot;ultra DMA&amp;quot; (UDMA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q230187" start="39456" end="39465" title="crosstalk" label="crosstalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q210813" start="39606" end="39626" title="direct memory access" label="direct memory access"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="39715" end="39718" title="CPU" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q376827" start="39973" end="39986" title="Fibre Channel" label="Fibre Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029977" start="40108" end="40137" title="Fibre Channel Arbitrated Loop" label="Fibre Channel Arbitrated Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q237576" start="40257" end="40277" title="storage area network" label="storage area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q306152" start="40333" end="40338" title="iSCSI" label="iSCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q298746" start="40343" end="40360" title="ATA over Ethernet" label="ATA over Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282302" start="40575" end="40596" title="disk array controller" label="disk array controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135301" start="40601" end="40621" title="Serial Attached SCSI" label="Serial Attached SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q188639" start="41097" end="41107" title="Serial ATA" label="Serial ATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q608019" start="41274" end="41281" title="EIA-422" label="EIA-422"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928527" start="41342" end="41364" title="differential signaling" label="differential signaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047466" start="41383" end="41388" title="RS485" label="RS485"/>
<link wikidata="Q392163" start="41390" end="41399" title="LocalTalk" label="LocalTalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="41401" end="41404" title="USB" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q181693" start="41406" end="41414" title="FireWire" label="FireWire"/>
<link wikidata="Q220868" start="41433" end="41437" title="SCSI" label="SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592242" start="41987" end="41997" title="head crash" label="head crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408770" start="42002" end="42021" title="hard disk failure" label="failure of the disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="42301" end="42310" title="corrosion" label="corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511415" start="42396" end="42407" title="air density" label="air density"/>
<link wikidata="Q55397879" start="42419" end="42433" title="disk enclosure" label="disk enclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463579" start="42471" end="42484" title="flying height" label="flying height"/>
<link wikidata="Q58353" start="44152" end="44174" title="giant magnetoresistive" label="giant magnetoresistive"/>
<link wikidata="Q283865" start="45223" end="45227" title="fsck" label="fsck"/>
<link wikidata="Q14656" start="45231" end="45240" title="UNIX-like" label="UNIX-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q422202" start="45253" end="45259" title="CHKDSK" label="CHKDSK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="45263" end="45270" title="Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054772" start="45288" end="45301" title="data recovery" label="data recovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046162" start="45344" end="45356" title="file carving" label="file carving"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="45566" end="45592" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="45597" end="45603" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q575769" start="45774" end="45793" title="Tom&amp;#x27;s Hardware" label="Tom&amp;#x27;s Hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q754940" start="45837" end="45863" title="Mean time between failures" label="Mean time between failures"/>
<link wikidata="Q56155" start="47354" end="47361" title="Desktop computer" label="desktop"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="47377" end="47379" title="terabyte" label="TB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564916" start="47735" end="47757" title="Western Digital Raptor" label="Western Digital Raptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q865042" start="48678" end="48700" title="digital video recorder" label="digital video recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q752870" start="48813" end="48831" title="automotive vehicle" label="automotive vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q20026619" start="49027" end="49032" title="USB-C" label="USB-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q188639" start="49134" end="49139" title="eSATA" label="eSATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q857815" start="49299" end="49312" title="Plug and play" label="Plug and play"/>
<link wikidata="Q55397879" start="49632" end="49641" title="Disk enclosure" label="enclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q887369" start="50161" end="50172" title="power brick" label="power brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q17081362" start="50192" end="50202" title="Self encrypting drive" label="encryption"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="50204" end="50209" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q181693" start="50280" end="50288" title="FireWire" label="FireWire"/>
<link wikidata="Q173350" start="50513" end="50534" title="printed circuit board" label="printed circuit board"/>
<link wikidata="Q230360" start="50558" end="50570" title="Parallel ATA" label="Parallel ATA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318054" start="50707" end="50726" title="enterprise software" label="enterprise software"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="51506" end="51514" title="air drag" label="air drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135301" start="51649" end="51669" title="Serial Attached SCSI" label="Serial Attached SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q376827" start="51679" end="51692" title="Fibre Channel" label="Fibre Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q585585" start="51768" end="51784" title="host bus adapter" label="host bus adapter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5227177" start="51985" end="52005" title="Data Integrity Field" label="Data Integrity Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326322" start="52103" end="52125" title="silent data corruption" label="silent data corruption"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52129" end="52153" title="#VideoHDD" label="Surveillance hard drives"/>
<link wikidata="Q181481" start="52497" end="52517" title="2011 Thailand floods" label="2011 Thailand floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440396" start="52604" end="52625" title="Federal Reserve Board" label="Federal Reserve Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q631360" start="52659" end="52670" title="price index" label="price index"/>
<link wikidata="Q738770" start="53110" end="53125" title="Western Digital" label="Western Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q705392" start="53127" end="53134" title="Seagate Technology" label="Seagate"/>
<link wikidata="Q49125" start="53140" end="53147" title="Toshiba" label="Toshiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q487343" start="53421" end="53438" title="solid-state drive" label="solid-state drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q79738" start="53490" end="53499" title="gigabytes" label="gigabytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15528609" start="53515" end="53518" title="M.2" label="M.2"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157198" start="53526" end="53530" title="NVMe" label="NVMe"/>
<link wikidata="Q79738" start="53546" end="53555" title="gigabytes" label="gigabytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q206924" start="53571" end="53575" title="PCIe" label="PCIe"/>
<link wikidata="Q487343" start="54253" end="54270" title="solid-state drive" label="solid-state drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q178655" start="54432" end="54448" title="Moore&amp;#x27;s law" label="Moore&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q571216" start="55230" end="55259" title="Automatic acoustic management" label="Automatic acoustic management"/>
<link wikidata="Q794827" start="55262" end="55271" title="Cleanroom" label="Cleanroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132439" start="55274" end="55288" title="Click of death" label="Click of death"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155865" start="55291" end="55329" title="Comparison of disk encryption software" label="Comparison of disk encryption software"/>
<link wikidata="Q574817" start="55332" end="55344" title="Data erasure" label="Data erasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307935" start="55347" end="55360" title="Drive mapping" label="Drive mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q254358" start="55363" end="55385" title="Error recovery control" label="Error recovery control"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655518" start="55388" end="55431" title="Hard disk drive performance characteristics" label="Hard disk drive performance characteristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143962" start="55434" end="55446" title="Hybrid drive" label="Hybrid drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931574" start="55449" end="55459" title="Microdrive" label="Microdrive"/>
<link wikidata="Q513349" start="55462" end="55475" title="Network drive" label="Network drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172305" start="55490" end="55505" title="shared resource" label="shared resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075068" start="55509" end="55523" title="Object storage" label="Object storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038421" start="55526" end="55547" title="Write precompensation" label="Write precompensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q738770" start="56144" end="56159" title="Western Digital" label="Western Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q705392" start="56256" end="56274" title="Seagate Technology" label="Seagate Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q775196" start="56324" end="56328" title="HGST" label="HGST"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13782" wikidata="Q44722" url="?curid=13782" title="Hebrew calendar">
<text>The Hebrew calendar (), also called the Jewish calendar, is a lunisolar calendar used today for Jewish religious observance and as an official calendar of Israel. It determines the dates of Jewish holidays and other rituals, such as &quot;yahrzeits&quot; and the schedule of public Torah readings. In Israel, it is used for religious purposes, provides a time frame for agriculture, and is an official calendar for civil holidays alongside the Gregorian calendar.

Like other lunisolar calendars, the Hebrew calendar consists of months of 29 or 30 days which begin and end at approximately the time of the new moon. As 12 such months comprise a total of just 354 days, an extra lunar month is added every 2 or 3 years so that the long-term average year length closely approximates the actual length of the solar year.

Originally, the beginning of each month was determined based on physical observation of a new moon, while the decision of whether to add the leap month was based on observation of natural agriculture-related events in ancient Israel. Between the years 70 and 1178, these empirical criteria were gradually replaced with a set of mathematical rules. Month length now follows a fixed schedule which is adjusted based on the molad interval (a mathematical approximation of the mean time between new moons) and several other rules, while leap months are now added in 7 out of every 19 years according to the Metonic cycle.

Nowadays, Hebrew years are generally counted according to the system of (Latin: &quot;in the year of the world&quot;; , &quot;from the creation of the world&quot;, abbreviated AM). This system attempts to calculate the number of years since the creation of the world according to the Genesis creation narrative and subsequent Biblical stories. The current Hebrew year, AM , began at sunset on and will end at sunset on .

==Components==
===Days===

Based on the classic rabbinic interpretation of (&quot;There was evening and there was morning, one day&quot;), a day in the rabbinic Hebrew calendar runs from sunset (the start of &quot;the evening&quot;) to the next sunset. Similarly, Yom Kippur, Passover, and Shabbat are described in the Bible as lasting &quot;from evening to evening&quot;. The days are therefore figured locally.

Halachically, the exact time when days begin or end is uncertain: this time could be either sundown (&quot;shekiah&quot;) or else nightfall (&quot;tzait ha&#x27;kochavim&quot;, &quot;when the stars appear&quot;). The time between sundown and nightfall (&quot;bein hashmashot&quot;) is of uncertain status. Thus (for example) observance of Shabbat begins before sundown on Friday and ends after nightfall on Saturday, to be sure that Shabbat is not violated no matter when the transition between days occurs.

Instead of the International Date Line convention, there are varying opinions as to where the day changes. (See International date line in Judaism.)

===Hours===

Judaism uses multiple systems for dividing hours. In one system, the 24-hour day is divided into fixed hours equal to of a day, while each hour is divided into 1080 &quot;halakim&quot; (parts, singular: &quot;helek&quot;). A part is seconds ( minute). The ultimate ancestor of the &quot;helek&quot; was a Babylonian time period called a &quot;barleycorn&quot;, equal to of a Babylonian &quot;time degree&quot; (1° of celestial rotation). These measures are not generally used for everyday purposes; their best-known use is for calculating and announcing the molad.

In another system, the daytime period is divided into 12 relative hours (&quot;sha&#x27;ah z&#x27;manit&quot;, also sometimes called &quot;halachic hours&quot;). A relative hour is defined as of the time from sunrise to sunset, or dawn to dusk, as per the two opinions in this regard. Therefore, an hour can be less than 60 minutes in winter, and more than 60 minutes in summer; similarly, the 6th hour ends at solar noon, which generally differs from 12:00. Relative hours are used for the calculation of prayer times (zmanim); for example, the Shema must be recited in the first three relative hours of the day.

Neither system is commonly used in ordinary life; rather, the local civil clock is used. This is even the case for ritual times (e.g. &quot;The latest time to recite Shema today is 9:38 AM&quot;).

===Weeks===

The Hebrew week (, ) is a cycle of seven days, mirroring the seven-day period of the Book of Genesis in which the world is created.

The names for the days of the week are simply the day number within the week. The week begins with Day 1 (Sunday) and ends with Shabbat (Saturday). (More precisely, since days begin in the evening, weeks begin and end on Saturday evening. Day 1 lasts from Saturday evening to Sunday evening, while Shabbat lasts from Friday evening to Saturday evening.)

Since some calculations use division, a remainder of 0 signifies Saturday.

In Hebrew, these names may be abbreviated using the numerical value of the Hebrew letters, for example (&quot;Day 1&quot;, or &quot;Yom Rishon&quot; ()):
The names of the days of the week are modeled on the seven days mentioned in the Genesis creation account. For example, Genesis 1:8 &quot;... And there was evening and there was morning, a second day&quot; corresponds to &quot;Yom Sheni&quot; meaning &quot;second day&quot;. (However, for days 1, 6, and 7 the modern name differs slightly from the version in Genesis.)

The seventh day, Shabbat, as its Hebrew name indicates, is a day of rest in Judaism. In Talmudic Hebrew, the word &quot;Shabbat&quot; () can also mean &quot;week&quot;, so that in ritual liturgy a phrase like &quot;Yom Reviʻi beShabbat&quot; means &quot;the fourth day in the week&quot;.

====Days of week of holidays====
Jewish holidays can only fall on the weekdays shown in the following table:

The period from 1 Adar (or Adar II, in leap years) to 29 Marcheshvan contains all of the festivals specified in the Bible (Purim, Passover, Shavuot, Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur, Sukkot, and Shemini Atzeret). The lengths of months in this period are fixed, meaning that the day of week of Passover dictates the day of week of the other Biblical holidays. However, the lengths of the months of Marcheshvan and Kislev can each vary by a day (due to the Rosh Hashanah postponement rules which are used to adjust the year length). As a result, the holidays falling after Marcheshvan (starting with Chanukah) can fall on multiple days for a given row of the table.

A common mnemonic is &quot;&quot;, meaning: &quot;Rosh HaShana cannot be on Sunday, Wednesday or Friday, and Passover cannot be on Monday, Wednesday or Friday&quot; with each day&#x27;s numerical equivalent, in gematria, is used, such that א&#x27; = 1 = Sunday, and so forth. From this rule, every other date can be calculated by adding weeks and days until that date&#x27;s possible day of the week can be derived.

===Months===
The Hebrew calendar is a lunisolar calendar, meaning that months are based on lunar months, but years are based on solar years. The calendar year features twelve lunar months of 29 or 30 days, with an additional lunar month (&quot;leap month&quot;) added periodically to synchronize the twelve lunar cycles with the longer solar year. These extra months are added in seven years (3, 6, 8, 11, 14, 17, and 19) out of a 19-year cycle, known as the Metonic cycle (See Leap months, below).

The beginning of each Jewish lunar month is based on the appearance of the new moon. Although originally the new lunar crescent had to be observed and certified by witnesses (as is still done in Karaite Judaism and Islam), nowadays Jewish months have generally fixed lengths which approximate the period between new moons. For these reasons, a given month does not always begin on the same day as its astronomical conjunction.

The mean period of the lunar month (precisely, the synodic month) is very close to 29.5 days. Accordingly, the basic Hebrew calendar year is one of twelve lunar months alternating between 29 and 30 days:

Thus, the year normally contains twelve months with a total of 354 days. In such a year, the month of Marcheshvan has 29 days and Kislev has 30 days. However, due to the Rosh Hashanah postponement rules, in some years Kislev may lose a day to have 29 days, or Marcheshvan may acquire an additional day to have 30 days.

Normally the 12th month is named Adar. During leap years, the 12th and 13th months are named Adar I and Adar II (Hebrew: &quot;Adar Aleph&quot; and &quot;Adar Bet&quot;—&quot;first Adar&quot; and &quot;second adar&quot;). Sources disagree as to which of these months is the &quot;real&quot; Adar, and which is the added leap month.

====Justification for leap months====
The Bible does not directly mention the addition of leap months (also known as &quot;embolismic&quot; or &quot;intercalary&quot; months). The insertion of the leap month is based on the requirement that Passover occur at the same time of year as the spring barley harvest (&quot;aviv&quot;). (Since 12 lunar months make up less than a solar year, the date of Passover would gradually move throughout the solar year if leap months were not occasionally added.) According to the rabbinic calculation, this requirement means that Passover (or at least most of Passover) should fall after the March equinox. Similarly, the holidays of Shavuot and Sukkot are presumed by the Torah to fall in specific agricultural seasons.

Maimonides, discussing the calendrical rules in his Mishneh Torah (1178), notes:

By how much does the solar year exceed the lunar year? By approximately 11 days. Therefore, whenever this excess accumulates to about 30 days, or a little more or less, one month is added and the particular year is made to consist of 13 months, and this is the so-called embolismic (intercalated) year. For the year could not consist of twelve months plus so-and-so many days, since it is said: &quot;throughout the months of the year&quot;, which implies that we should count the year by months and not by days.


===Years===
====New year====
The Hebrew calendar year conventionally begins on Rosh Hashanah, the first day of Tishrei. However, the Jewish calendar also defines several additional new years, used for different purposes. The use of multiple starting dates for a year is comparable to different starting dates for civil &quot;calendar years&quot;, &quot;tax or fiscal years&quot;, &quot;academic years&quot;, and so on. The &quot;Mishnah&quot; (c. 200 CE) identifies four new-year dates:

The 1st of Nisan is the new year for kings and festivals. The 1st of Elul is the new year for the cattle tithe, Rabbi Eliezer and Rabbi Shimon say on the first of Tishrei. The 1st of Tishri is the new year for years, of the Shmita and Jubilee years, for planting and for vegetables. The 1st of Shevat is the new year for trees—so the school of Shammai, but the school of Hillel say: On the 15th thereof.

Two of these dates are especially prominent:
* 1 Nisan is the &quot;ecclesiastical new year&quot;, i.e. the date from which months and festivals are counted. Thus Passover (which begins on 15 Nisan) is described in the Torah as falling &quot;in the first month&quot;, while Rosh Hashana (which begins on 1 Tishrei) is described as falling &quot;in the seventh month&quot;.
* 1 Tishrei is the &quot;civil new year&quot;, and the date on which the year number advances. This date is known as Rosh Hashanah (lit. &quot;head of the year&quot;). Tishrei marks the end of one &quot;agricultural&quot; year and the beginning of another, and thus 1 Tishrei is considered the new year for most agriculture-related commandments, including Shmita, Yovel, Maaser Rishon, Maaser Sheni, and Maaser Ani.

For the dates of the Jewish New Year see Jewish and Israeli holidays 2000–2050.

====Anno Mundi====

The Jewish year number is generally given by &quot;&quot; (from Latin &quot;in the year of the world&quot;, often abbreviated &quot;AM&quot; or &quot;A.M.&quot;). In this calendar era, the year number equals the number of years that have passed since the creation of the world, according to an interpretation of Biblical accounts of the creation and subsequent history. From the eleventh century, &quot;anno mundi&quot; dating became the dominant method of counting years throughout most of the world&#x27;s Jewish communities, replacing earlier systems such as the Seleucid era.
As with (A.D. or AD), the words or abbreviation for (A.M. or AM) for the era should properly &quot;precede&quot; the date rather than follow it. 

The reference junction of the Sun and the Moon (Molad 1) is considered to be at 5 hours and 204 halakim, or 11:11:20 p.m., on the evening of Sunday, 6 October 3761 BCE. According to rabbinic reckoning, this moment was &quot;not&quot; Creation, but about one year &quot;before&quot; Creation, with the new moon of its first month (Tishrei) called &quot;molad tohu&quot; (the mean new moon of chaos or nothing). It is about one year &quot;before&quot; the traditional Jewish date of Creation on 25 Elul AM 1, based upon the &quot;Seder Olam Rabbah&quot;. Thus, adding 3760 before Rosh Hashanah or 3761 after to a Julian calendar year number starting from 1 CE will yield the Hebrew year. For earlier years there may be a discrepancy; &quot;see Missing years (Jewish calendar)&quot;.

In Hebrew there are two common ways of writing the year number: with the thousands, called (&quot;major era&quot;), and without the thousands, called (&quot;minor era&quot;). Thus, the current year is written as &#x27; ‎() using the &quot;major era&quot; and &#x27; ‎() using the &quot;minor era&quot;.

====Cycles of years====
Since the Jewish calendar has been fixed, leap months have been added according to the Metonic cycle of 19 years, of which 12 are common (non-leap) years of 12 months, and 7 are leap years of 13 months. This 19-year cycle is known in Hebrew as the &quot;Machzor Katan&quot; (&quot;small cycle&quot;).

Because the Julian years are days long, every 28 years the weekday pattern repeats. This is called the sun cycle, or the &quot;Machzor Gadol&quot; (&quot;great cycle&quot;) in Hebrew. The beginning of this cycle is arbitrary. Its main use is for determining the time of Birkat Hachama.

Because every 50 years is a Jubilee year, there is a jubilee (&quot;yovel&quot;) cycle. Because every seven years is a sabbatical year, there is a seven-year release cycle. The placement of these cycles is debated. Historically, there is enough evidence to fix the sabbatical years in the Second Temple Period. But it may not match with the sabbatical cycle derived from the biblical period; and there is no consensus on whether or not the Jubilee year is the fiftieth year or the latter half of the forty ninth year.

Every 247 years, or 13 cycles of 19 years, form a period known as an &quot;iggul&quot;, or the &quot;Iggul of Rabbi Nahshon&quot;. This period is notable in that the precise details of the calendar almost always (but not always) repeat over this period. This occurs because the &quot;molad&quot; interval (the average length of a Hebrew month) is 29.530594 days, which over 247 years results in a total of 90215.965 days. This is almost exactly 90216 days – a whole number and multiple of 7 (equalling the days of the week). So over 247 years, not only does the 19-year leap year cycle repeat itself, but the days of the week (and thus the days of Rosh Hashanah and the year length) typically repeat themselves.

==Calculations==
===Leap year calculations===

To determine whether a Jewish year is a leap year, one must find its position in the 19-year Metonic cycle. This position is calculated by dividing the Jewish year number by 19 and finding the remainder. (Since there is no year 0, a remainder of 0 indicates that the year is year 19 of the cycle.) For example, the Jewish year divided by 19 results in a remainder of , indicating that it is year of the Metonic cycle. The Jewish year used is the &quot;anno mundi&quot; year, in which the year of creation according to the Rabbinical Chronology (3761 BCE) is taken as year 1. Years 3, 6, 8, 11, 14, 17, and 19 of the Metonic cycle are leap years. The Hebrew mnemonic GUCHADZaT refers to these years, while another memory aid refers to musical notation.

Whether a year is a leap year can also be determined by a simple calculation (which also gives the fraction of a month by which the calendar is behind the seasons, useful for agricultural purposes). To determine whether year &quot;n&quot; of the calendar is a leap year, find the remainder on dividing [(7 × &quot;n&quot;) + 1] by 19. If the remainder is 6 or less it is a leap year; if it is 7 or more it is not. For example, the The This works because as there are seven leap years in nineteen years the difference between the solar and lunar years increases by month per year. When the difference goes above month this signifies a leap year, and the difference is reduced by one month.

The Hebrew calendar assumes that a month is uniformly of the length of an average synodic month, taken as exactly days (about 29.530594 days, which is less than half a second from the modern scientific estimate); it also assumes that a tropical year is exactly times that, i.e., about 365.2468 days. Thus it overestimates the length of the tropical year (365.2422 days) by 0.0046 days (about 7 minutes) per year, or about one day in 216 years. This error is less than the Julian years (365.2500 days) make (0.0078 days/year, or one day in 128 years), but much more than what the Gregorian years (365.2425 days/year) make (0.0003 days/year, or one day in 3333 years).

===Rosh Hashanah postponement rules===
Besides the adding of leap months, the year length is sometimes adjusted by adding one day to the month of Marcheshvan, or removing one day from the month of Kislev. Because each calendar year begins with Rosh Hashanah, adjusting the year length is equivalent to moving the day of the next Rosh Hashanah. Several rules are used to determine when this is performed.

To calculate the day on which Rosh Hashanah of a given year will fall, the expected molad (moment of lunar conjunction or new moon) of Tishrei in that year is calculated. The molad is calculated by multiplying the number of months that will have elapsed since some (preceding) molad (whose weekday is known) by the mean length of a (synodic) lunar month, which is 29 days, 12 hours, and 793 parts (there are 1080 &quot;parts&quot; in an hour, so that one part is equal to seconds). The very first molad, the molad tohu, fell on Sunday evening at 11:11:20 pm in the local time of Jerusalem, 6 October 3761 BCE (Proleptic Julian calendar) 20:50:23.1 UTC, or in Jewish terms Day 2, 5 hours, and 204 parts. The exact time of a molad in terms of days after midnight between 29 and 30 December 1899 (the form used by many spreadsheets for date and time) is
:-2067022+(23+34/3/60)/24+(29.5+793/1080/24)*&quot;N&quot;
where &quot;N&quot; is the number of lunar months since the beginning. ( for the beginning of the 305th Machzor Katan on 1 October 2016.) Adding 0.25 to this converts it to the Jewish system in which the day begins at 6 pm.

In calculating the number of months that will have passed since the known molad that one uses as the starting point, one must remember to include any leap months that falls within the elapsed interval, according to the cycle of leap years. A 19-year cycle of 235 synodic months has 991 weeks 2 days 16 hours 595 parts, a common year of 12 synodic months has 50 weeks 4 days 8 hours 876 parts, while a leap year of 13 synodic months has 54 weeks 5 days 21 hours 589 parts.

Four conditions are considered to determine whether the date of Rosh Hashanah must be postponed. These are called the Rosh Hashanah postponement rules, or . The two most important conditions are:

*If the molad occurs at or later than noon, Rosh Hashanah is postponed a day. This is called (, literally, &quot;old birth&quot;, i.e., late new moon). This rule is mentioned in the Talmud, and is used nowadays to prevent the molad falling on the second day of the month. This ensures that the long-term average month length is 29.530594 days (equal to the molad interval), rather than the 29.5 days implied by the standard alternation between 29- and 30-day months.
*If the molad occurs on a Sunday, Wednesday, or Friday, Rosh Hashanah is postponed a day. If the application of would place Rosh Hashanah on one of these days, then it must be postponed a second day. This is called (), an acronym that means &quot;not [weekday] one, four, or six&quot;.
:This rule is applied for religious reasons, so that Yom Kippur does not fall on a Friday or Sunday, and Hoshana Rabbah does not fall on Shabbat. Since Shabbat restrictions also apply to Yom Kippur, if either day falls immediately before the other, it would not be possible to make necessary preparations for the second day (such as candle lighting). Additionally, the laws of Shabbat override those of Hoshana Rabbah, so that if Hoshana Rabbah were to fall on Shabbat, the Hoshana Rabbah &quot;aravah&quot; ritual could not be performed.
:Thus Rosh Hashanah can only fall on Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday. The &quot;kevi&#x27;ah&quot; uses the letters ה ,ג ,ב and ז (representing 2, 3, 5, and 7, for Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday) to denote the starting day of Rosh Hashana and the year.

Another two rules are applied much less frequently and serve to prevent impermissible year lengths. Their names are Hebrew acronyms that refer to the ways they are calculated:
* If the molad in a common year falls on a Tuesday, on or after 9 hours and 204 parts, Rosh Hashanah is postponed to Thursday. This is (, where the acronym stands for &quot;3 [Tuesday], 9, 204&quot;).
* If the molad following a leap year falls on a Monday, on or after 15 hours and 589 parts after the Hebrew day began (for calculation purposes, this is taken to be 6 pm Sunday), Rosh Hashanah is postponed to Tuesday. This is (), where the acronym stands for &quot;2 [Monday], 15, 589&quot;.

===Deficient, regular, and complete years===
The rules of postponement of Rosh HaShanah make it that a Jewish common year will have 353, 354, or 355 days while a leap year (with the addition of Adar I which always has 30 days) has 383, 384, or 385 days.

*A year (Hebrew for &quot;deficient&quot; or &quot;incomplete&quot;) is 353 or 383 days long. Both Cheshvan and Kislev have 29 days.
*A year (&quot;regular&quot; or &quot;in-order&quot;) is 354 or 384 days long. Cheshvan has 29 days while Kislev has 30 days.
*A year (&quot;complete&quot; or &quot;perfect&quot;, also &quot;abundant&quot;) is 355 or 385 days long. Both Cheshvan and Kislev have 30 days.

Whether a year is deficient, regular, or complete is determined by the time between two adjacent Rosh Hashanah observances and the leap year.

A Metonic cycle equates to 235 lunar months in each 19-year cycle. This gives an average of 6,939 days, 16 hours, and 595 parts for each cycle. But due to the Rosh Hashanah postponement rules (preceding section) a cycle of 19 Jewish years can be either 6,939, 6,940, 6,941, or 6,942 days in duration. For any given year in the Metonic cycle, the molad moves forward in the week by 2 days, 16 hours, and 595 parts every 19 years. The greatest common divisor of this and a week is 5 parts, so the Jewish calendar repeats exactly following a number of Metonic cycles equal to the number of parts in a week divided by 5, namely 7×24×216 = 36,288 Metonic cycles, or 689,472 Jewish years. There is a near-repetition every 247 years, except for an excess of 50 minutes seconds (905 parts).

Contrary to popular impression, one&#x27;s Hebrew birthday does not necessarily fall on the same Gregorian date every 19 years, since the length of the Metonic cycle varies by several days (as does the length of a 19-year Gregorian period, depending whether it contains 4 or 5 leap years).

===Keviah===

There are three qualities that distinguish one year from another: whether it is a leap year or a common year; on which of four permissible days of the week the year begins; and whether it is a deficient, regular, or complete year. Mathematically, there are 24 (2×4×3) possible combinations, but only 14 of them are valid.

Each of these patterns is known by a ( for &#x27;a setting&#x27; or &#x27;an established thing&#x27;), which is a code consisting of two numbers and a letter. In English, the code consists of the following:
* The left number is the day of the week of , Rosh Hashanah 
* The letter indicates whether that year is deficient (D, &quot;ח&quot;, from ), regular (R, &quot;כ&quot;, from ), or complete (C, &quot;ש&quot;, from )
* The right number is the day of the week of , the first day of Passover or Pesach , within the same Hebrew year (next Julian/Gregorian year)
The in Hebrew letters is written right-to-left, so their days of the week are reversed, the right number for and the left for .

The &quot;kevi&#x27;ah&quot; also determines the Torah reading cycle (which &quot;parshiyot&quot; are read together or separately.

=== The four gates ===
The &quot;keviah&quot;, and thus the annual calendar, of a numbered Hebrew year can be determined by consulting the table of Four Gates, whose inputs are the year&#x27;s position in the 19-year cycle and its molad Tishrei. In this table, the years of a 19-year cycle are organized into four groups (called &quot;gates&quot;): common years after a leap year but before a common year ; common years between two leap years ; common years after a common year but before a leap year ; and leap years .

This table numbers the days of the week and hours for the limits of molad Tishrei in the Hebrew manner for calendrical calculations, that is, both begin at , thus is noon Saturday, with the week starting on (Saturday 6pm, i.e. the beginning of Sunday reckoned in the Hebrew manner). The oldest surviving table of Four Gates was written by Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi in 824.
====Incidence====
Comparing the days of the week of molad Tishrei with those in the shows that during 39% of years is not postponed beyond the day of the week of its molad Tishrei, 47% are postponed one day, and 14% are postponed two days. This table also identifies the seven types of common years and seven types of leap years. Most are represented in any 19-year cycle, except one or two may be in neighboring cycles. The most likely type of year is 5R7 in 18.1% of years, whereas the least likely is 5C1 in 3.3% of years. The day of the week of is later than that of by one, two or three days for common years and three, four or five days for leap years in deficient, regular or complete years, respectively.

===Worked example===
Given the length of the year, the length of each month is fixed as described above, so the real problem in determining the calendar for a year is determining the number of days in the year. In the modern calendar, this is determined in the following manner.

The day of Rosh Hashanah and the length of the year are determined by the time and the day of the week of the Tishrei &quot;molad&quot;, that is, the moment of the average conjunction. Given the Tishrei &quot;molad&quot; of a certain year, the length of the year is determined as follows:

First, one must determine whether each year is an ordinary or leap year by its position in the 19-year Metonic cycle. Years 3, 6, 8, 11, 14, 17, and 19 are leap years.

Secondly, one must determine the number of days between the starting Tishrei &quot;molad&quot; (TM1) and the Tishrei &quot;molad&quot; of the next year (TM2). For calendar descriptions in general the day begins at 6 pm, but for the purpose of determining Rosh Hashanah, a &quot;molad&quot; occurring on or after noon is treated as belonging to the next day (the first &quot;deḥiyyah&quot;). All months are calculated as 29d, 12h, 44m, s long (MonLen). Therefore, in an ordinary year TM2 occurs 12 × MonLen days after TM1. This is usually 354 calendar days after TM1, but if TM1 is on or after 3:11:20 am and before noon, it will be 355 days. Similarly, in a leap year, TM2 occurs 13 × MonLen days after TM1. This is usually 384 days after TM1, but if TM1 is on or after noon and before  pm, TM2 will be only 383 days after TM1. In the same way, from TM2 one calculates TM3. Thus the four natural year lengths are 354, 355, 383, and 384 days.

However, because of the holiday rules, Rosh Hashanah cannot fall on a Sunday, Wednesday, or Friday, so if TM2 is one of those days, Rosh Hashanah in year 2 is postponed by adding one day to year 1 (the second &quot;deḥiyyah&quot;). To compensate, one day is subtracted from year 2. It is to allow for these adjustments that the system allows 385-day years (long leap) and 353-day years (short ordinary) besides the four natural year lengths.

But how can year 1 be lengthened if it is already a long ordinary year of 355 days or year 2 be shortened if it is a short leap year of 383 days? That is why the third and fourth &quot;deḥiyyah&quot;s are needed.

If year 1 is already a long ordinary year of 355 days, there will be a problem if TM1 is on a Tuesday, as that means TM2 falls on a Sunday and will have to be postponed, creating a 356-day year. In this case, Rosh Hashanah in year 1 is postponed from Tuesday (the third &quot;deḥiyyah&quot;). As it cannot be postponed to Wednesday, it is postponed to Thursday, and year 1 ends up with 354 days.

On the other hand, if year 2 is already a short year of 383 days, there will be a problem if TM2 is on a Wednesday. because Rosh Hashanah in year 2 will have to be postponed from Wednesday to Thursday and this will cause year 2 to be only 382 days long. In this case, year 2 is extended by one day by postponing Rosh Hashanah in year 3 from Monday to Tuesday (the fourth &quot;deḥiyyah&quot;), and year 2 will have 383 days.

=== Holidays ===
For calculated dates of Jewish holidays, see Jewish and Israeli holidays 2000–2050

==Accuracy==
===Molad interval===
A &quot;new moon&quot; (astronomically called a lunar conjunction and, in Hebrew, a molad) is the moment at which the sun and moon have the same ecliptic longitude (i.e. they are aligned horizontally with respect to a north–south line). The period between two new moons is a synodic month. The actual length of a synodic month varies from about 29 days 6 hours and 30 minutes (29.27 days) to about 29 days and 20 hours (29.83 days), a variation range of about 13 hours and 30 minutes. Accordingly, for convenience, the Hebrew calendar uses a long-term average month length, known as the molad interval, which equals the mean synodic month of ancient times. The molad interval is 29 days, 12 hours, and 793 &quot;parts&quot; (1 &quot;part&quot; = 1/18 minute = 31/3 seconds) (i.e., 29.530594 days), and is the same value determined by the Babylonians in their System B about 300 BCE and was adopted by Hipparchus (2nd century BCE) and by Ptolemy in the &quot;Almagest&quot; (2nd century CE). Its remarkable accuracy (less than one second from the current true value) is thought to have been achieved using records of lunar eclipses from the 8th to 5th centuries BCE. In the Talmudic era, when the mean synodic month was slightly shorter than at present, the molad interval was even more accurate, being &quot;essentially a perfect fit&quot; for the mean synodic month at the time.

Currently, the accumulated drift in the moladot since the Talmudic era has reached a total of approximately 97 minutes. This means that the molad of Tishrei lands one day later than it ought to in (97 minutes) ÷ (1440 minutes per day) = nearly 7% of years. Therefore, the seemingly small drift of the moladot is already significant enough to affect the date of Rosh Hashanah, which then cascades to many other dates in the calendar year, and sometimes (due to the Rosh Hashanah postponement rules) also interacts with the dates of the prior or next year.

The rate of calendar drift is increasing with time, since the mean synodic month is progressively shortening due to gravitational tidal effects. Measured on a strictly uniform time scale (such as that provided by an atomic clock) the mean synodic month is becoming gradually longer, but since the tides slow Earth&#x27;s rotation rate even more, the mean synodic month is becoming gradually shorter in terms of mean solar time.

===Metonic cycle drift===
A larger source of error is the inaccuracy of the Metonic cycle. Nineteen Jewish years average 6939d 16h 33m 03s, compared to the 6939d 14h 26m 15s of nineteen mean solar years. Thus, the Hebrew calendar drifts by just over 2 hours every 19 years, or approximately one day every 216 years. Due to accumulation of this discrepancy, the earliest date on which Passover can fall has drifted by roughly eight days since the 4th century, and the 15th of Nisan now falls only on or after 26 March (the date in 2013), five days after the actual equinox on 21 March. In the distant future, this drift is projected to move Passover much further in the year. If the calendar is not amended, then Passover will start to land on or after the summer solstice around approximately AM 16652 (12892 CE).

===Implications for Jewish ritual===
When the calendar was fixed in the 4th century, the earliest Passover (in year 16 of the Metonic cycle) began on the first full moon after the March equinox. This is still the case in about 80% of years; but, in about 20% of years, Passover is a month late by this criterion. Presently, this occurs after the &quot;premature&quot; insertion of a leap month in years 8, 11, and 19 of each 19-year cycle, which causes Passover to fall especially far after the March equinox in such years. Calendar drift also impacts the observance of Sukkot, which will shift into Israel&#x27;s winter rainy season, making dwelling in the sukkah less practical. It also affects the logic of the Shemini Atzeret prayer for rain, which will be more often recited once rains are already underway.

Modern scholars have debated at which point the drift could become ritually problematic, and proposed adjustments to the fixed calendar to keep Passover in its proper season. The seriousness of the calendar drift is discounted by many, on the grounds that Passover will remain in the spring season for many millennia, and the Torah is generally not interpreted as having specified tight calendrical limits. However, some writers and researchers have proposed &quot;corrected&quot; calendars (with modifications to the leap year cycle, molad interval, or both) which would compensate for these issues:

*Irv Bromberg has suggested a 353-year cycle of 4,366 months, which would include 130 leap months, along with use of a progressively shorter &quot;molad&quot; interval, which would keep an amended fixed arithmetic Hebrew calendar from drifting for more than seven millennia. The 353 years would consist of 18 Metonic cycles, as well as an 11-year period in which the last 8 years of the Metonic cycle are omitted.
*Other authors have proposed to use cycles of 334 or 687 years.
*Another suggestion is to delay the leap years gradually so that a whole intercalary month is taken out at the end of Iggul 26; while also changing the synodic month to be the more accurate 29.53058868 days. Thus, the length of the year would be very close to the actual tropical year. The result is the &quot;Hebrew Calendar&quot; in the program CalMaster2000.

Religious questions abound about how such a system might be implemented and administered throughout the diverse aspects of the world Jewish community.

==Usage==
===In Auschwitz===
While imprisoned in Auschwitz, Jews made every effort to preserve Jewish tradition in the camps, despite the monumental dangers in doing so. The Hebrew calendar, which is a tradition with great importance to Jewish practice and rituals was particularly dangerous since no tools of telling of time, such as watches and calendars, were permitted in the camps. The keeping of a Hebrew calendar was a rarity amongst prisoners and there are only two known surviving calendars that were made in Auschwitz, both of which were made by women. Before this, the tradition of making a Hebrew calendar was greatly assumed to be the job of a man in Jewish society.

===In contemporary Israel===

Early Zionist pioneers were impressed by the fact that the calendar preserved by Jews over many centuries in far-flung diasporas, as a matter of religious ritual, was geared to the climate of their original country: major Jewish holidays such as Sukkot, Passover, and Shavuot correspond to major points of the country&#x27;s agricultural year such as planting and harvest. Accordingly, in the early 20th century the Hebrew calendar was re-interpreted as an agricultural rather than religious calendar.

After the creation of the State of Israel, the Hebrew calendar became one of the official calendars of Israel, along with the Gregorian calendar. Holidays and commemorations not derived from previous Jewish tradition were to be fixed according to the Hebrew calendar date. For example, the Israeli Independence Day falls on 5 Iyar, Jerusalem Reunification Day on 28 Iyar, Yom HaAliyah on 10 Nisan, and the Holocaust Commemoration Day on 27 Nisan.

The Hebrew calendar is still widely acknowledged, appearing in public venues such as banks (where it is legal for use on cheques and other documents), and on the mastheads of newspapers.

The Jewish New Year (Rosh Hashanah) is a two-day public holiday in Israel. However, since the 1980s an increasing number of secular Israelis celebrate the Gregorian New Year (usually known as &quot;Silvester Night&quot;—) on the night between 31 December and 1 January. Prominent rabbis have on several occasions sharply denounced this practice, but with no noticeable effect on the secularist celebrants.

Wall calendars commonly used in Israel are hybrids. Most are organised according to Gregorian rather than Jewish months, but begin in September, when the Jewish New Year usually falls, and provide the Jewish date in small characters.

==History==
=== Early formation ===
Lunisolar calendars similar to the Hebrew calendar, consisting of twelve lunar months plus an occasional 13th intercalary month to synchronize with the solar/agricultural cycle, were used in all ancient Middle Eastern civilizations except Egypt, and likely date to the 3rd millennium BCE. While there is no mention of this 13th month anywhere in the Hebrew Bible, still most Biblical scholars hold that the intercalation process was almost certainly a regularly occurring aspect of the early Hebrew calendar keeping process.

===Month names===

Biblical references to the pre-exilic calendar include ten of the twelve months identified by number rather than by name.

Prior to the Babylonian captivity, the names of only four months are referred to in the Tanakh: &quot;Aviv&quot; (first month), &quot;Ziv&quot; (second month), &quot;Ethanim&quot; (seventh month), and &quot;Bul&quot; (eighth month). All of these are believed to be Canaanite names. The last three of these names are only mentioned in connection with the building of the First Temple and Håkan Ulfgard suggests that the use of what are rarely used Canaanite (or in the case of Ethanim perhaps Northwest Semitic) names indicates that &quot;the author is consciously utilizing an archaizing terminology, thus giving the impression of an ancient story...&quot;. Alternatively, these names may be attributed to the presence of Phoenician scribes in Solomon&#x27;s court at the time of the building of the Temple.

During the Babylonian captivity, the Jewish people adopted the Babylonian names for the months. The Babylonian calendar descended directly from the Sumerian calendar. These Babylonian month-names (such as Nisan, Iyyar, Tammuz, Ab, Elul, Tishri and Adar) are shared with the modern Levantine solar calendar (currently used in the Arabic-speaking countries of the Fertile Crescent) and the modern Assyrian calendar, indicating a common origin. The origin is thought to be the Babylonian calendar.

===Past methods of dividing years===
According to some Christian and Karaite sources, the tradition in ancient Israel was that 1 Nisan would not start until the barley is ripe, being the test for the onset of spring. If the barley was not ripe, an intercalary month would be added before Nisan.

In the 1st century, Josephus stated that while –
Moses...appointed Nisan...as the first month for the festivals...the commencement of the year for everything relating to divine worship, but for selling and buying and other ordinary affairs he preserved the ancient order [i. e. the year beginning with Tishrei].&quot;

Edwin Thiele concluded that the ancient northern Kingdom of Israel counted years using the ecclesiastical new year starting on 1 Aviv/Nisan (Nisan-years), while the southern Kingdom of Judah counted years using the civil new year starting on 1 Tishrei (Tishri-years). The practice of the Kingdom of Israel was also that of Babylon, as well as other countries of the region. The practice of Judah is continued in modern Judaism and is celebrated as Rosh Hashana.

===Past methods of numbering years===
Before the adoption of the current &quot;Anno Mundi&quot; year numbering system, other systems were used. In early times, the years were counted from some significant event such as the Exodus. During the period of the monarchy, it was the widespread practice in western Asia to use era year numbers according to the accession year of the monarch of the country involved. This practice was followed by the united kingdom of Israel, kingdom of Judah, kingdom of Israel, Persia, and others. Besides, the author of Kings coordinated dates in the two kingdoms by giving the accession year of a monarch in terms of the year of the monarch of the other kingdom, though some commentators note that these dates do not always synchronise. Other era dating systems have been used at other times. For example, Jewish communities in the Babylonian diaspora counted the years from the first deportation from Israel, that of Jehoiachin in 597 BCE. The era year was then called &quot;year of the captivity of Jehoiachin&quot;.

During the Hellenistic Maccabean period, Seleucid era counting was used, at least in Land of Israel (under Greek influence at the time). The Books of the Maccabees used Seleucid era dating exclusively, as did Josephus writing in the Roman period. From the 1st-10th centuries, the center of world Judaism was in the Middle East (primarily Iraq and Palestine), and Jews in these regions also used Seleucid era dating, which they called the &quot;Era of Contracts [or Documents]&quot;; this counting is still sometimes used by Yemenite Jews. The Talmud states:

Rav Aha bar Jacob then put this question: How do we know that our Era [of Documents] is connected with the Kingdom of Greece at all? Why not say that it is reckoned from the Exodus from Egypt, omitting the first thousand years and giving the years of the next thousand? In that case, the document is really post-dated!Said Rav Nahman: In the Diaspora the Greek Era alone is used.He [Rav Aha] thought that Rav Nahman wanted to dispose of him anyhow, but when he went and studied it thoroughly he found that it is indeed taught [in a Baraita]: In the Diaspora the Greek Era alone is used.

In the 8th and 9th centuries, as the center of Jewish life moved from Babylonia to Europe, counting using the Seleucid era &quot;became meaningless&quot;, and thus was replaced by the &quot;anno mundi system&quot;. The use of the Seleucid era continued till the 16th century in the East, and was employed even in the 19th century among Yemenite Jews.

Occasionally in Talmudic writings, reference was made to other starting points for eras, such as destruction era dating, being the number of years since the 70 CE destruction of the Second Temple.

===Leap months===
According to Rabbinic Judaism, requires that the months be determined by a proper court with the necessary authority to sanctify the months. Hence the court, not the astronomy, has the final decision. When the observational form of the calendar was in use, whether or not a leap month was added depended on three factors: &#x27;aviv [i.e., the ripeness of barley], fruits of trees, and the equinox. On two of these grounds it should be intercalated, but not on one of them alone. It may be noted that in the Bible the name of the first month, &quot;Aviv&quot;, literally means &quot;spring&quot;. Thus, if Adar was over and spring had not yet arrived, an additional month was observed.

===Determining the new month in the Mishnaic period===

The Tanakh contains several commandments related to the keeping of the calendar and the lunar cycle, and records changes that have taken place to the Hebrew calendar. Numbers 10:10 stresses the importance in Israelite religious observance of the new month (Hebrew: , Rosh Chodesh, &quot;beginning of the month&quot;): &quot;... in your new moons, ye shall blow with the trumpets over your burnt-offerings...&quot; Similarly in Numbers 28:11. &quot;The beginning of the month&quot; meant the appearance of a new moon, and in Exodus 12:2. &quot;This month is to you&quot;.

According to the &quot;Mishnah&quot; and Tosefta, in the Maccabean, Herodian, and Mishnaic periods, new months were determined by the sighting of a new crescent, with two eyewitnesses required to testify to the Sanhedrin to having seen the new lunar crescent at sunset. The practice in the time of Gamaliel II (c. 100 CE) was for witnesses to select the appearance of the moon from a collection of drawings that depicted the crescent in a variety of orientations, only a few of which could be valid in any given month. These observations were compared against calculations.

At first the beginning of each Jewish month was signaled to the communities of Israel and beyond by fires lit on mountaintops, but after the Samaritans began to light false fires, messengers were sent. The inability of the messengers to reach communities outside Israel before mid-month High Holy Days (Succot and Passover) led outlying communities to celebrate scriptural festivals for two days rather than one, observing the second feast-day of the Jewish diaspora because of uncertainty of whether the previous month ended after 29 or 30 days.

==== Historicity ====
It has been noted that the procedures described in the Mishnah and Tosefta are all plausible procedures for regulating an empirical lunar calendar. Fire-signals, for example, or smoke-signals, are known from the pre-exilic Lachish ostraca. Furthermore, the Mishnah contains laws that reflect the uncertainties of an empirical calendar. Mishnah Sanhedrin, for example, holds that when one witness holds that an event took place on a certain day of the month, and another that the same event took place on the following day, their testimony can be held to agree, since the length of the preceding month was uncertain. Another Mishnah takes it for granted that it cannot be known in advance whether a year&#x27;s lease is for twelve or thirteen months. Hence it is a reasonable conclusion that the Mishnaic calendar was actually used in the Mishnaic period.

The accuracy of the Mishnah&#x27;s claim that the Mishnaic calendar was also used in the late Second Temple period is less certain. One scholar has noted that there are no laws from Second Temple period sources that indicate any doubts about the length of a month or of a year. This led him to propose that the priests must have had some form of computed calendar or calendrical rules that allowed them to know in advance whether a month would have 30 or 29 days, and whether a year would have 12 or 13 months.

===The fixing of the calendar===

Between 70 and 1178 CE, the observation-based calendar was gradually replaced by a mathematically calculated one.

The Talmuds indicate at least the beginnings of a transition from a purely empirical to a computed calendar. Samuel of Nehardea (c. 165–254) stated that he could determine the dates of the holidays by calculation rather than observation. According to a statement attributed to Yose (late 3rd century), Purim could not fall on a Sabbath nor a Monday, lest Yom Kippur fall on a Friday or a Sunday. This indicates that, by the time of the redaction of the Jerusalem Talmud (c. 400 CE), there were a fixed number of days in all months from Adar to Elul, also implying that the extra month was already a second Adar added before the regular Adar. Elsewhere, Shimon ben Pazi is reported to have counseled &quot;those who make the computations&quot; not to set Rosh Hashana or Hoshana Rabbah on Shabbat. This indicates that there was a group who &quot;made computations&quot; and controlled, to some extent, the day of the week on which Rosh Hashana would fall.

There is a tradition, first mentioned by Hai Gaon (died 1038 CE), that Hillel II was responsible for the new calculated calendar with a fixed intercalation cycle &quot;in the year 670 of the Seleucid era&quot; (i.e., 358–359 CE). Later writers, such as Nachmanides, explained Hai Gaon&#x27;s words to mean that the entire computed calendar was due to Hillel II in response to persecution of Jews. Maimonides (12th century) stated that the Mishnaic calendar was used &quot;until the days of Abaye and Rava&quot; (c. 320–350 CE), and that the change came when &quot;the land of Israel was destroyed, and no permanent court was left.&quot; Taken together, these two traditions suggest that Hillel II (whom they identify with the mid-4th-century Jewish patriarch Ioulos, attested in a letter of the Emperor Julian, and the Jewish patriarch Ellel, mentioned by Epiphanius) instituted the computed Hebrew calendar because of persecution. H. Graetz linked the introduction of the computed calendar to a sharp repression following a failed Jewish insurrection that occurred during the rule of the Christian emperor Constantius and Gallus. Saul Lieberman argued instead that the introduction of the fixed calendar was due to measures taken by Christian Roman authorities to prevent the Jewish patriarch from sending calendrical messengers.

Both the tradition that Hillel II instituted the complete computed calendar, and the theory that the computed calendar was introduced due to repression or persecution, have been questioned. Furthermore, two Jewish dates during post-Talmudic times (specifically in 506 and 776) are impossible under the rules of the modern calendar, indicating that some of its arithmetic rules were established in Babylonia during the times of the Geonim (7th to 8th centuries). Most likely, the procedure established in 359 involved a fixed molad interval slightly different from the current one, Rosh Hashana postponement rules similar but not identical to current rules, and leap months were added based on when Passover preceded a fixed cutoff date rather than through a repeated 19-year cycle. The Rosh Hashana rules apparently reached their modern form between 629 and 648, the modern molad interval was likely fixed in 776, while the fixed 19-year cycle also likely dates to the late 8th century.

Except for the epoch year number (the fixed reference point at the beginning of year 1, which at that time was one year later than the epoch of the modern calendar), the calendar rules reached their current form by the beginning of the 9th century, as described by the Persian Muslim astronomer Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi in 823. Al-Khwarizmi&#x27;s study of the Jewish calendar describes the 19-year intercalation cycle, the rules for determining on what day of the week the first day of the month Tishrei shall fall, the interval between the Jewish era (creation of Adam) and the Seleucid era, and the rules for determining the mean longitude of the sun and the moon using the Jewish calendar. Not all the rules were in place by 835.

In 921, Aaron ben Meïr had a debate with Saadya Gaon about one of the rules of the calendar. This indicates that the rules of the modern calendar were not so clear and set. In 1000, the Muslim chronologist al-Biruni described all of the modern rules of the Hebrew calendar, except that he specified three different epochs used by various Jewish communities being one, two, or three years later than the modern epoch.

In 1178, Maimonides included all the rules for the calculated calendar and their scriptural basis, including the modern epochal year, in his work &quot;Mishneh Torah&quot;. He wrote that he had chosen the epoch from which calculations of all dates should be as &quot;the third day of Nisan in this present year ... which is the year 4938 of the creation of the world&quot; (22 March 1178). Today, these rules are generally used by Jewish communities throughout the world.

==Other calendars==
Outside of Rabbinic Judaism, evidence shows a diversity of practice.

===Karaite calendar===
Karaites use the lunar month and the solar year, but the Karaite calendar differs from the current Rabbinic calendar in a number of ways. The Karaite calendar is identical to the Rabbinic calendar used before the Sanhedrin changed the Rabbinic calendar from the lunar, observation based, calendar to the current, mathematically based, calendar used in Rabbinic Judaism today.

In the lunar Karaite calendar, the beginning of each month, the Rosh Chodesh, can be calculated, but is confirmed by the observation in Israel of the first sightings of the new moon. This may result in an occasional variation of a maximum of one day, depending on the inability to observe the new moon. The day is usually &quot;picked up&quot; in the next month.

The addition of the leap month (Adar II) is determined by observing in Israel the ripening of barley at a specific stage (defined by Karaite tradition) (called aviv), rather than using the calculated and fixed calendar of rabbinic Judaism. Occasionally this results in Karaites being one month ahead of other Jews using the calculated rabbinic calendar. The &quot;lost&quot; month would be &quot;picked up&quot; in the next cycle when Karaites would observe a leap month while other Jews would not.

Furthermore, the seasonal drift of the rabbinic calendar is avoided, resulting in the years affected by the drift starting one month earlier in the Karaite calendar.

Also, the four rules of postponement of the rabbinic calendar are not applied, since they are not mentioned in the Tanakh. This can affect the dates observed for all the Jewish holidays in a particular year by one or two days.

In the Middle Ages many Karaite Jews outside Israel followed the calculated rabbinic calendar, because it was not possible to retrieve accurate aviv barley data from the land of Israel. However, since the establishment of the State of Israel, and especially since the Six-Day War, the Karaite Jews that have made &quot;aliyah&quot; can now again use the observational calendar.

===Samaritan calendar===
The Samaritan community&#x27;s calendar also relies on lunar months and solar years. Calculation of the Samaritan calendar has historically been a secret reserved to the priestly family alone, and was based on observations of the new crescent moon. More recently, a 20th-century Samaritan High Priest transferred the calculation to a computer algorithm. The current High Priest confirms the results twice a year, and then distributes calendars to the community.

The epoch of the Samaritan calendar is year of the entry of the Children of Israel into the Land of Israel with Joshua. The month of Passover is the first month in the Samaritan calendar, but the year number increments in the sixth month. Like in the Rabbinic calendar, there are seven leap years within each 19-year cycle. However, the Rabbinic and Samaritan calendars&#x27; cycles are not synchronized, so Samaritan festivals—notionally the same as the Rabbinic festivals of Torah origin—are frequently one month off from the date according to the Rabbinic calendar. Additionally, as in the Karaite calendar, the Samaritan calendar does not apply the four rules of postponement, since they are not mentioned in the Tanakh. This can affect the dates observed for all the Jewish holidays in a particular year by one or two days.

===The Qumran calendar===
Many of the Dead Sea Scrolls have references to a unique calendar, used by the people there, who are often assumed to be Essenes. The year of this calendar used the ideal Mesopotamian calendar of twelve 30-day months, to which were added 4 days at the equinoxes and solstices (cardinal points), making a total of 364 days.

With only 364 days, the calendar would be very noticeably different from the actual seasons after a few years, but there is nothing to indicate what was done about this problem. Various scholars have suggested that nothing was done and the calendar was allowed to change with respect to the seasons, or that changes were made irregularly when the seasonal anomaly was too great to be ignored any longer.

===Other calendars used by ancient Jews===
Calendrical evidence for the postexilic Persian period is found in papyri from the Jewish colony at Elephantine, in Egypt. These documents show that the Jewish community of Elephantine used the Egyptian and Babylonian calendars.

The Sardica paschal table shows that the Jewish community of some eastern city, possibly Antioch, used a calendrical scheme that kept Nisan 14 within the limits of the Julian month of March. Some of the dates in the document are clearly corrupt, but they can be emended to make the sixteen years in the table consistent with a regular intercalation scheme. Peter, the bishop of Alexandria (early 4th century CE), mentions that the Jews of his city &quot;hold their Passover according to the course of the moon in the month of Phamenoth, or according to the intercalary month every third year in the month of Pharmuthi&quot;, suggesting a fairly consistent intercalation scheme that kept Nisan 14 approximately between Phamenoth 10 (6 March in the 4th century CE) and Pharmuthi 10 (5 April).

Jewish funerary inscriptions from Zoar (south of the Dead Sea), dated from the 3rd to the 5th century, indicate that when years were intercalated, the intercalary month was at least sometimes a repeated month of Adar. The inscriptions, however, reveal no clear pattern of regular intercalations, nor do they indicate any consistent rule for determining the start of the lunar month.

==See also==

* Biblical and Talmudic units of measurement
* Chronology of the Bible
* Gezer calendar
* Hebrew astronomy
* Jewish astrology
* Jewish and Israeli holidays 2000–2050
* List of observances set by the Hebrew calendar
==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==

* Ari Belenkiy. &quot;A Unique Feature of the Jewish Calendar – &quot;Dehiyot&quot;&quot;. &quot;Culture and Cosmos&quot; 6 (2002) 3–22.
* Sherrard Beaumont Burnaby. &quot;Elements of the Jewish and Muhammadan Calendars&quot;. George Bell and Sons, London, 1901 – Internet Archive link.
* Nathan Bushwick. &quot;Understanding the Jewish Calendar&quot;. Moznaim, New York/Jerusalem, 1989. 
* William Moses Feldman. &quot;Rabbinical Mathematics and Astronomy&quot;, 3rd ed., Sepher-Hermon Press, New York, 1978.
* &quot;The Code of Maimonides (Mishneh Torah), Book Three, Treatise Eight: Sanctification of the New Moon&quot;. Translated by Solomon Gandz. Yale Judaica Series Volume XI, Yale University Press, New Haven, Conn., 1956.
* Edward M. Reingold and Nachum Dershowitz. &quot;Calendrical Calculations: The Millennium Edition&quot;. Cambridge University Press; 2 edition (2001). 723–730.
* Arthur Spier. &quot;The Comprehensive Hebrew Calendar: Twentieth to the Twenty-Second Century 5660–5860/1900–2100&quot;. Feldheim Publishers, Jerusalem/New York, 1986.
* Ernest Wiesenberg. &quot;Appendix: Addenda and Corrigenda to Treatise VIII&quot;. &quot;The Code of Maimonides (Mishneh Torah), Book Three: The Book of Seasons&quot;. Yale Judaica Series Volume XIV, Yale University Press, New Haven, Conn., 1961. pp. 557–602.
* Francis Henry Woods. &quot;Calendar (Hebrew)&quot;, &quot;Encyclopædia of Religion and Ethics&quot;. T. &amp; T. Clark, Edinburgh, 1910, vol. 3, pp. 108–109.
==External links==
* Chabad.org: Introduction to the Jewish Calendar
* Hebcal.com: Jewish Holiday Calendars &amp; Hebrew Date Converter
* Aish.com: Jewish Calendar
* Tripod.com: Hebrew Calendar Science and Myths
* Yeshiva.co: Jewish Calendar with Halachic times date converter and daf yomi
* Illustrating the &quot;Four Gates&quot;

===Date converters===
* TorahCalc.com: Molad Calculator
* Kaluach.org: Hebrew Date Converter
* Hebcal Hebrew Date Converter
* Chabad.org: Jewish/Hebrew Date Converter
* University of Toronto: The &quot;Kalendis&quot; Calendar Calculator
* Calendar-Converter.com: Jewish/Hebrew Calendar Converter</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q44722" start="4" end="19" title="Hebrew calendar" label="Hebrew calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q44722" start="40" end="55" title="Hebrew calendar" label="Jewish calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q194235" start="62" end="80" title="lunisolar calendar" label="lunisolar calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="96" end="99" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="155" end="161" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q94920" start="190" end="205" title="Jewish holidays" label="Jewish holidays"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006856" start="239" end="247" title="yahrzeit" label="yahrzeit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643870" start="275" end="296" title="Weekly Torah portion" label="public Torah readings"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="444" end="462" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q185688" start="619" end="633" title="Lunar calendar" label="12 such months"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225911" start="672" end="689" title="Intercalation (timekeeping)" label="extra lunar month"/>
<link wikidata="Q189607" start="806" end="816" title="solar year" label="solar year"/>
<link wikidata="Q193748" start="1037" end="1051" title="History of ancient Israel and Judah" label="ancient Israel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1240" end="1254" title="#Molad interval" label="molad interval"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1325" end="1344" title="#Rosh Hashanah postponement rules" label="several other rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q285682" start="1422" end="1435" title="Metonic cycle" label="Metonic cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1511" end="1516" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q137651" start="1722" end="1748" title="Genesis creation narrative" label="Genesis creation narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q132994" start="2124" end="2134" title="Yom Kippur" label="Yom Kippur"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="2136" end="2144" title="Passover" label="Passover"/>
<link wikidata="Q102477" start="2150" end="2157" title="Shabbat" label="Shabbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q107427" start="2274" end="2286" title="Halakha" label="Halachically"/>
<link wikidata="Q102477" start="2613" end="2620" title="Shabbat" label="Shabbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q131389" start="2798" end="2821" title="International Date Line" label="International Date Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q12410965" start="2844" end="2888" title="International date line in Judaism" label="varying opinions as to where the day changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12410965" start="2895" end="2929" title="International date line in Judaism" label="International date line in Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2999" end="3009" title="Biblical and Talmudic units of measurement#Day" label="one system"/>
<link wikidata="Q771081" start="3155" end="3160" title="helek" label="helek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888912" start="3504" end="3509" title="molad" label="molad"/>
<link wikidata="Q253797" start="3569" end="3582" title="relative hour" label="relative hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q168182" start="3923" end="3933" title="solar noon" label="solar noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999995" start="4032" end="4038" title="zmanim" label="zmanim"/>
<link wikidata="Q207607" start="4058" end="4063" title="Shema" label="Shema"/>
<link wikidata="Q137651" start="4399" end="4415" title="creation week" label="seven-day period"/>
<link wikidata="Q9184" start="4423" end="4438" title="Book of Genesis" label="Book of Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q923933" start="4521" end="4531" title="Ordinal number (linguistics)" label="day number"/>
<link wikidata="Q132" start="4577" end="4583" title="Sunday" label="Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q102477" start="4599" end="4606" title="Shabbat" label="Shabbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q131" start="4608" end="4616" title="Saturday" label="Saturday"/>
<link wikidata="Q512378" start="4954" end="4969" title="Hebrew numerals" label="numerical value"/>
<link wikidata="Q137651" start="5137" end="5161" title="Genesis creation myth" label="Genesis creation account"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5176" end="5187" title="Genesis 1:8" label="Genesis 1:8"/>
<link wikidata="Q102477" start="5443" end="5450" title="Shabbat" label="Shabbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q212779" start="5843" end="5847" title="Adar" label="Adar"/>
<link wikidata="Q212779" start="5852" end="5859" title="Adar II" label="Adar II"/>
<link wikidata="Q643051" start="5882" end="5893" title="Marcheshvan" label="Marcheshvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q180115" start="5948" end="5953" title="Purim" label="Purim"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="5955" end="5963" title="Passover" label="Passover"/>
<link wikidata="Q201196" start="5965" end="5972" title="Shavuot" label="Shavuot"/>
<link wikidata="Q131028" start="5974" end="5987" title="Rosh Hashanah" label="Rosh Hashanah"/>
<link wikidata="Q132994" start="5989" end="5999" title="Yom Kippur" label="Yom Kippur"/>
<link wikidata="Q182242" start="6001" end="6007" title="Sukkot" label="Sukkot"/>
<link wikidata="Q932711" start="6013" end="6028" title="Shemini Atzeret" label="Shemini Atzeret"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6273" end="6305" title="#Rosh Hashanah postponement rules" label="Rosh Hashanah postponement rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q840378" start="6694" end="6702" title="gematria" label="gematria"/>
<link wikidata="Q194235" start="6938" end="6956" title="lunisolar calendar" label="lunisolar calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q591259" start="6991" end="7002" title="lunar month" label="lunar month"/>
<link wikidata="Q189607" start="7028" end="7038" title="solar year" label="solar year"/>
<link wikidata="Q285682" start="7359" end="7372" title="Metonic cycle" label="Metonic cycle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7378" end="7389" title="#Leap months" label="Leap months"/>
<link wikidata="Q108566" start="7475" end="7483" title="new moon" label="new moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q208398" start="7595" end="7610" title="Karaite Judaism" label="Karaite Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="7615" end="7620" title="Islamic calendar" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7879" end="7892" title="Months#Synodic month" label="synodic month"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8203" end="8235" title="#Rosh Hashanah postponement rules" label="Rosh Hashanah postponement rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q212779" start="8386" end="8390" title="Adar" label="Adar"/>
<link wikidata="Q19828" start="8399" end="8408" title="leap year" label="leap year"/>
<link wikidata="Q15033" start="8485" end="8490" title="Aleph (Hebrew)" label="Aleph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225911" start="8835" end="8846" title="Intercalation (timekeeping)" label="intercalary"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="8927" end="8935" title="Passover" label="Passover"/>
<link wikidata="Q12889843" start="9313" end="9326" title="March equinox" label="March equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q201196" start="9355" end="9362" title="Shavuot" label="Shavuot"/>
<link wikidata="Q182242" start="9367" end="9373" title="Sukkot" label="Sukkot"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="9443" end="9453" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q201029" start="9495" end="9508" title="Mishneh Torah" label="Mishneh Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q131028" start="10119" end="10132" title="Rosh Hashanah" label="Rosh Hashanah"/>
<link wikidata="Q217782" start="10151" end="10158" title="Tishrei" label="Tishrei"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="10400" end="10411" title="fiscal year" label="fiscal year"/>
<link wikidata="Q915466" start="10426" end="10439" title="academic year" label="academic year"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="10469" end="10476" title="Mishnah" label="Mishnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q13534407" start="10626" end="10638" title="cattle tithe" label="cattle tithe"/>
<link wikidata="Q131028" start="10704" end="10717" title="Rosh Hashanah" label="1st of Tishri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790469" start="10752" end="10758" title="Shmita" label="Shmita"/>
<link wikidata="Q217642" start="10822" end="10828" title="Shevat" label="Shevat"/>
<link wikidata="Q748816" start="10918" end="10930" title="Tu Bishvat" label="15th thereof"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="11096" end="11104" title="Passover" label="Passover"/>
<link wikidata="Q131028" start="11207" end="11219" title="Rosh Hashana" label="Rosh Hashana"/>
<link wikidata="Q131028" start="11423" end="11436" title="Rosh Hashanah" label="Rosh Hashanah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790469" start="11662" end="11668" title="Shmita" label="Shmita"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778038" start="11677" end="11690" title="Maaser Rishon" label="Maaser Rishon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906919" start="11692" end="11704" title="Maaser Sheni" label="Maaser Sheni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909887" start="11710" end="11720" title="Maaser Ani" label="Maaser Ani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512010" start="11764" end="11801" title="Jewish and Israeli holidays 2000–2050" label="Jewish and Israeli holidays 2000–2050"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="11888" end="11893" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375074" start="11995" end="12007" title="calendar era" label="calendar era"/>
<link wikidata="Q137651" start="12079" end="12100" title="Genesis creation narrative" label="creation of the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="12136" end="12144" title="Biblical" label="Biblical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887711" start="12390" end="12402" title="Seleucid era" label="Seleucid era"/>
<link wikidata="Q137651" start="12785" end="12793" title="Creation according to Genesis" label="Creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707397" start="13024" end="13040" title="Dating Creation" label="date of Creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131028" start="13129" end="13142" title="Rosh Hashanah" label="Rosh Hashanah"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="13162" end="13177" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071121" start="13293" end="13324" title="Missing years (Jewish calendar)" label="Missing years (Jewish calendar)"/>
<link wikidata="Q285682" start="13748" end="13761" title="Metonic cycle" label="Metonic cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352971" start="14233" end="14247" title="Birkat Hachama" label="Birkat Hachama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911414" start="14539" end="14559" title="Second Temple Period" label="Second Temple Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q16163211" start="14879" end="14892" title="Nahshon ben Zadok" label="Rabbi Nahshon"/>
<link wikidata="Q846677" start="15722" end="15731" title="remainder" label="remainder"/>
<link wikidata="Q591259" start="17054" end="17067" title="synodic month" label="synodic month"/>
<link wikidata="Q189607" start="17208" end="17221" title="tropical year" label="tropical year"/>
<link wikidata="Q189607" start="17312" end="17325" title="tropical year" label="tropical year"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="17444" end="17456" title="Julian Calendar" label="Julian years"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="17551" end="17566" title="Gregorian Calendar" label="Gregorian years"/>
<link wikidata="Q131028" start="17884" end="17897" title="Rosh Hashanah" label="Rosh Hashanah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888912" start="18129" end="18134" title="molad" label="molad"/>
<link wikidata="Q108566" start="18146" end="18163" title="lunar conjunction" label="lunar conjunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q108566" start="18167" end="18175" title="new moon" label="new moon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18553" end="18563" title="#Anno Mundi" label="molad tohu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="18624" end="18633" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985786" start="18655" end="18680" title="Proleptic Julian calendar" label="Proleptic Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536" start="18693" end="18696" title="Coordinated Universal Time" label="UTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q132994" start="20656" end="20666" title="Yom Kippur" label="Yom Kippur"/>
<link wikidata="Q524418" start="20708" end="20722" title="Hoshana Rabbah" label="Hoshana Rabbah"/>
<link wikidata="Q102477" start="20740" end="20747" title="Shabbat" label="Shabbat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290591" start="20936" end="20951" title="Shabbat candles" label="candle lighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q131752" start="23319" end="23342" title="greatest common divisor" label="greatest common divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q202805" start="24252" end="24263" title="combination" label="combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747852" start="25040" end="25053" title="Torah reading" label="Torah reading"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25354" end="25367" title="#Rosh Hashanah postponement rules" label="molad Tishrei"/>
<link wikidata="Q9038" start="25983" end="26013" title="Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi" label="Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q30353" start="26017" end="26020" title="824" label="824"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512010" start="29960" end="29997" title="Jewish and Israeli holidays 2000–2050" label="Jewish and Israeli holidays 2000–2050"/>
<link wikidata="Q108566" start="30041" end="30049" title="new moon" label="new moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q108566" start="30081" end="30098" title="lunar conjunction" label="lunar conjunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888912" start="30117" end="30122" title="molad" label="molad"/>
<link wikidata="Q500348" start="30178" end="30196" title="Ecliptic coordinate system" label="ecliptic longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q591259" start="30308" end="30321" title="synodic month" label="synodic month"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30653" end="30671" title="Lunar month#Synodic month" label="mean synodic month"/>
<link wikidata="Q787931" start="30892" end="30900" title="Babylonian mathematics" label="System B"/>
<link wikidata="Q159905" start="30934" end="30944" title="Hipparchus" label="Hipparchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="30970" end="30977" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q155952" start="30991" end="30999" title="Almagest" label="Almagest"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="32100" end="32105" title="tide" label="tidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q227467" start="32186" end="32198" title="atomic clock" label="atomic clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q12889843" start="33394" end="33407" title="March equinox" label="March equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q182242" start="33784" end="33790" title="Sukkot" label="Sukkot"/>
<link wikidata="Q496417" start="33872" end="33878" title="sukkah" label="sukkah"/>
<link wikidata="Q932711" start="33928" end="33943" title="Shemini Atzeret" label="Shemini Atzeret"/>
<link wikidata="Q19828" start="35144" end="35154" title="leap years" label="leap years"/>
<link wikidata="Q591259" start="35260" end="35273" title="synodic month" label="synodic month"/>
<link wikidata="Q189607" start="35379" end="35392" title="tropical year" label="tropical year"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="35672" end="35681" title="Auschwitz concentration camp" label="Auschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="36340" end="36347" title="Zionist" label="Zionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q182242" start="36580" end="36586" title="Sukkot" label="Sukkot"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="36588" end="36596" title="Passover" label="Passover"/>
<link wikidata="Q201196" start="36602" end="36609" title="Shavuot" label="Shavuot"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="36863" end="36878" title="State of Israel" label="State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="36963" end="36981" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q212437" start="37163" end="37167" title="Iyar" label="Iyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q26972877" start="37209" end="37221" title="Yom HaAliyah" label="Yom HaAliyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q208192" start="37277" end="37282" title="Nisan" label="Nisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12525597" start="37671" end="37680" title="Silvester" label="Silvester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225911" start="38261" end="38272" title="Intercalation (timekeeping)" label="intercalary"/>
<link wikidata="Q175447" start="38723" end="38733" title="Babylonian captivity" label="pre-exilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q175447" start="38832" end="38852" title="Babylonian captivity" label="Babylonian captivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="38907" end="38913" title="Tanakh" label="Tanakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q320843" start="38921" end="38925" title="Aviv" label="Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q212437" start="38953" end="38956" title="Iyar" label="Ziv"/>
<link wikidata="Q217782" start="38985" end="38992" title="Ethanim" label="Ethanim"/>
<link wikidata="Q643051" start="39026" end="39029" title="Cheshvan" label="Bul"/>
<link wikidata="Q747547" start="39084" end="39099" title="Canaanite languages" label="Canaanite names"/>
<link wikidata="Q223644" start="39189" end="39201" title="First Temple" label="First Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q162996" start="39311" end="39328" title="Northwest Semitic languages" label="Northwest Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q726847" start="39728" end="39747" title="Babylonian calendar" label="Babylonian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39909" end="39933" title="Arabic names of Gregorian months#Syrian Calendar in Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Palestine and Jordan" label="Levantine solar calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="39957" end="39963" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170526" start="39990" end="40006" title="Fertile Crescent" label="Fertile Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q746003" start="40023" end="40040" title="Assyrian calendar" label="Assyrian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q208398" start="40193" end="40200" title="Karaite Judaism" label="Karaite"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="40440" end="40448" title="Josephus" label="Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294909" start="40739" end="40751" title="Edwin Thiele" label="Edwin Thiele"/>
<link wikidata="Q230407" start="40788" end="40805" title="Kingdom of Israel (Samaria)" label="Kingdom of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7040162" start="40880" end="40891" title="Nisan-years" label="Nisan-years"/>
<link wikidata="Q48685" start="40913" end="40929" title="Kingdom of Judah" label="Kingdom of Judah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809593" start="40992" end="41004" title="Tishri-years" label="Tishri-years"/>
<link wikidata="Q726847" start="41062" end="41069" title="Babylonian calendar" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131028" start="41187" end="41199" title="Rosh Hashana" label="Rosh Hashana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290338" start="41421" end="41431" title="the Exodus" label="the Exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4224666" start="41751" end="41756" title="Books of Kings" label="Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q319049" start="42150" end="42160" title="Jehoiachin" label="Jehoiachin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887711" start="42293" end="42305" title="Seleucid era" label="Seleucid era"/>
<link wikidata="Q155321" start="42337" end="42351" title="Land of Israel" label="Land of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q524457" start="42393" end="42415" title="Books of the Maccabees" label="Books of the Maccabees"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="42461" end="42469" title="Josephus" label="Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627039" start="42590" end="42594" title="Talmudic Academies in Babylonia" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822468" start="42599" end="42608" title="Talmudic Academies in the Land of Israel" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q657993" start="42776" end="42789" title="Yemenite Jews" label="Yemenite Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q43290" start="42795" end="42801" title="Talmud" label="Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303905" start="42811" end="42814" title="Rav" label="Rav"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694892" start="42815" end="42828" title="Aha bar Jacob" label="Aha bar Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124832" start="43134" end="43144" title="Rav Nachman" label="Rav Nahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q935452" start="43343" end="43350" title="Baraita" label="Baraita"/>
<link wikidata="Q657993" start="43735" end="43748" title="Yemenite Jews" label="Yemenite Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q844886" start="43914" end="43946" title="Siege of Jerusalem (70)" label="destruction of the Second Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q320843" start="44516" end="44520" title="Aviv" label="Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="44714" end="44720" title="Tanakh" label="Tanakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637842" start="44738" end="44750" title="613 Mitzvot" label="commandments"/>
<link wikidata="Q913852" start="44977" end="44989" title="Rosh Chodesh" label="Rosh Chodesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q108566" start="45217" end="45225" title="new moon" label="new moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q191825" start="45305" end="45312" title="Mishnah" label="Mishnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341410" start="45323" end="45330" title="Tosefta" label="Tosefta"/>
<link wikidata="Q208481" start="45493" end="45502" title="Sanhedrin" label="Sanhedrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492866" start="45580" end="45591" title="Gamaliel II" label="Gamaliel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q182651" start="45998" end="46007" title="Samaritan" label="Samaritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q182242" start="46160" end="46166" title="Succot" label="Succot"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="46171" end="46179" title="Passover" label="Passover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412733" start="46308" end="46323" title="Jewish diaspora" label="Jewish diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q728428" start="47377" end="47390" title="Second Temple of Jerusalem" label="Second Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q723557" start="48053" end="48071" title="Samuel of Nehardea" label="Samuel of Nehardea"/>
<link wikidata="Q180115" start="48246" end="48251" title="Purim" label="Purim"/>
<link wikidata="Q132994" start="48299" end="48309" title="Yom Kippur" label="Yom Kippur"/>
<link wikidata="Q387422" start="48397" end="48413" title="Jerusalem Talmud" label="Jerusalem Talmud"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589258" start="48597" end="48612" title="Shimon ben Pazi" label="Shimon ben Pazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q131028" start="48698" end="48710" title="Rosh Hashana" label="Rosh Hashana"/>
<link wikidata="Q524418" start="48714" end="48728" title="Hoshana Rabbah" label="Hoshana Rabbah"/>
<link wikidata="Q982194" start="48941" end="48949" title="Hai Gaon" label="Hai Gaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q540824" start="48971" end="48980" title="Hillel II" label="Hillel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q355455" start="49153" end="49164" title="Nachmanides" label="Nachmanides"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="49297" end="49307" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q46418" start="50007" end="50018" title="Constantius II" label="Constantius"/>
<link wikidata="Q352506" start="50023" end="50029" title="Constantius Gallus" label="Gallus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908897" start="50031" end="50045" title="Saul Lieberman" label="Saul Lieberman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062089" start="50663" end="50669" title="Geonim" label="Geonim"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="51489" end="51495" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="51497" end="51503" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q9038" start="51515" end="51545" title="Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi" label="Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q285682" start="51617" end="51644" title="Metonic cycle" label="19-year intercalation cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q217782" start="51723" end="51730" title="Tishrei" label="Tishrei"/>
<link wikidata="Q743781" start="51768" end="51778" title="Anno Mundi" label="Jewish era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887711" start="51806" end="51818" title="Seleucid era" label="Seleucid era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820100" start="51969" end="51983" title="Aaron ben Meïr" label="Aaron ben Meïr"/>
<link wikidata="Q328748" start="52002" end="52013" title="Saadya Gaon" label="Saadya Gaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11826" start="52167" end="52176" title="al-Biruni" label="al-Biruni"/>
<link wikidata="Q127398" start="52388" end="52398" title="Maimonides" label="Maimonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q201029" start="52531" end="52544" title="Mishneh Torah" label="Mishneh Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q507810" start="52584" end="52589" title="epoch" label="epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366914" start="52883" end="52899" title="Rabbinic Judaism" label="Rabbinic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q208398" start="52965" end="52973" title="Karaite Judaism" label="Karaites"/>
<link wikidata="Q913852" start="53406" end="53418" title="Rosh Chodesh" label="Rosh Chodesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="53478" end="53484" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q320843" start="53866" end="53870" title="aviv" label="aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366914" start="53928" end="53944" title="rabbinic Judaism" label="rabbinic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="54488" end="54494" title="Tanakh" label="Tanakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="54827" end="54842" title="State of Israel" label="State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="54869" end="54880" title="Six-Day War" label="Six-Day War"/>
<link wikidata="Q597260" start="54920" end="54926" title="aliyah" label="aliyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q182651" start="55009" end="55018" title="Samaritan" label="Samaritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q678510" start="55284" end="55305" title="Samaritan High Priest" label="Samaritan High Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="55532" end="55550" title="Children of Israel" label="Children of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q155321" start="55560" end="55574" title="Land of Israel" label="Land of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734" start="55580" end="55586" title="Joshua" label="Joshua"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="56185" end="56191" title="Tanakh" label="Tanakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q145780" start="56336" end="56352" title="Dead Sea Scrolls" label="Dead Sea Scrolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q189204" start="56445" end="56452" title="Essenes" label="Essenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315" start="56576" end="56583" title="equinox" label="equinox"/>
<link wikidata="Q123524" start="56590" end="56598" title="solstice" label="solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q520170" start="57163" end="57169" title="Elephantine papyri" label="papyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q284009" start="57196" end="57207" title="Elephantine" label="Elephantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q254101" start="57290" end="57298" title="Egyptian calendar" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q726847" start="57303" end="57313" title="Babylonian calendar" label="Babylonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423791" start="57330" end="57351" title="Sardica paschal table" label="Sardica paschal table"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="57415" end="57422" title="Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q546893" start="57852" end="57861" title="Paremhat" label="Phamenoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144472" start="57934" end="57943" title="Paremoude" label="Pharmuthi"/>
<link wikidata="Q218016" start="58152" end="58156" title="Zoara" label="Zoar"/>
<link wikidata="Q23883" start="58171" end="58179" title="Dead Sea" label="Dead Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q794587" start="58518" end="58560" title="Biblical and Talmudic units of measurement" label="Biblical and Talmudic units of measurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448627" start="58563" end="58586" title="Chronology of the Bible" label="Chronology of the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031406" start="58589" end="58603" title="Gezer calendar" label="Gezer calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5695906" start="58606" end="58622" title="Hebrew astronomy" label="Hebrew astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q109875849" start="58625" end="58641" title="Jewish astrology" label="Jewish astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512010" start="58644" end="58681" title="Jewish and Israeli holidays 2000–2050" label="Jewish and Israeli holidays 2000–2050"/>
<link wikidata="Q24911090" start="58684" end="58730" title="List of observances set by the Hebrew calendar" label="List of observances set by the Hebrew calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345024" start="59507" end="59525" title="Edward M. Reingold" label="Edward M. Reingold"/>
<link wikidata="Q18209412" start="59530" end="59547" title="Nachum Dershowitz" label="Nachum Dershowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375665" start="60157" end="60192" title="Encyclopædia of Religion and Ethics" label="Encyclopædia of Religion and Ethics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13786" wikidata="Q1768389" url="?curid=13786" title="The Holocaust Industry">
<text>The Holocaust Industry: Reflections on the Exploitation of Jewish Suffering is a book by Norman Finkelstein arguing that the American Jewish establishment exploits the memory of the Nazi Holocaust for political and financial gain and to further Israeli interests. According to Finkelstein, this &quot;Holocaust industry&quot; has corrupted Jewish culture and the authentic memory of the Holocaust.

The book was controversial, attracting both praise as well as criticism. While supporters describe the book as a substantive engagement with issues such as the politics of memory, critics argue that it either reuses antisemitic tropes, empowers them, or does both, and that the book&#x27;s style is harsh and not respectful enough considering the delicate subject.

== Conception ==
The book began as a journal review of &quot;The Holocaust in American Life&quot;, by Peter Novick.

==Synopsis==

=== The Holocaust industry ===
Finkelstein follows the Holocaust&#x27;s standing in American life from the postwar years to the end of the 20th century. Before the 1967 Arab–Israeli War, he argues, the Holocaust took little part in the lives of American Gentiles and Jews. There was, for example, at that time only a small number of books and films on the Holocaust and few works of scholarship. Not until the late 20th century, especially after the 1967 War, did the Holocaust take up its role as the foremost historical event in the American mind – so Finkelstein argues.

Finkelstein views this growing American fixation with the Holocaust through a materialist lens. After World War II, he claims, the leaders of American Jewish organizations (like the Anti-Defamation League and the American Jewish Committee) understood assimilation and access to elite power to be in their own interest. Thus these organizations distanced themselves from Israel, moderated their demands for German denazification, and collaborated with McCarthyite investigations. In the 1960s, however, the American government began a friendlier relationship with the Israeli government; and the interests of American Jewish leaders changed. Their organizations began openly to support Israel and espouse a Holocaust ideology that emphasized (1) the Holocaust as a unique historical event and (2) the Holocaust as the climax of an eternal anti-Semitism. Finkelstein argues that this Holocaust ideology does not fit with academic Holocaust scholarship. Rather it serves to defend Israel and American Jewish leaders from criticism.

=== Bad history and fraudulent memoirs ===
Many popular Holocaust books by contemporary writers have, in Finkelstein&#x27;s view, little scholarly merit. He faults Deborah Lipstadt&#x27;s 1993 book &quot;Denying the Holocaust&quot; for expanding the definition of Holocaust denial to include questioning its uniqueness. He writes that Daniel Goldhagen, in his 1996 book &quot;Hitler’s Willing Executioners&quot;, inaccurately characterizes the entire German people as eager Jew murderers driven by pathological hatred.

The U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, D.C., which opened in 1993, gets sharp criticism from Finkelstein.  Why, he asks, did the victims of the Holocaust get a national museum but not the victims of American slavery or the American Indian extermination? He also argues that the Gentile victims of the Holocaust – especially the Romani victims of the Porajmos – got only token recognition in the museum. More generally he claims that museum&#x27;s leadership is committed to political support of the Israeli state, pointing to its praise of pro-Zionist literature and its condemnation of anti-Zionist literature.

Finkelstein takes book reviewers and historians to task for praising two Holocaust memoirs that were later revealed to be fraudulent: &quot;The Painted Bird&quot; by Jerzy Kosiński (1965) and &quot;&quot; by Binjamin Wilkomirski (1995).

=== Swiss banks ===
In 1995 the World Jewish Congress initiated a lawsuit against Swiss banks to recover the assets in accounts left dormant by victims of the Holocaust. Finkelstein accuses the leaders of Jewish organizations of exaggerating the size of the assets and of using Swiss payouts to fund their own pet projects. He is equally critical of a similar lawsuit directed at German banks and of attempts to get monetary compensation from the Polish government.

==Reviews and critiques==
The book has been controversial, receiving a number of both positive and negative reviews. It was reviewed positively in &quot;The Nation&quot; by Neve Gordon. The Holocaust historian Raul Hilberg said:
 Referring to the part of the book that deals with the claims against the Swiss banks and to forced labor, he noted: 

Israeli historian Moshe Zuckermann welcomed his book as an &quot;irreplaceable critique of the ‘instrumentalisation of the past’ and underlined its ‘liberating potential’&quot;.

Oren Baruch Stier reviewing the book for the journal &quot;Prooftexts&quot; summarized the book as a &quot;small and pungent manifesto&quot; and concluded his review by writing that &quot;there are worthwhile arguments here, if one can stomach the bile in which they float&quot;.

Genocide scholar Omer Bartov wrote that &quot;Like any conspiracy theory, it contains several grains of truth; and like any such theory, it is both irrational and insidious.&quot;

Enzo Traverso reviewing the book for the journal &quot;Historical Materialism&quot; wrote that the book has proven controversial, concluding that it &quot;contains a core of truth that must be recognised, but it lends itself, due to its style and several of its main arguments, to the worst uses and instrumentalisations.&quot; He suggested that the book should be seen as an opportunity for stimulating public debates about difficult topics related to &quot;the politics of memory and on the public uses of history&quot;

Donald D. Denton, reviewing the book for &quot;Terrorism and Political Violence&quot; journal, noted that it &quot;will be valuable as an historical piece of research and of interest to those who now attempt to deal with the contemporary genocides and the subsequent generations of children of those who endured such horrors&quot;.

Wolfgang Benz stated to &quot;Le Monde&quot;: &quot;It is impossible to learn anything from Finkelstein&#x27;s book. At best, it is interesting for a psychotherapist.&quot; Jean Birnbaum publishing in the same venue added that Norman Finkelstein &quot;hardly cares about nuance&quot; and Rony Brauman wrote in the preface to the French edition (&quot;L&#x27;Industrie de l&#x27;Holocauste&quot;, Paris, La Fabrique, 2001) that some assertions of Finkelstein (especially on the impact of the Six-days war) are wrong, others being pieces of &quot;propaganda&quot;.

Historian Peter Novick, whose work Finkelstein described as providing the &quot;initial stimulus&quot; for &quot;The Holocaust Industry&quot;, said in the July 28, 2000 issue of London&#x27;s &quot;The Jewish Chronicle&quot; that Finkelstein&#x27;s book is replete with &quot;false accusations&quot;, &quot;egregious misrepresentations&quot;, &quot;absurd claims&quot; and &quot;repeated mis-statements&quot; (&quot;A charge into darkness that sheds no light&quot;). Finkelstein replied to the allegations by Novick on his website, replying to five &quot;specific charges&quot;, and criticizing his opponents&#x27; &quot;intellectual standards&quot;.

Historian Hasia Diner described Peter Novick and Finkelstein of being &quot;harsh critics of American Jewry from the left,&quot; and challenged the notion in their books that American Jews did not begin to commemorate the Holocaust until after 1967.

Andrew Ross, reviewing the book for &quot;Salon&quot;, wrote:
Alvin Hirsch Rosenfeld wrote that &quot;The Holocaust Industry&quot; &quot;is representative of a polemical engagement with the Holocaust&quot; that places it in line with a number of other works by &quot;critics of Holocaust consciousness, all of whom stress the utilitarian function of memory&quot;, and who see many modern references to The Holocaust as &quot;means of enhancing ethnic identity and advancing political agendas of one kind or another&quot;. Rosenfeld also noted that the book presents those ideas in a very &quot;harsh and inflammatory way.&quot;

It has been suggested by the editor of &quot; Terrorism and Political Violence&quot; journal that the book &quot;probably cost [Finkelstein] ... tenure at DePaul University&quot;.

===Finkelstein&#x27;s response to critics===
Finkelstein responded to his critics in the foreword to the second edition (published in 2003), writing &quot;Mainstream critics allege that I conjured a &#x27;conspiracy theory&#x27; while those on the Left ridicule the book as a defense of &#x27;the banks&#x27;. None, so far as I can tell, question my actual findings.&quot;

==Selected publication history==

* 2000; First edition, Verso Books (London) 150 p. Hardcover, 
* 2003; Second edition expanded, Verso Books (London) 286 p. Paperback, 

==See also==
* &quot;Image and Reality of the Israel–Palestine Conflict&quot;
* Jewish lobby
* Nazi gold

==References==
==External links==
*
*Author&#x27;s web page for the book
*Review by Tanweer Akram, an economist at Columbia University
*&quot;The business of death&quot; (Extracted from The Holocaust Industry by Norman G Finkelstein), &quot;The Guardian&quot; (Wednesday July 12, 2000).
*&quot;Swiss toll II&quot;, (Extracted from The Holocaust Industry by Norman G Finkelstein), &quot;The Guardian&quot; (Thursday July 13, 2000).
*&quot;It Takes an Enormous Amount of Courage to Speak the Truth When No One Else is Out There&quot; -- World-Renowned Holocaust, Israel Scholars Defend DePaul Professor Norman Finkelstein as He Fights for Tenure (Raul Hilberg and Avi Shlaim speak in support of Norman Finkelstein&#x27;s scholarship and &quot;The Holocaust Industry&quot; specifically.)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q160163" start="89" end="107" title="Norman Finkelstein" label="Norman Finkelstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="125" end="140" title="American Jewish" label="American Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="182" end="186" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="187" end="196" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="245" end="251" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q548478" start="340" end="354" title="Jewish culture" label="Jewish culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422907" start="559" end="577" title="politics of memory" label="politics of memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="615" end="626" title="antisemitic" label="antisemitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740012" start="826" end="856" title="The Holocaust in American Life" label="The Holocaust in American Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077328" start="867" end="879" title="Peter Novick" label="Peter Novick"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="1060" end="1081" title="Six-Day War" label="1967 Arab–Israeli War"/>
<link wikidata="Q190004" start="1549" end="1560" title="Historical materialism" label="materialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q158818" start="1653" end="1675" title="Anti-Defamation League" label="Anti-Defamation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q465308" start="1684" end="1709" title="American Jewish Committee" label="American Jewish Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q12294354" start="1722" end="1734" title="Jewish assimilation" label="assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q27617" start="1877" end="1898" title="Denazification" label="German denazification"/>
<link wikidata="Q207066" start="1922" end="1948" title="McCarthyism" label="McCarthyite investigations"/>
<link wikidata="Q111945429" start="2216" end="2258" title="Holocaust uniqueness debate" label="the Holocaust as a unique historical event"/>
<link wikidata="Q254798" start="2665" end="2688" title="Deborah Lipstadt" label="Deborah Lipstadt&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259841" start="2705" end="2726" title="Denying the Holocaust" label="Denying the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="2765" end="2781" title="Holocaust denial" label="Holocaust denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q553527" start="2836" end="2852" title="Daniel Goldhagen" label="Daniel Goldhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069471" start="2877" end="2906" title="Hitler&amp;#x27;s Willing Executioners" label="Hitler’s Willing Executioners"/>
<link wikidata="Q238990" start="3025" end="3055" title="United States Holocaust Memorial Museum" label="U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="3231" end="3247" title="Slavery in the United States" label="American slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q108733451" start="3255" end="3284" title="Native American genocide in the United States" label="American Indian extermination"/>
<link wikidata="Q117571" start="3382" end="3390" title="Romani Holocaust" label="Porajmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603401" start="3785" end="3801" title="The Painted Bird" label="The Painted Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q319447" start="3811" end="3825" title="Jerzy Kosiński" label="Jerzy Kosiński"/>
<link wikidata="Q541010" start="3915" end="3936" title="World Jewish Congress" label="World Jewish Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035872" start="3949" end="3976" title="World Jewish Congress lawsuit against Swiss banks" label="lawsuit against Swiss banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897630" start="4503" end="4513" title="The Nation" label="The Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q627806" start="4523" end="4534" title="Neve Gordon" label="Neve Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q213553" start="4560" end="4572" title="Raul Hilberg" label="Raul Hilberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4716" end="4732" title="Moshe Zuckermann" label="Moshe Zuckermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q15764810" start="4936" end="4946" title="Prooftexts (journal)" label="Prooftexts"/>
<link wikidata="Q929282" start="5175" end="5186" title="Omer Bartov" label="Omer Bartov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346171" start="5339" end="5352" title="Enzo Traverso" label="Enzo Traverso"/>
<link wikidata="Q385919" start="5394" end="5416" title="Historical Materialism (journal)" label="Historical Materialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422907" start="5802" end="5820" title="politics of memory" label="politics of memory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5862" end="5878" title="Donald D. Denton" label="Donald D. Denton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15760136" start="5909" end="5941" title="Terrorism and Political Violence" label="Terrorism and Political Violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q76372" start="6195" end="6208" title="Wolfgang Benz" label="Wolfgang Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q12461" start="6225" end="6233" title="Le Monde" label="Le Monde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3170784" start="6368" end="6381" title="Jean Birnbaum" label="Jean Birnbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441838" start="6483" end="6495" title="Rony Brauman" label="Rony Brauman"/>
<link wikidata="Q49077" start="6686" end="6698" title="Six-days war" label="Six-days war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077328" start="6769" end="6781" title="Peter Novick" label="Peter Novick"/>
<link wikidata="Q886181" start="6957" end="6977" title="The Jewish Chronicle" label="The Jewish Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679108" start="7421" end="7432" title="Hasia Diner" label="Hasia Diner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150423" start="7704" end="7709" title="Salon magazine" label="Salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29016891" start="7724" end="7746" title="Alvin Hirsch Rosenfeld" label="Alvin Hirsch Rosenfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154390" start="8436" end="8442" title="tenure" label="tenure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179603" start="8446" end="8463" title="DePaul University" label="DePaul University"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="8677" end="8694" title="conspiracy theory" label="conspiracy theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="8720" end="8724" title="Left-wing politics" label="Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010248" start="8903" end="8914" title="Verso Books" label="Verso Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q16820903" start="9038" end="9088" title="Image and Reality of the Israel–Palestine Conflict" label="Image and Reality of the Israel–Palestine Conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q764452" start="9097" end="9109" title="Jewish lobby" label="Jewish lobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q658418" start="9112" end="9121" title="Nazi gold" label="Nazi gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q213553" start="9768" end="9780" title="Raul Hilberg" label="Raul Hilberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q790712" start="9785" end="9795" title="Avi Shlaim" label="Avi Shlaim"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13787" wikidata="Q368173" url="?curid=13787" title="Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn">
<text>The Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn (), more commonly the Golden Dawn (), was a secret society devoted to the study and practice of occult Hermeticism and metaphysics during the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Known as a magical order, the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn was active in Great Britain and focused its practices on theurgy and spiritual development. Many present-day concepts of ritual and magic that are at the centre of contemporary traditions, such as Wicca and Thelema, were inspired by the Golden Dawn, which became one of the largest single influences on 20th-century Western occultism.

The three founders, William Robert Woodman, William Wynn Westcott, and Samuel Liddell Mathers, were Freemasons and members of the Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia. Westcott appears to have been the initial driving force behind the establishment of the Golden Dawn. Hence the Golden Dawn system was based on hierarchy and initiation, similar to Masonic lodges. While the grade structure was based on the SRIA, women were admitted on an equal basis with men.

The &quot;Golden Dawn&quot; was the first of three Orders, although all three are often collectively referred to as the &quot;Golden Dawn&quot;. The First Order taught esoteric philosophy based on the Hermetic Qabalah and personal development through study and awareness of the four classical elements, as well as the basics of astrology, tarot divination, and geomancy. The Second or Inner Order, the , taught magic, including scrying, astral travel, and alchemy. The Third Order was that of the Secret Chiefs, who were said to be highly skilled; they supposedly directed the activities of the lower two orders by spirit communication with the Chiefs of the Second Order.

==History==

===Cipher Manuscripts===

The foundational documents of the original Order of the Golden Dawn, known as the Cipher Manuscripts, are written in English using the Trithemius cipher. The manuscripts give the specific outlines of the Grade Rituals of the Order and prescribe a curriculum of graduated teachings that encompass the Hermetic Qabalah, astrology, occult tarot, geomancy, and alchemy.

According to the records of the Order, the manuscripts passed from Kenneth R. H. Mackenzie, a Masonic scholar, to the Rev. A. F. A. Woodford, whom British occult writer Francis King describes as the fourth founder, although Woodford died shortly after the Order was founded. The documents did not excite Woodford, and in February 1886 he passed them on to Freemason William Wynn Westcott, who managed to decode them in 1887. 

Westcott, pleased with his discovery, called on fellow Freemason Samuel Liddell MacGregor Mathers for a second opinion. Westcott asked for Mathers&#x27;s help to turn the manuscripts into a coherent system for lodge work. Mathers asked fellow Freemason William Robert Woodman to assist the two, and he accepted. 

Mathers and Westcott have been credited with developing the ritual outlines in the Cipher Manuscripts into a workable format. Mathers is generally credited with the design of the curriculum and rituals of the Second Order, which he called the &quot;Rosae Rubae et Aureae Crucis&quot; (&quot;Ruby Rose and Golden Cross&quot; or the &quot;RR et AC&quot;).

===Founding of the First Temple===
In October 1887, Westcott claimed to have written to a German countess and prominent Rosicrucian named Anna Sprengel, whose address was said to have been found in the decoded Cipher Manuscripts. According to Westcott, Sprengel claimed the ability to contact certain supernatural entities, known as the Secret Chiefs, that were considered the authorities over any magical order or esoteric organization. Westcott purportedly received a reply from Sprengel granting permission to establish a Golden Dawn temple and conferring honorary grades of Adeptus Exemptus on Westcott, Mathers, and Woodman. The temple was to consist of the five grades outlined in the manuscripts.

In 1888, the Isis-Urania Temple was founded in London. In contrast to the SRIA and Masonry, women were allowed and welcome to participate in the Order in &quot;perfect equality&quot; with men. The Order was more of a philosophical and metaphysical teaching order in its early years. Other than certain rituals and meditations found in the Cipher manuscripts and developed further, &quot;magical practices&quot; were generally not taught at the first temple.

For the first four years, the Golden Dawn was one cohesive group later known as the &quot;First Order&quot; or &quot;Outer Order&quot;. A &quot;Second Order&quot; or &quot;Inner Order&quot; was established and became active in 1892. The Second Order consisted of members known as &quot;adepts&quot;, who had completed the entire course of study for the First Order. The Second Order was formally established under the name &quot;Ordo Rosae Rubeae et Aureae Crucis&quot; (the Order of the Red Rose and the Golden Cross).

Eventually, the Osiris temple in Weston-super-Mare, the Horus temple in Bradford (both in 1888), and the Amen-Ra temple in Edinburgh (1893) were founded. In 1893, Mathers founded the Ahathoor temple in Paris.

===The Secret Chiefs===

In 1890, Westcott&#x27;s alleged correspondence with Anna Sprengel suddenly ceased. He claimed to have received word from Germany that she was dead and that her companions did not approve of the founding of the Order, and no further contact was to be made. If the founders were to contact the Secret Chiefs, apparently, it had to be done on their own. 

In 1892, Mathers professed that a link to the Secret Chiefs had been established. Subsequently, he supplied rituals for the Second Order. The rituals were based on the tradition of the tomb of Christian Rosenkreuz, and a &quot;Vault of Adepts&quot; became the controlling force behind the Outer Order. Later in 1916, Westcott claimed that Mathers also constructed these rituals from materials he received from Frater Lux ex Tenebris, a purported &quot;Continental Adept&quot;.

Some followers of the Golden Dawn tradition believe that the Secret Chiefs were not human or supernatural beings, but rather symbolic representations of actual or legendary sources of spiritual esotericism. The term came to stand for a great leader or teacher of a spiritual path or practice that found its way into the teachings of the Order.

===Golden Age===

By the mid-1890s, the Golden Dawn was well established in Great Britain, with over one hundred members from every class of Victorian society. Many celebrities belonged to the Golden Dawn, such as the actress Florence Farr, the Irish revolutionary Maud Gonne, the Irish poet William Butler Yeats, the Welsh author Arthur Machen, and the English authors Evelyn Underhill and Aleister Crowley.

In 1896 or 1897, Westcott broke all ties to the Golden Dawn, leaving Mathers in control. It has been speculated that his departure was due to his having lost a number of occult-related papers in a hansom cab. Apparently, when the papers were found, Westcott&#x27;s connection to the Golden Dawn was discovered and brought to the attention of his employers. He may have been told to either resign from the Order or to give up his occupation as coroner. After Westcott&#x27;s departure, Mathers appointed Florence Farr to be Chief Adept in Anglia. Dr. Henry B. Pullen Burry succeeded Westcott as Cancellarius—one of the three Chiefs of the Order.

Mathers was the only active founding member after Westcott&#x27;s departure. Due to personality clashes with other members and frequent absences from the center of Lodge activity in Great Britain, however, challenges to Mathers&#x27;s authority as leader developed among the members of the Second Order.

===Revolt===
Towards the end of 1899, the Adepts of the Isis-Urania and Amen-Ra temples had become dissatisfied with Mathers&#x27;s leadership, as well as his growing friendship with Aleister Crowley. They had also become anxious to make contact with the Secret Chiefs themselves, instead of relying on Mathers as an intermediary. Within the Isis-Urania temple, disputes were arising between Farr&#x27;s &quot;The Sphere&quot;, a secret society within the Isis-Urania, and the rest of the Adepti Minores.

Crowley was refused initiation into the Adeptus Minor grade by the London officials. Mathers overrode their decision and quickly initiated him at the Ahathoor temple in Paris on 16 January 1900. Upon his return to the London temple, Crowley requested from Miss Cracknell, the acting secretary, the papers acknowledging his grade, to which he was now entitled.

To the London Adepts, this was the final straw. Farr, already of the opinion that the London temple should be closed, wrote to Mathers expressing her wish to resign as his representative, although she was willing to carry on until a successor was found. Mathers believed Westcott was behind this turn of events, and replied on 16 February.

On 3 March a committee of seven Adepts was elected in London and requested a full investigation of the matter. Mathers sent an immediate reply, declining to provide proof, refusing to acknowledge the London temple, and dismissing Farr as his representative on 23 March. In response, a general meeting was called on 29 March in London to remove Mathers as chief and expel him from the Order.

====Splinters====
In 1901, W. B. Yeats privately published a pamphlet titled &quot;Is the Order of R. R. &amp; A. C. to Remain a Magical Order?&quot; After the Isis-Urania temple claimed its independence, there were even more disputes, leading to Yeats resigning. A committee of three was to temporarily govern, which included P. W. Bullock, M. W. Blackden and J. W. Brodie-Innes. After a short time, Bullock resigned, and Dr. Robert Felkin took his place.

In 1903, A. E. Waite and Blackden joined forces to retain the name Isis-Urania, while Felkin and other London members formed the Stella Matutina. Yeats remained in the Stella Matutina until 1921, while Brodie-Innes continued his Amen-Ra membership in Edinburgh.

===Reconstruction===
Once Mathers realised that reconciliation was impossible, he made efforts to reestablish himself in London. The Bradford and Weston-super-Mare temples remained loyal to him, but their numbers were few. He then appointed Edward Berridge as his representative. According to Francis King, historical evidence shows that there were &quot;twenty three members of a flourishing Second Order under Berridge-Mathers in 1913.&quot;

J.W. Brodie-Innes continued leading the Amen-Ra temple, deciding that the revolt was unjustified. By 1908, Mathers and Brodie-Innes were in complete accord. According to sources that differ regarding the actual date, sometime between 1901 and 1913 Mathers renamed the branch of the Golden Dawn remaining loyal to his leadership, to Alpha et Omega. 

Brodie-Innes assumed command of the English and Scottish temples, while Mathers concentrated on building up his Ahathoor temple and extending his American connections. According to occultist Israel Regardie, the Golden Dawn had spread to the United States of America before 1900 and a Thoth-Hermes temple had been founded in Chicago. By the beginning of the First World War in 1914, Mathers had established two to three American temples.

Most temples of the Alpha et Omega and Stella Matutina closed or went into abeyance by the end of the 1930s, with the exceptions of two Stella Matutina temples: Hermes Temple in Bristol, which operated sporadically until 1970, and the Smaragdum Thallasses Temple, commonly referred to as Whare Ra, in Havelock North, New Zealand, which operated regularly until its closure in 1978.

==Structure and grades==

Much of the hierarchical structure for the Golden Dawn came from the Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia, which was itself derived from the Order of the Golden and Rosy Cross.

;First Order:
* Neophyte 0=0
* Zelator 1=10
* Theoricus 2=9
* Practicus 3=8
* Philosophus 4=7

;Second Order:
* Adeptus Minor 5=6
* Adeptus Major 6=5
* Adeptus Exemptus 7=4

;Third Order:
* Magister Templi 8=3
* Magus 9=2
* Ipsissimus 10=1

The paired numbers attached to the Grades relate to positions on the Tree of Life. The Neophyte Grade of &quot;0=0&quot; indicates no position on the Tree. In the other pairs, the first numeral is the number of steps up from the bottom (Malkuth), and the second numeral is the number of steps down from the top (Kether).

The First Order Grades were related to the four elements of Earth, Air, Water, and Fire, respectively. The Aspirant to a Grade received instruction on the metaphysical meaning of each of these Elements and had to pass a written examination and demonstrate certain skills to receive admission to that Grade.

==Membership==
===Selected known members===

* Emily Katharine Bates (1846–1922), British spiritualist author, travel writer, and novelist
* Charles Henry Allan Bennett (1872–1923), best known for introducing Buddhism to the West
* Arnold Bennett (1867–1931), British novelist
* Edward W. Berridge (ca. 1843–1923), British homeopathic physician
* Algernon Blackwood (1869–1951), British writer and radio broadcaster of supernatural stories
* Gabrielle Borthwick (1866–1952), British pioneering motorist, mechanic, garage owner, and driving teacher
* Anna de Brémont (1849–1922), American singer and writer
* Aleister Crowley (1875–1947), occultist, writer and mountaineer, founder of his own magical society
* Florence Farr (1860–1917), London stage actress and musician
* Robert Felkin (1853–1926), medical missionary, explorer and anthropologist in Central Africa, author, founder of the New Zealand branch of the Golden Dawn and the Smaragdum Thalasses / Whare Ra temple
* Frederick Leigh Gardner (1857–1930), British stockbroker and occultist; published three-volume bibliography &quot;Catalogue Raisonné of Works on the Occult Sciences&quot; (1912)
* Annie Horniman (1860–1937), British repertory theatre producer and pioneer; member of the wealthy Horniman family of tea-traders
* Arthur Machen (1863–1947), leading London writer of the 1890s, author of acclaimed works of imaginative and occult fiction, such as &quot;The Great God Pan&quot;, &quot;The White People&quot; and &quot;The Hill of Dreams&quot;. Welsh by birth and upbringing
* Moina Mathers (1865–1928), London trained artist, wife of S. L. MacGregor-Mathers and sister of philosopher Henri Bergson
* Samuel Liddell MacGregor-Mathers (1854–1918), British Freemason, one of the three founders of the Golden Dawn, prolific writer, occultist, and researcher
* Alfred John Pearce (1840–1923), medic, writer, pioneering weather forecaster and celebrated astrologer known as &quot;Zadkiel&quot;
* Sax Rohmer (1883–1959), novelist, creator of the Fu Manchu character
* William Sharp (1855–1905), poet and author; alias Fiona MacLeod
* Violet Tweedale (1862–1936), Scottish writer and spiritualist
* A. E. Waite (1857–1942), British writer, Freemason and co-creator of the Rider–Waite tarot deck
* William Wynn Westcott (1848–1925), founder of the Golden Dawn, doctor, London coroner, prolific writer, British Freemason, former Supreme Magus of the Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia (SRIA)
* William Robert Woodman (1828–1891), doctor, British Freemason, former Supreme Magus of the Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia, one of the three founders of the Golden Dawn
* W. B. Yeats (1865–1939), Irish poet, dramatist and writer.

===Alleged members===
* E. Nesbit (1858–1924), English author and political activist. According to biographer Eleanor Fitzsimons: &quot;Edith&#x27;s reputed membership in the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, the foremost occult organization of the day, is intriguing. … Most biographical accounts suggest that Edith was a member of the Golden Dawn, but evidence to support this is rarely cited. The organization was of course secretive by nature, but eyewitness accounts never mentioned her as they did others, and her name does not appear on the rolls.&quot;
==Contemporary Golden Dawn orders==
While no temples in the original chartered lineage of the Golden Dawn survived past the 1970s, several organizations have since carried on, revived or expanded upon the Order&#x27;s teachings and rituals, including:

* The Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, Inc. (founded 1977)
* Thelemic Order of the Golden Dawn (founded 1990)
* Open Source Order of the Golden Dawn (2002 – 2019)

==&quot;The Golden Dawn&quot; book==
&quot;The Golden Dawn&quot;, by Israel Regardie; was published in 1937. The book is divided into several basic sections. First are the knowledge lectures, which describe the basic teaching of the Qabalah, symbolism, meditation, geomancy, etc. This is followed by the rituals of the Outer Order, consisting of five initiation rituals into the degrees of the Golden Dawn. The next section covers the rituals of the Inner Order including two initiation rituals and equinox ceremonies.

==See also==
* 

==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Works cited===
* 
* 
*
*
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
*
*
*
* 
*
*
*
*
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* Term: Golden Dawn in &quot;Llewellyn Encyclopedia&quot;
* The Life and Work of WB Yeats. Material on display in exhibition includes Yeat&#x27;s ritual notebooks.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q368173" start="4" end="37" title="Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn" label="Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q368173" start="60" end="71" title="Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn" label="Golden Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="82" end="96" title="secret society#Europe" label="secret society"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="134" end="140" title="occult" label="occult"/>
<link wikidata="Q192933" start="141" end="152" title="Hermeticism" label="Hermeticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="157" end="168" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q14946195" start="227" end="240" title="Magical organization" label="magical order"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="294" end="307" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140325" start="337" end="344" title="theurgy" label="theurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="412" end="417" title="Magic (paranormal)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q59774" start="477" end="482" title="Wicca" label="Wicca"/>
<link wikidata="Q745955" start="487" end="494" title="Thelema" label="Thelema"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="604" end="613" title="occultism" label="occultism"/>
<link wikidata="Q945121" start="636" end="658" title="William Robert Woodman" label="William Robert Woodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q540538" start="660" end="681" title="William Wynn Westcott" label="William Wynn Westcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q705702" start="687" end="709" title="Samuel Liddell Mathers" label="Samuel Liddell Mathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="716" end="726" title="Freemasons" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473888" start="746" end="777" title="Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia" label="Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454597" start="959" end="973" title="Masonic lodges" label="Masonic lodges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473888" start="1018" end="1022" title="Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia" label="SRIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613576" start="1274" end="1290" title="Hermetic Qabalah" label="Hermetic Qabalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q188520" start="1356" end="1373" title="classical element" label="classical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="1401" end="1410" title="astrology" label="astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q126645" start="1412" end="1428" title="tarot divination" label="tarot divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q815750" start="1434" end="1442" title="geomancy" label="geomancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411865" start="1501" end="1508" title="scrying" label="scrying"/>
<link wikidata="Q818844" start="1510" end="1523" title="Astral projection" label="astral travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="1529" end="1536" title="alchemy" label="alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11595987" start="1570" end="1583" title="Secret Chiefs" label="Secret Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121270" start="1868" end="1886" title="Cipher Manuscripts" label="Cipher Manuscripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708937" start="1921" end="1938" title="Trithemius cipher" label="Trithemius cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613576" start="2086" end="2102" title="Hermetic Qabalah" label="Hermetic Qabalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="2104" end="2113" title="astrology" label="astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q126645" start="2115" end="2127" title="Divinatory, esoteric and occult tarot" label="occult tarot"/>
<link wikidata="Q815750" start="2129" end="2137" title="geomancy" label="geomancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="2143" end="2150" title="alchemy" label="alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390613" start="2220" end="2243" title="Kenneth R. H. Mackenzie" label="Kenneth R. H. Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684464" start="2276" end="2293" title="A. F. A. Woodford" label="A. F. A. Woodford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482872" start="2322" end="2334" title="Francis X. King" label="Francis King"/>
<link wikidata="Q540538" start="2519" end="2540" title="William Wynn Westcott" label="William Wynn Westcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q705702" start="2645" end="2677" title="Samuel Liddell MacGregor Mathers" label="Samuel Liddell MacGregor Mathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q945121" start="2833" end="2855" title="William Robert Woodman" label="William Robert Woodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850609" start="3387" end="3400" title="Anna Sprengel" label="Anna Sprengel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11595987" start="3586" end="3599" title="Secret Chiefs" label="Secret Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q356336" start="3827" end="3843" title="Adept" label="Adeptus Exemptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6081171" start="3967" end="3985" title="Isis-Urania Temple" label="Isis-Urania Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="4001" end="4007" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q845623" start="4967" end="4984" title="Weston-super-Mare" label="Weston-super-Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q22905" start="5006" end="5014" title="Bradford" label="Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="5057" end="5066" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="5136" end="5141" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q11595987" start="5462" end="5475" title="Secret Chiefs" label="Secret Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q841173" start="5716" end="5736" title="Christian Rosenkreuz" label="Christian Rosenkreuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="6195" end="6206" title="Western esotericism" label="esotericism"/>
<link wikidata="Q168796" start="6266" end="6280" title="spiritual path" label="spiritual path"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="6487" end="6496" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073976" start="6572" end="6585" title="Florence Farr" label="Florence Farr"/>
<link wikidata="Q444601" start="6611" end="6621" title="Maud Gonne" label="Maud Gonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q40213" start="6638" end="6658" title="William Butler Yeats" label="William Butler Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q540166" start="6677" end="6690" title="Arthur Machen" label="Arthur Machen"/>
<link wikidata="Q454734" start="6716" end="6732" title="Evelyn Underhill" label="Evelyn Underhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q172684" start="6737" end="6753" title="Aleister Crowley" label="Aleister Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583962" start="6953" end="6963" title="hansom cab" label="hansom cab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134614" start="7199" end="7206" title="coroner" label="coroner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5717649" start="7306" end="7327" title="Henry B. Pullen Burry" label="Henry B. Pullen Burry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264125" start="9668" end="9686" title="J. W. Brodie-Innes" label="J. W. Brodie-Innes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13519787" start="9734" end="9747" title="Robert Felkin" label="Robert Felkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q553124" start="9774" end="9785" title="A. E. Waite" label="A. E. Waite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429511" start="9894" end="9909" title="Stella Matutina" label="Stella Matutina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339922" start="10269" end="10284" title="Edmund William Berridge" label="Edward Berridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2650925" start="10805" end="10819" title="Alpha et Omega" label="Alpha et Omega"/>
<link wikidata="Q980338" start="11014" end="11029" title="Israel Regardie" label="Israel Regardie"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="11065" end="11089" title="United States" label="United States of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="11148" end="11155" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="11181" end="11196" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="11440" end="11447" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990642" start="11550" end="11558" title="Whare Ra" label="Whare Ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q847452" start="11563" end="11577" title="Havelock North" label="Havelock North"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="11579" end="11590" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473888" start="11740" end="11771" title="Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia" label="Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100667" start="11807" end="11841" title="Order of the Golden and Rosy Cross" label="Order of the Golden and Rosy Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q188520" start="12450" end="12463" title="Classical elements" label="four elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q64685510" start="12762" end="12783" title="Emily Katharine Bates" label="Emily Katharine Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302404" start="12856" end="12883" title="Charles Henry Allan Bennett" label="Charles Henry Allan Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="12924" end="12932" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q314158" start="12947" end="12961" title="Arnold Bennett" label="Arnold Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339922" start="12994" end="13012" title="Edmund William Berridge" label="Edward W. Berridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q507991" start="13062" end="13080" title="Algernon Blackwood" label="Algernon Blackwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q95969300" start="13157" end="13176" title="Gabrielle Borthwick" label="Gabrielle Borthwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617855" start="13265" end="13280" title="Anna de Brémont" label="Anna de Brémont"/>
<link wikidata="Q172684" start="13323" end="13339" title="Aleister Crowley" label="Aleister Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073976" start="13425" end="13438" title="Florence Farr" label="Florence Farr"/>
<link wikidata="Q13519787" start="13488" end="13501" title="Robert Felkin" label="Robert Felkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990642" start="13651" end="13670" title="Whare Ra" label="Smaragdum Thalasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990642" start="13673" end="13688" title="Whare Ra" label="Whare Ra temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498269" start="13691" end="13714" title="Frederick Leigh Gardner" label="Frederick Leigh Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q460547" start="13871" end="13885" title="Annie Horniman" label="Annie Horniman"/>
<link wikidata="Q540166" start="14002" end="14015" title="Arthur Machen" label="Arthur Machen"/>
<link wikidata="Q459138" start="14262" end="14275" title="Moina Mathers" label="Moina Mathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q42156" start="14370" end="14383" title="Henri Bergson" label="Henri Bergson"/>
<link wikidata="Q705702" start="14386" end="14418" title="Samuel Liddell MacGregor Mathers" label="Samuel Liddell MacGregor-Mathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q510258" start="14676" end="14686" title="Sax Rohmer" label="Sax Rohmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575288" start="14747" end="14760" title="William Sharp (writer)" label="William Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933288" start="14813" end="14828" title="Violet Tweedale" label="Violet Tweedale"/>
<link wikidata="Q553124" start="14877" end="14888" title="A. E. Waite" label="A. E. Waite"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="14918" end="14927" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166793" start="14950" end="14972" title="Rider–Waite tarot deck" label="Rider–Waite tarot deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q540538" start="14975" end="14996" title="William Wynn Westcott" label="William Wynn Westcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473888" start="15126" end="15164" title="Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia" label="Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia (SRIA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q945121" start="15167" end="15189" title="William Robert Woodman" label="William Robert Woodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473888" start="15258" end="15289" title="Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia" label="Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40213" start="15338" end="15349" title="W. B. Yeats" label="W. B. Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q231708" start="15422" end="15431" title="E. Nesbit" label="E. Nesbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739462" start="16215" end="16258" title="The Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, Inc." label="The Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1086943" start="16276" end="16309" title="Thelemic Order of the Golden Dawn" label="Thelemic Order of the Golden Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755189" start="16327" end="16363" title="Open Source Order of the Golden Dawn" label="Open Source Order of the Golden Dawn"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13790" wikidata="Q183427" url="?curid=13790" title="Hash function">
<text>A hash function is any function that can be used to map data of arbitrary size to fixed-size values, though there are some hash functions that support variable-length output. The values returned by a hash function are called &quot;hash values&quot;, &quot;hash codes&quot;, &quot;hash digests&quot;, &quot;digests&quot;, or simply &quot;hashes&quot;. The values are usually used to index a fixed-size table called a &quot;hash table&quot;. Use of a hash function to index a hash table is called &quot;hashing&quot; or &quot;scatter-storage addressing&quot;.

Hash functions and their associated hash tables are used in data storage and retrieval applications to access data in a small and nearly constant time per retrieval. They require an amount of storage space only fractionally greater than the total space required for the data or records themselves. Hashing is a computationally- and storage-space-efficient form of data access that avoids the non-constant access time of ordered and unordered lists and structured trees, and the often-exponential storage requirements of direct access of state spaces of large or variable-length keys.

Use of hash functions relies on statistical properties of key and function interaction: worst-case behavior is intolerably bad but rare, and average-case behavior can be nearly optimal (minimal collision).

Hash functions are related to (and often confused with) checksums, check digits, fingerprints, lossy compression, randomization functions, error-correcting codes, and ciphers. Although the concepts overlap to some extent, each one has its own uses and requirements and is designed and optimized differently. The hash function differs from these concepts mainly in terms of data integrity. Hash tables may use non-cryptographic hash functions, while cryptographic hash functions are used in cybersecurity to secure sensitive data such as passwords.

== Overview ==
In a hash table, a hash function takes a key as an input, which is associated with a datum or record and used to identify it to the data storage and retrieval application. The keys may be fixed-length, like an integer, or variable-length, like a name. In some cases, the key is the datum itself. The output is a hash code used to index a hash table holding the data or records, or pointers to them.

A hash function may be considered to perform three functions:
*Convert variable-length keys into fixed-length (usually machine-word-length or less) values, by folding them by words or other units using a parity-preserving operator like ADD or XOR,
*Scramble the bits of the key so that the resulting values are uniformly distributed over the keyspace, and
*Map the key values into ones less than or equal to the size of the table.
A good hash function satisfies two basic properties: it should be very fast to compute, and it should minimize duplication of output values (collisions). Hash functions rely on generating favorable probability distributions for their effectiveness, reducing access time to nearly constant. High table loading factors, pathological key sets, and poorly designed hash functions can result in access times approaching linear in the number of items in the table. Hash functions can be designed to give the best worst-case performance, good performance under high table loading factors, and in special cases, perfect (collisionless) mapping of keys into hash codes. Implementation is based on parity-preserving bit operations (XOR and ADD), multiply, or divide. A necessary adjunct to the hash function is a collision-resolution method that employs an auxiliary data structure like linked lists, or systematic probing of the table to find an empty slot.

== Hash tables ==
Hash functions are used in conjunction with hash tables to store and retrieve data items or data records. The hash function translates the key associated with each datum or record into a hash code, which is used to index the hash table. When an item is to be added to the table, the hash code may index an empty slot (also called a bucket), in which case the item is added to the table there. If the hash code indexes a full slot, then some kind of collision resolution is required: the new item may be omitted (not added to the table), or replace the old item, or be added to the table in some other location by a specified procedure. That procedure depends on the structure of the hash table. In &quot;chained hashing&quot;, each slot is the head of a linked list or chain, and items that collide at the slot are added to the chain. Chains may be kept in random order and searched linearly, or in serial order, or as a self-ordering list by frequency to speed up access. In &quot;open address hashing&quot;, the table is probed starting from the occupied slot in a specified manner, usually by linear probing, quadratic probing, or double hashing until an open slot is located or the entire table is probed (overflow). Searching for the item follows the same procedure until the item is located, an open slot is found, or the entire table has been searched (item not in table).

=== Specialized uses ===
Hash functions are also used to build caches for large data sets stored in slow media. A cache is generally simpler than a hashed search table, since any collision can be resolved by discarding or writing back the older of the two colliding items.

Hash functions are an essential ingredient of the Bloom filter, a space-efficient probabilistic data structure that is used to test whether an element is a member of a set.

A special case of hashing is known as geometric hashing or the &quot;grid method&quot;. In these applications, the set of all inputs is some sort of metric space, and the hashing function can be interpreted as a partition of that space into a grid of &quot;cells&quot;. The table is often an array with two or more indices (called a &quot;grid file&quot;, &quot;grid index&quot;, &quot;bucket grid&quot;, and similar names), and the hash function returns an index tuple. This principle is widely used in computer graphics, computational geometry, and many other disciplines, to solve many proximity problems in the plane or in three-dimensional space, such as finding closest pairs in a set of points, similar shapes in a list of shapes, similar images in an image database, and so on.

Hash tables are also used to implement associative arrays and dynamic sets.

== Properties ==
=== Uniformity ===
A good hash function should map the expected inputs as evenly as possible over its output range. That is, every hash value in the output range should be generated with roughly the same probability. The reason for this last requirement is that the cost of hashing-based methods goes up sharply as the number of &quot;collisions&quot;—pairs of inputs that are mapped to the same hash value—increases. If some hash values are more likely to occur than others, then a larger fraction of the lookup operations will have to search through a larger set of colliding table entries.

This criterion only requires the value to be &quot;uniformly distributed&quot;, not &quot;random&quot; in any sense. A good randomizing function is (barring computational efficiency concerns) generally a good choice as a hash function, but the converse need not be true.

Hash tables often contain only a small subset of the valid inputs. For instance, a club membership list may contain only a hundred or so member names, out of the very large set of all possible names. In these cases, the uniformity criterion should hold for almost all typical subsets of entries that may be found in the table, not just for the global set of all possible entries.

In other words, if a typical set of records is hashed to table slots, then the probability of a bucket receiving many more than records should be vanishingly small. In particular, if , then very few buckets should have more than one or two records. A small number of collisions is virtually inevitable, even if is much larger than —see the birthday problem.

In special cases when the keys are known in advance and the key set is static, a hash function can be found that achieves absolute (or collisionless) uniformity. Such a hash function is said to be &quot;perfect&quot;. There is no algorithmic way of constructing such a function—searching for one is a factorial function of the number of keys to be mapped versus the number of table slots that they are mapped into. Finding a perfect hash function over more than a very small set of keys is usually computationally infeasible; the resulting function is likely to be more computationally complex than a standard hash function and provides only a marginal advantage over a function with good statistical properties that yields a minimum number of collisions. See universal hash function.

=== Testing and measurement ===
When testing a hash function, the uniformity of the distribution of hash values can be evaluated by the chi-squared test. This test is a goodness-of-fit measure: it is the actual distribution of items in buckets versus the expected (or uniform) distribution of items. The formula is

formula_1
where is the number of keys, is the number of buckets, and is the number of items in bucket .

A ratio within one confidence interval (such as 0.95 to 1.05) is indicative that the hash function evaluated has an expected uniform distribution.

Hash functions can have some technical properties that make it more likely that they will have a uniform distribution when applied. One is the strict avalanche criterion: whenever a single input bit is complemented, each of the output bits changes with a 50% probability. The reason for this property is that selected subsets of the keyspace may have low variability. For the output to be uniformly distributed, a low amount of variability, even one bit, should translate into a high amount of variability (i.e. distribution over the tablespace) in the output. Each bit should change with a probability of 50% because, if some bits are reluctant to change, then the keys become clustered around those values. If the bits want to change too readily, then the mapping is approaching a fixed XOR function of a single bit. Standard tests for this property have been described in the literature. The relevance of the criterion to a multiplicative hash function is assessed here.

=== Efficiency ===
In data storage and retrieval applications, the use of a hash function is a trade-off between search time and data storage space. If search time were unbounded, then a very compact unordered linear list would be the best medium; if storage space were unbounded, then a randomly accessible structure indexable by the key-value would be very large and very sparse, but very fast. A hash function takes a finite amount of time to map a potentially large keyspace to a feasible amount of storage space searchable in a bounded amount of time regardless of the number of keys. In most applications, the hash function should be computable with minimum latency and secondarily in a minimum number of instructions.

Computational complexity varies with the number of instructions required and latency of individual instructions, with the simplest being the bitwise methods (folding), followed by the multiplicative methods, and the most complex (slowest) are the division-based methods.

Because collisions should be infrequent, and cause a marginal delay but are otherwise harmless, it is usually preferable to choose a faster hash function over one that needs more computation but saves a few collisions.

Division-based implementations can be of particular concern because a division requires multiple cycles on nearly all processor microarchitectures. Division (modulo) by a constant can be inverted to become a multiplication by the word-size multiplicative-inverse of that constant. This can be done by the programmer, or by the compiler. Division can also be reduced directly into a series of shift-subtracts and shift-adds, though minimizing the number of such operations required is a daunting problem; the number of machine-language instructions resulting may be more than a dozen and swamp the pipeline. If the microarchitecture has hardware multiply functional units, then the multiply-by-inverse is likely a better approach.

We can allow the table size to not be a power of 2 and still not have to perform any remainder or division operation, as these computations are sometimes costly. For example, let be significantly less than . Consider a pseudorandom number generator function that is uniform on the interval . A hash function uniform on the interval is . We can replace the division by a (possibly faster) right bit shift: .

If keys are being hashed repeatedly, and the hash function is costly, then computing time can be saved by precomputing the hash codes and storing them with the keys. Matching hash codes almost certainly means that the keys are identical. This technique is used for the transposition table in game-playing programs, which stores a 64-bit hashed representation of the board position.

=== Universality ===

A &quot;universal hashing&quot; scheme is a randomized algorithm that selects a hash function among a family of such functions, in such a way that the probability of a collision of any two distinct keys is , where is the number of distinct hash values desired—independently of the two keys. Universal hashing ensures (in a probabilistic sense) that the hash function application will behave as well as if it were using a random function, for any distribution of the input data. It will, however, have more collisions than perfect hashing and may require more operations than a special-purpose hash function.

===Applicability===
A hash function that allows only certain table sizes or strings only up to a certain length, or cannot accept a seed (i.e. allow double hashing) is less useful than one that does.

A hash function is applicable in a variety of situations. Particularly within cryptography, notable applications include:

* Integrity checking: Identical hash values for different files imply equality, providing a reliable means to detect file modifications.
* Key derivation: Minor input changes result in a random-looking output alteration, known as the diffusion property. Thus, hash functions are valuable for key derivation functions.
* Message authentication codes (MACs): Through the integration of a confidential key with the input data, hash functions can generate MACs ensuring the genuineness of the data, such as in HMACs.
* Password storage: The password&#x27;s hash value does not expose any password details, emphasizing the importance of securely storing hashed passwords on the server.
* Signatures: Message hashes are signed rather than the whole message.

=== Deterministic ===
A hash procedure must be deterministic—for a given input value, it must always generate the same hash value. In other words, it must be a function of the data to be hashed, in the mathematical sense of the term. This requirement excludes hash functions that depend on external variable parameters, such as pseudo-random number generators or the time of day. It also excludes functions that depend on the memory address of the object being hashed, because the address may change during execution (as may happen on systems that use certain methods of garbage collection), although sometimes rehashing of the item is possible.

The determinism is in the context of the reuse of the function. For example, Python adds the feature that hash functions make use of a randomized seed that is generated once when the Python process starts in addition to the input to be hashed. The Python hash (SipHash) is still a valid hash function when used within a single run, but if the values are persisted (for example, written to disk), they can no longer be treated as valid hash values, since in the next run the random value might differ.

=== Defined range ===
It is often desirable that the output of a hash function have fixed size (but see below). If, for example, the output is constrained to 32-bit integer values, then the hash values can be used to index into an array. Such hashing is commonly used to accelerate data searches. Producing fixed-length output from variable-length input can be accomplished by breaking the input data into chunks of specific size. Hash functions used for data searches use some arithmetic expression that iteratively processes chunks of the input (such as the characters in a string) to produce the hash value.

=== Variable range ===
In many applications, the range of hash values may be different for each run of the program or may change along the same run (for instance, when a hash table needs to be expanded). In those situations, one needs a hash function which takes two parameters—the input data , and the number of allowed hash values.

A common solution is to compute a fixed hash function with a very large range (say, to ), divide the result by , and use the division&#x27;s remainder. If is itself a power of , this can be done by bit masking and bit shifting. When this approach is used, the hash function must be chosen so that the result has fairly uniform distribution between and , for any value of that may occur in the application. Depending on the function, the remainder may be uniform only for certain values of , e.g. odd or prime numbers.

=== Variable range with minimal movement (dynamic hash function) ===
When the hash function is used to store values in a hash table that outlives the run of the program, and the hash table needs to be expanded or shrunk, the hash table is referred to as a dynamic hash table.

A hash function that will relocate the minimum number of records when the table is resized is desirable. What is needed is a hash function (where is the key being hashed and is the number of allowed hash values) such that with probability close to .

Linear hashing and spiral hashing are examples of dynamic hash functions that execute in constant time but relax the property of uniformity to achieve the minimal movement property. Extendible hashing uses a dynamic hash function that requires space proportional to to compute the hash function, and it becomes a function of the previous keys that have been inserted. Several algorithms that preserve the uniformity property but require time proportional to to compute the value of have been invented.

A hash function with minimal movement is especially useful in distributed hash tables.

=== Data normalization ===
In some applications, the input data may contain features that are irrelevant for comparison purposes. For example, when looking up a personal name, it may be desirable to ignore the distinction between upper and lower case letters. For such data, one must use a hash function that is compatible with the data equivalence criterion being used: that is, any two inputs that are considered equivalent must yield the same hash value. This can be accomplished by normalizing the input before hashing it, as by upper-casing all letters.

==Hashing integer data types==
There are several common algorithms for hashing integers. The method giving the best distribution is data-dependent. One of the simplest and most common methods in practice is the modulo division method.

=== Identity hash function ===
If the data to be hashed is small enough, then one can use the data itself (reinterpreted as an integer) as the hashed value. The cost of computing this &quot;identity&quot; hash function is effectively zero. This hash function is perfect, as it maps each input to a distinct hash value.

The meaning of &quot;small enough&quot; depends on the size of the type that is used as the hashed value. For example, in Java, the hash code is a 32-bit integer. Thus the 32-bit integer codice_1 and 32-bit floating-point codice_2 objects can simply use the value directly, whereas the 64-bit integer codice_3 and 64-bit floating-point codice_4 cannot.

Other types of data can also use this hashing scheme. For example, when mapping character strings between upper and lower case, one can use the binary encoding of each character, interpreted as an integer, to index a table that gives the alternative form of that character (&quot;A&quot; for &quot;a&quot;, &quot;8&quot; for &quot;8&quot;, etc.). If each character is stored in 8 bits (as in extended ASCII or ISO Latin 1), the table has only 28 = 256 entries; in the case of Unicode characters, the table would have 17 × 216 = entries.

The same technique can be used to map two-letter country codes like &quot;us&quot; or &quot;za&quot; to country names (262 = 676 table entries), 5-digit ZIP codes like 13083 to city names ( entries), etc. Invalid data values (such as the country code &quot;xx&quot; or the ZIP code 00000) may be left undefined in the table or mapped to some appropriate &quot;null&quot; value.

=== Trivial hash function ===
If the keys are uniformly or sufficiently uniformly distributed over the key space, so that the key values are essentially random, then they may be considered to be already &quot;hashed&quot;. In this case, any number of any bits in the key may be extracted and collated as an index into the hash table. For example, a simple hash function might mask off the least significant bits and use the result as an index into a hash table of size .

=== Mid-squares ===
A mid-squares hash code is produced by squaring the input and extracting an appropriate number of middle digits or bits. For example, if the input is and the hash table size , then squaring the key produces , so the hash code is taken as the middle 4 digits of the 17-digit number (ignoring the high digit) 8750. The mid-squares method produces a reasonable hash code if there is not a lot of leading or trailing zeros in the key. This is a variant of multiplicative hashing, but not as good because an arbitrary key is not a good multiplier.

=== Division hashing ===
A standard technique is to use a modulo function on the key, by selecting a divisor which is a prime number close to the table size, so . The table size is usually a power of 2. This gives a distribution from . This gives good results over a large number of key sets. A significant drawback of division hashing is that division requires multiple cycles on most modern architectures (including x86) and can be 10 times slower than multiplication. A second drawback is that it will not break up clustered keys. For example, the keys 123000, 456000, 789000, etc. modulo 1000 all map to the same address. This technique works well in practice because many key sets are sufficiently random already, and the probability that a key set will be cyclical by a large prime number is small.

=== Algebraic coding ===
Algebraic coding is a variant of the division method of hashing which uses division by a polynomial modulo 2 instead of an integer to map bits to bits. In this approach, , and we postulate an th-degree polynomial . A key can be regarded as the polynomial . The remainder using polynomial arithmetic modulo 2 is . Then . If is constructed to have or fewer non-zero coefficients, then keys which share fewer than bits are guaranteed to not collide.

 is a function of , , and (the last of which is a divisor of ) and is constructed from the finite field . Knuth gives an example: taking yields . The derivation is as follows:

Let be the smallest set of integers such that and .

Define formula_2 where and where the coefficients of are computed in this field. Then the degree of . Since is a root of whenever is a root, it follows that the coefficients of satisfy , so they are all 0 or 1. If is any nonzero polynomial modulo 2 with at most nonzero coefficients, then is not a multiple of modulo 2. If follows that the corresponding hash function will map keys with fewer than bits in common to unique indices.

The usual outcome is that either will get large, or will get large, or both, for the scheme to be computationally feasible. Therefore, it is more suited to hardware or microcode implementation.

=== Unique permutation hashing ===
Unique permutation hashing has a guaranteed best worst-case insertion time.

=== Multiplicative hashing ===
Standard multiplicative hashing uses the formula , which produces a hash value in . The value is an appropriately chosen value that should be relatively prime to ; it should be large, and its binary representation a random mix of 1s and 0s. An important practical special case occurs when and are powers of 2 and is the machine word size. In this case, this formula becomes . This is special because arithmetic modulo is done by default in low-level programming languages and integer division by a power of 2 is simply a right-shift, so, in C, for example, this function becomes
 unsigned hash(unsigned K) { 
 return (a*K) » (w-m);
and for fixed and this translates into a single integer multiplication and right-shift, making it one of the fastest hash functions to compute.

Multiplicative hashing is susceptible to a &quot;common mistake&quot; that leads to poor diffusion—higher-value input bits do not affect lower-value output bits. A transmutation on the input which shifts the span of retained top bits down and XORs or ADDs them to the key before the multiplication step corrects for this. The resulting function looks like:
 unsigned hash(unsigned K) {
 K ^= K » (w-m); 
 return (a*K) » (w-m);

=== Fibonacci hashing ===
Fibonacci hashing is a form of multiplicative hashing in which the multiplier is , where is the machine word length and (phi) is the golden ratio (approximately 1.618). A property of this multiplier is that it uniformly distributes over the table space, blocks of consecutive keys with respect to any block of bits in the key. Consecutive keys within the high bits or low bits of the key (or some other field) are relatively common. The multipliers for various word lengths are:
*16: &quot;a&quot; = 9E3716 = 10
*32: &quot;a&quot; = 16 = 10
*48: &quot;a&quot; = 16 = 10
*64: &quot;a&quot; = 16 = 10

The multiplier should be odd, so the least significant bit of the output is invertible modulo . The last two values given above are rounded (up and down, respectively) by more than 1/2 of a least-significant bit to achieve this.

=== Zobrist hashing ===

Tabulation hashing, more generally known as &quot;Zobrist hashing&quot; after Albert Zobrist, is a method for constructing universal families of hash functions by combining table lookup with XOR operations. This algorithm has proven to be very fast and of high quality for hashing purposes (especially hashing of integer-number keys).

Zobrist hashing was originally introduced as a means of compactly representing chess positions in computer game-playing programs. A unique random number was assigned to represent each type of piece (six each for black and white) on each space of the board. Thus a table of 64×12 such numbers is initialized at the start of the program. The random numbers could be any length, but 64 bits was natural due to the 64 squares on the board. A position was transcribed by cycling through the pieces in a position, indexing the corresponding random numbers (vacant spaces were not included in the calculation) and XORing them together (the starting value could be 0 (the identity value for XOR) or a random seed). The resulting value was reduced by modulo, folding, or some other operation to produce a hash table index. The original Zobrist hash was stored in the table as the representation of the position.

Later, the method was extended to hashing integers by representing each byte in each of 4 possible positions in the word by a unique 32-bit random number. Thus, a table of 28×4 random numbers is constructed. A 32-bit hashed integer is transcribed by successively indexing the table with the value of each byte of the plain text integer and XORing the loaded values together (again, the starting value can be the identity value or a random seed). The natural extension to 64-bit integers is by use of a table of 28×8 64-bit random numbers.

This kind of function has some nice theoretical properties, one of which is called &quot;3-tuple independence&quot;, meaning that every 3-tuple of keys is equally likely to be mapped to any 3-tuple of hash values.

=== Customized hash function ===
A hash function can be designed to exploit existing entropy in the keys. If the keys have leading or trailing zeros, or particular fields that are unused, always zero or some other constant, or generally vary little, then masking out only the volatile bits and hashing on those will provide a better and possibly faster hash function. Selected divisors or multipliers in the division and multiplicative schemes may make more uniform hash functions if the keys are cyclic or have other redundancies.

== Hashing variable-length data ==
When the data values are long (or variable-length) character strings—such as personal names, web page addresses, or mail messages—their distribution is usually very uneven, with complicated dependencies. For example, text in any natural language has highly non-uniform distributions of characters, and character pairs, characteristic of the language. For such data, it is prudent to use a hash function that depends on all characters of the string—and depends on each character in a different way.

=== Middle and ends ===
Simplistic hash functions may add the first and last characters of a string along with the length, or form a word-size hash from the middle 4 characters of a string. This saves iterating over the (potentially long) string, but hash functions that do not hash on all characters of a string can readily become linear due to redundancies, clustering, or other pathologies in the key set. Such strategies may be effective as a custom hash function if the structure of the keys is such that either the middle, ends, or other fields are zero or some other invariant constant that does not differentiate the keys; then the invariant parts of the keys can be ignored.

=== Character folding ===
The paradigmatic example of folding by characters is to add up the integer values of all the characters in the string. A better idea is to multiply the hash total by a constant, typically a sizable prime number, before adding in the next character, ignoring overflow. Using exclusive-or instead of addition is also a plausible alternative. The final operation would be a modulo, mask, or other function to reduce the word value to an index the size of the table. The weakness of this procedure is that information may cluster in the upper or lower bits of the bytes; this clustering will remain in the hashed result and cause more collisions than a proper randomizing hash. ASCII byte codes, for example, have an upper bit of 0, and printable strings do not use the last byte code or most of the first 32 byte codes, so the information, which uses the remaining byte codes, is clustered in the remaining bits in an unobvious manner.

The classic approach, dubbed the PJW hash based on the work of Peter J. Weinberger at Bell Labs in the 1970s, was originally designed for hashing identifiers into compiler symbol tables as given in the . This hash function offsets the bytes 4 bits before adding them together. When the quantity wraps, the high 4 bits are shifted out and if non-zero, xored back into the low byte of the cumulative quantity. The result is a word-size hash code to which a modulo or other reducing operation can be applied to produce the final hash index.

Today, especially with the advent of 64-bit word sizes, much more efficient variable-length string hashing by word chunks is available.

=== Word length folding ===

Modern microprocessors will allow for much faster processing if 8-bit character strings are not hashed by processing one character at a time, but by interpreting the string as an array of 32-bit or 64-bit integers and hashing/accumulating these &quot;wide word&quot; integer values by means of arithmetic operations (e.g. multiplication by constant and bit-shifting). The final word, which may have unoccupied byte positions, is filled with zeros or a specified randomizing value before being folded into the hash. The accumulated hash code is reduced by a final modulo or other operation to yield an index into the table.

=== Radix conversion hashing ===
Analogous to the way an ASCII or EBCDIC character string representing a decimal number is converted to a numeric quantity for computing, a variable-length string can be converted as . This is simply a polynomial in a radix that takes the components as the characters of the input string of length . It can be used directly as the hash code, or a hash function applied to it to map the potentially large value to the hash table size. The value of is usually a prime number large enough to hold the number of different characters in the character set of potential keys. Radix conversion hashing of strings minimizes the number of collisions. Available data sizes may restrict the maximum length of string that can be hashed with this method. For example, a 128-bit word will hash only a 26-character alphabetic string (ignoring case) with a radix of 29; a printable ASCII string is limited to 9 characters using radix 97 and a 64-bit word. However, alphabetic keys are usually of modest length, because keys must be stored in the hash table. Numeric character strings are usually not a problem; 64 bits can count up to , or 19 decimal digits with radix 10.

=== Rolling hash ===
In some applications, such as substring search, one can compute a hash function for every -character substring of a given -character string by advancing a window of width characters along the string, where is a fixed integer, and . The straightforward solution, which is to extract such a substring at every character position in the text and compute separately, requires a number of operations proportional to . However, with the proper choice of , one can use the technique of rolling hash to compute all those hashes with an effort proportional to where is the number of occurrences of the substring.

The most familiar algorithm of this type is Rabin-Karp with best and average case performance and worst case (in all fairness, the worst case here is gravely pathological: both the text string and substring are composed of a repeated single character, such as =&quot;AAAAAAAAAAA&quot;, and =&quot;AAA&quot;). The hash function used for the algorithm is usually the Rabin fingerprint, designed to avoid collisions in 8-bit character strings, but other suitable hash functions are also used.

=== Fuzzy hash ===
=== Perceptual hash ===
== Analysis ==
Worst case results for a hash function can be assessed two ways: theoretical and practical. The theoretical worst case is the probability that all keys map to a single slot. The practical worst case is the expected longest probe sequence (hash function + collision resolution method). This analysis considers uniform hashing, that is, any key will map to any particular slot with probability , a characteristic of universal hash functions.

While Knuth worries about adversarial attack on real time systems, Gonnet has shown that the probability of such a case is &quot;ridiculously small&quot;. His representation was that the probability of of keys mapping to a single slot is , where is the load factor, .

== History ==
The term &quot;hash&quot; offers a natural analogy with its non-technical meaning (to chop up or make a mess out of something), given how hash functions scramble their input data to derive their output. In his research for the precise origin of the term, Donald Knuth notes that, while Hans Peter Luhn of IBM appears to have been the first to use the concept of a hash function in a memo dated January 1953, the term itself did not appear in published literature until the late 1960s, in Herbert Hellerman&#x27;s &quot;Digital Computer System Principles&quot;, even though it was already widespread jargon by then.

== See also ==

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==

*Calculate hash of a given value by Timo Denk
*The Goulburn Hashing Function (PDF) by Mayur Patel
*Hash Function Construction for Textual and Geometrical Data Retrieval (PDF) Latest Trends on Computers, Vol.2, pp. 483–489, CSCC Conference, Corfu, 2010</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q183427" start="2" end="15" title="Hash function" label="hash function"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="23" end="31" title="Function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q494756" start="56" end="60" title="data (computing)" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q207440" start="422" end="432" title="hash table" label="hash table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195184" start="1338" end="1347" title="hash collision" label="collision"/>
<link wikidata="Q218341" start="1407" end="1416" title="checksums" label="checksums"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337960" start="1418" end="1429" title="check digit" label="check digit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745713" start="1432" end="1444" title="Fingerprint (computing)" label="fingerprints"/>
<link wikidata="Q55564" start="1446" end="1463" title="lossy compression" label="lossy compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q228206" start="1465" end="1487" title="randomization function" label="randomization function"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611017" start="1490" end="1512" title="Error correction code" label="error-correcting codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681865" start="1518" end="1524" title="cipher" label="cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q461671" start="1724" end="1738" title="data integrity" label="data integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q119438219" start="1760" end="1791" title="non-cryptographic hash function" label="non-cryptographic hash function"/>
<link wikidata="Q477202" start="1800" end="1827" title="cryptographic hash function" label="cryptographic hash function"/>
<link wikidata="Q625642" start="2434" end="2446" title="Machine word" label="machine-word"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898309" start="2519" end="2545" title="Parity function" label="parity-preserving operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557574" start="2657" end="2665" title="Key space (cryptography)" label="keyspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195184" start="2887" end="2897" title="Hash collision" label="collisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="2944" end="2968" title="probability distribution" label="probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456138" start="3064" end="3076" title="Pathological (mathematics)" label="pathological"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003418" start="3623" end="3634" title="linked list" label="linked list"/>
<link wikidata="Q207440" start="3758" end="3769" title="hash tables" label="hash tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q2988094" start="4810" end="4824" title="linear probing" label="linear probing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268367" start="4826" end="4843" title="quadratic probing" label="quadratic probing"/>
<link wikidata="Q478351" start="4848" end="4862" title="double hashing" label="double hashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q165596" start="5158" end="5164" title="cache (computing)" label="caches"/>
<link wikidata="Q885373" start="5419" end="5431" title="Bloom filter" label="Bloom filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="5451" end="5464" title="Probability" label="probabilistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q175263" start="5465" end="5479" title="data structure" label="data structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q379825" start="5512" end="5519" title="element (mathematics)" label="element"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514741" start="5537" end="5540" title="set (computer science)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535489" start="5581" end="5598" title="geometric hashing" label="geometric hashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="5692" end="5704" title="metric space" label="metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632024" start="5755" end="5764" title="partition (mathematics)" label="partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546257" start="5882" end="5891" title="grid file" label="grid file"/>
<link wikidata="Q600590" start="6007" end="6012" title="tuple" label="tuple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600677" start="6047" end="6064" title="computer graphics" label="computer graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q874709" start="6066" end="6088" title="computational geometry" label="computational geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252872" start="6132" end="6149" title="proximity problem" label="proximity problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285" start="6158" end="6163" title="Plane (geometry)" label="plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q34929" start="6170" end="6193" title="three-dimensional space" label="three-dimensional space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209543" start="6211" end="6224" title="closest pair problem" label="closest pairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070689" start="6289" end="6295" title="image processing" label="images"/>
<link wikidata="Q10927554" start="6302" end="6316" title="image retrieval" label="image database"/>
<link wikidata="Q80585" start="6369" end="6386" title="associative array" label="associative array"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514741" start="6392" end="6404" title="set (abstract data type)" label="dynamic sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="6628" end="6639" title="probability" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q339000" start="8011" end="8027" title="birthday problem" label="birthday problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070573" start="8233" end="8240" title="Perfect hash function" label="perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q120976" start="8331" end="8340" title="factorial" label="factorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q846912" start="8790" end="8813" title="Universal hashing" label="universal hash function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071004" start="8952" end="8968" title="chi-squared test" label="chi-squared test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208241" start="9528" end="9554" title="strict avalanche criterion" label="strict avalanche criterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q259864" start="11706" end="11723" title="microarchitecture" label="microarchitecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799665" start="11736" end="11742" title="Modulo operation" label="modulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377144" start="12214" end="12231" title="hardware multiply" label="hardware multiply"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365898" start="12232" end="12247" title="functional unit" label="functional unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623338" start="12528" end="12557" title="pseudorandom number generator" label="pseudorandom number generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q879126" start="12703" end="12712" title="bit shifting" label="bit shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q583461" start="13166" end="13186" title="randomized algorithm" label="randomized algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448364" start="14057" end="14075" title="File verification" label="Integrity checking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496793" start="14194" end="14208" title="Key derivation function" label="Key derivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052621" start="14375" end="14402" title="Message authentication code" label="Message authentication code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669397" start="14561" end="14565" title="HMAC" label="HMAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q220849" start="14738" end="14748" title="Digital signature" label="Signatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064349" start="14855" end="14868" title="deterministic algorithm" label="deterministic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="14968" end="14976" title="function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623338" start="15136" end="15166" title="pseudo-random number generator" label="pseudo-random number generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q322202" start="15379" end="15397" title="garbage collection (computer science)" label="garbage collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="15532" end="15538" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525546" start="15716" end="15723" title="SipHash" label="SipHash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799665" start="17045" end="17054" title="modulo operation" label="remainder"/>
<link wikidata="Q591605" start="17102" end="17113" title="Mask (computing)" label="bit masking"/>
<link wikidata="Q879126" start="17118" end="17130" title="bit shifting" label="bit shifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q230967" start="17400" end="17403" title="odd number" label="odd"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="17407" end="17419" title="prime number" label="prime number"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553456" start="17951" end="17965" title="Linear hashing" label="Linear hashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q111939140" start="17970" end="17984" title="spiral hashing" label="spiral hashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421911" start="18133" end="18151" title="Extendible hashing" label="Extendible hashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q863506" start="18516" end="18538" title="distributed hash table" label="distributed hash table"/>
<link wikidata="Q130998" start="18879" end="18890" title="equivalence relation" label="equivalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q321119" start="19528" end="19536" title="identity function" label="identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070573" start="19600" end="19607" title="Perfect hash function" label="perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="19780" end="19784" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="20092" end="20108" title="character string" label="character string"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188561" start="20118" end="20138" title="letter case" label="upper and lower case"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610482" start="20404" end="20418" title="extended ASCII" label="extended ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q935289" start="20422" end="20433" title="ISO Latin 1" label="ISO Latin 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="20488" end="20495" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140221" start="20588" end="20612" title="ISO 3166-1 alpha-2" label="two-letter country codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q136208" start="20703" end="20712" title="ZIP Code" label="ZIP codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q182933" start="22383" end="22386" title="x86" label="x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q603880" start="23335" end="23347" title="finite field" label="finite field"/>
<link wikidata="Q17457" start="23350" end="23355" title="Donald Knuth" label="Knuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q104752" start="24387" end="24403" title="Coprime integers" label="relatively prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q625642" start="24573" end="24582" title="word size" label="word size"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="24786" end="24787" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q23835349" start="25476" end="25485" title="Fibonacci number" label="Fibonacci"/>
<link wikidata="Q41690" start="25609" end="25621" title="golden ratio" label="golden ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q20514253" start="25730" end="25736" title="Blockchain" label="blocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q17198949" start="26409" end="26423" title="Albert Lindsey Zobrist" label="Albert Zobrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="28945" end="28961" title="character string" label="character string"/>
<link wikidata="Q42253" start="28987" end="29005" title="URL" label="web page addresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="29123" end="29139" title="natural language" label="natural language"/>
<link wikidata="Q32483" start="29180" end="29190" title="character (computing)" label="characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454322" start="29196" end="29211" title="digraph (computing)" label="character pairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907782" start="31071" end="31079" title="PJW hash function" label="PJW hash"/>
<link wikidata="Q92959" start="31101" end="31120" title="Peter J. Weinberger" label="Peter J. Weinberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="31124" end="31133" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q498186" start="31389" end="31394" title="Exclusive or" label="xored"/>
<link wikidata="Q627945" start="32433" end="32439" title="EBCDIC" label="EBCDIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q843684" start="32617" end="32622" title="radix" label="radix"/>
<link wikidata="Q374040" start="33607" end="33623" title="string searching algorithm" label="substring search"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626534" start="33678" end="33687" title="substring" label="substring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384131" start="34226" end="34236" title="Rabin-Karp" label="Rabin-Karp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2125043" start="34547" end="34564" title="Rabin fingerprint" label="Rabin fingerprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q17457" start="35178" end="35183" title="Donald Knuth" label="Knuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q17457" start="35710" end="35722" title="Donald Knuth" label="Donald Knuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q86300" start="35741" end="35756" title="Hans Peter Luhn" label="Hans Peter Luhn"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="35760" end="35763" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="36216" end="36219" title="Portable Document Format" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="36308" end="36311" title="Portable Document Format" label="PDF"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13791" wikidata="Q165704" url="?curid=13791" title="High jump">
<text>The high jump is a track and field event in which competitors must jump unaided over a horizontal bar placed at measured heights without dislodging it. In its modern, most-practiced format, a bar is placed between two standards with a crash mat for landing. Since ancient times, competitors have successively improved their technique until developing the universally preferred Fosbury Flop, in which athletes run towards the bar and leap head first with their back to the bar.

The discipline is, alongside the pole vault, one of two vertical clearance events in the Olympic athletics program. It is contested at the World Championships in Athletics and the World Athletics Indoor Championships, and is a common occurrence at track and field meets. The high jump was among the first events deemed acceptable for women, having been held at the 1928 Olympic Games.

Javier Sotomayor (Cuba) is the world record holder with a jump of set in 1993 – the longest-standing record in the history of the men&#x27;s high jump. Yaroslava Mahuchikh (Ukraine) is the women&#x27;s world record holder with a jump of set in 2024.

==Rules==
The rules set for the high jump by World Athletics (previously named the IAAF) are Technical Rules TR26 and TR27 (previously Rules 181 and 182). Jumpers must take off from one foot. A jump is considered a failure if the jumper dislodges the bar or touches the ground or any object behind the bar before clearance.

Competitors may begin jumping at any height announced by the chief judge, or may pass at their own discretion. Most competitions state that three consecutive missed jumps, at any height or combination of heights, will eliminate the jumper from contention. The victory goes to the jumper who clears the greatest height during the final.

===Tie breaking===
If two or more jumpers tie for any place, the tie-breakers are: 1) the fewest misses at the height at which the tie occurred; and 2) the fewest misses throughout the competition. If the event remains tied for first place (or a limited-advancement position to a subsequent meet), the jumpers have a jump-off, beginning at the next height above their highest success. Jumpers have one attempt at each height. If only one succeeds, he or she wins; if more than one does, these try with the bar raised; if none does, all try with the bar lowered. This process was followed at the 2015 World Championship men&#x27;s event and at the 2024 Summer Olympics.

Example:
In the example jump-off, the final cleared height is 1.88m, at which A B C and D each have one failure. D has two failures at lower heights compared to one each for the other three, who proceed to a jump-off at the next height above the final cleared height. C is eliminated in the second round of the jump-off 1.89m, then B wins in the third round.

A 2009 rule-change makes the jump-off optional, so that first place can be shared by agreement among tied athletes. This rule led to shared gold in the 2020 Olympic men&#x27;s event held in 2021.

==History==

The first recorded high jump event took place in Scotland in the 19th century. Early jumpers used either an elaborate straight-on approach or a &quot;scissors&quot; technique. In later years, the bar was approached diagonally, and the jumper threw first the inside leg and then the other over the bar in a scissoring motion.

Around the turn of the 20th century, techniques began to change, beginning with the Irish-American Michael Sweeney&#x27;s &quot;Eastern cut-off&quot; as a variation of the scissors technique. By taking off as in the scissors method, extending his spine and flattening out over the bar, Sweeney raised the world record to in 1895. Even in 1948, John Winter of Australia won the gold medal of the 1948 London Olympics with this style. Besides, one of the most successful female high jumpers, Iolanda Balaș of Romania, used this style to dominate women&#x27;s high jump for about 10 years until her retirement in 1967.

Another American, George Horine, developed an even more efficient technique, the &quot;Western roll&quot;. In this style, the bar again is approached on a diagonal, but the inner leg is used for the take-off, while the outer leg is thrust up to lead the body sideways over the bar. Horine increased the world standard to in 1912. His technique was predominant through the 1936 Berlin Olympics, in which the event was won by Cornelius Johnson at .

American and Soviet jumpers were the most successful for the next four decades, and they pioneered the straddle technique. Straddle jumpers took off as in the Western roll but rotated their torso, belly-down, around the bar, obtaining the most efficient and highest clearance up to that time. Straddle jumper Charles Dumas was the first to clear 7 ft (2.13m), in 1956. American John Thomas pushed the world mark to in 1960. Valeriy Brumel of the Soviet Union took over the event for the next four years, radically speeding up his approach run. He took the record up to and won the gold medal of the 1964 Tokyo Olympics, before a motorcycle accident ended his career in 1965.

American coaches, including two-time NCAA champion Frank Costello of the University of Maryland, flocked to Russia to learn from Brumel and his coaches like Vladimir Dyachkov. However, it would be a solitary innovator at Oregon State University, Dick Fosbury, who would bring the high jump into the next century.

Taking advantage of the raised, softer, artificially-cushioned landing areas that were in use by then, Fosbury added a new twist to the outmoded Eastern cut-off. He directed himself over the bar head and shoulders first, going over on his back and landing in a fashion that would likely have resulted in serious injury in the old ground-level landing pits, which were usually filled with sawdust or sand mixtures. Around the same time, Debbie Brill independently came up with the same technique, which she called the &#x27;Brill Bend&#x27;.

Since Fosbury used his new style, called the Fosbury flop, to win the gold medal of the 1968 Mexico Olympics, its use spread quickly, and soon &quot;floppers&quot; were dominating international high jump competitions. The first flopper setting a world record was the American Dwight Stones, who cleared in 1973. In the female side, the 16-year-old flopper Ulrike Meyfarth from West Germany won the gold medal of the 1972 Munich Olympics at , which tied the women&#x27;s world record at that time (held by the Austrian straddler Ilona Gusenbauer a year before). However, it was not until 1978 when a flopper, Sara Simeoni of Italy, broke the women&#x27;s world record.

Successful high jumpers following Fosbury&#x27;s lead also included the rival of Dwight Stones, -tall Franklin Jacobs of Paterson, New Jersey, who cleared , over his head (a feat equalled 27 years later by Stefan Holm of Sweden); Chinese record-setters Ni-chi Chin and Zhu Jianhua; Germans Gerd Wessig and Dietmar Mögenburg; Swedish Olympic medalist and former world record holder Patrik Sjöberg; female jumpers Ulrike Meyfarth of West Germany and Sara Simeoni of Italy.

In spite of this, the straddle technique did not disappear at once. In 1977, the 18-year-old Soviet straddler Vladimir Yashchenko set a new world record . In 1978, he raised the record to , and indoor, just before a knee injury effectively ended his career when he was only 20 years old. In the female side, the straddler Rosemarie Ackermann of East Germany, who was the first female jumper ever to clear , raised the world record from to during 1974 to 1977. In fact, from 2 June 1977 to 3 August 1978, almost 10 years after Fosbury&#x27;s success, the men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s world records were still held by straddle jumpers Yashchenko and Ackermann respectively. However, they were the last world record holders using the straddle technique. Ackermann also won the gold medal of the 1976 Montreal Olympics, which was the last time for a straddle jumper (male or female) to win an Olympic medal.

In 1980, the Polish flopper, 1976 Olympic gold medalist Jacek Wszoła, broke Yashchenko&#x27;s world record at . Two years before, the female Italian flopper Sara Simeoni, the long-term rival of Ackermann, broke Ackermann&#x27;s world record at and became the first female flopper to break the women&#x27;s world record. She also won the gold medal of the 1980 Moscow Olympics, where Ackermann placed fourth. Since then, the flop style has been completely dominant. All other techniques were almost extinct in serious high jump competitions after late 1980s.

==Technical aspects==
Technique and form have evolved greatly over the history of high jump. The Fosbury Flop is considered the most efficient way for competitors to propel themselves over the bar.

===Approach===
For a Fosbury Flop, depending on the athlete&#x27;s jump foot, they start on the right or left of the high jump mat, placing their jump foot farthest away from the mat. They take an eight- to ten-step approach, with the first three to five steps being in a straight line and the last five being on a curve. Athletes generally mark their approach in order to find as much consistency as possible.

The approach run can be more important than the takeoff. If a high jumper runs with bad timing or without enough aggression, clearing the bar becomes more of a challenge. The approach requires a certain shape or curve, the right amount of speed, and the correct number of strides. The approach angle is also critical for optimal height.

The straight run builds the momentum and sets the tone for a jump. The athlete starts by pushing off their takeoff foot with slow, powerful steps, then begins to accelerate. They should be running upright by the end of the straight portion.

The athlete&#x27;s takeoff foot will be landing on the first step of the curve, and they will continue to accelerate, focusing their body towards the opposite back corner of the high jump mat. While staying erect and leaning away from the mat, the athlete takes their final two steps flat-footed, rolling from the heel to the toe.

Most great straddle jumpers run at angles of about 30 to 40 degrees. The length of the run is determined by the speed of the approach. A slower run requires about eight strides, but a faster high jumper might need about 13 strides. Greater speed allows a greater part of the body&#x27;s forward momentum to be converted upward.

The J approach favored by Fosbury floppers allows for speed, the ability to turn in the air (centripetal force), and a good takeoff position, which helps turn horizontal momentum into vertical momentum. The approach should be a hard, controlled stride so that the athlete does not fall from running at an angle. Athletes should lean into the curve from their ankles, not their hips. This allows their hips to rotate during takeoff, which in turn allows their center of gravity to pass under the bar.

===Takeoff===
The takeoff can be double-arm or single-arm. In both cases, the plant foot should be the foot farthest from the bar, angled towards the opposite back corner of the mat, as they drive up the knee on their non-takeoff leg. This is accompanied by a one- or two-arm swing while driving the knee.

Unlike the straddle technique, where the takeoff foot is &quot;planted&quot; in the same spot regardless of the height of the bar, flop-style jumpers must adjust their approach run as the bar is raised so that their takeoff spot is slightly farther out from the bar. Jumpers attempting to reach record heights commonly fail when most of their energy is directed into the vertical effort and they knock the bar off the standards with the backs of their legs as they stall.

An effective approach shape can be derived from physics. For example, the rate of backward spin required as the jumper crosses the bar in order to facilitate shoulder clearance on the way up and foot clearance on the way down can be determined by computer simulation. This rotation rate can be back-calculated to determine the required angle of lean away from the bar at the moment of planting, based on how long the jumper is on the takeoff foot. This information, together with the jumper&#x27;s speed, can be used to calculate the radius of the curved part of the approach. One can also work in the opposite direction by assuming a certain approach radius and determining the resulting backward rotation.
Drills can be practiced to solidify the approach. One drill is to run in a straight line and then run two to three circles spiraling into one another. Another is to run or skip a circle of any size two to three times in a row. It is important to leap upwards without first leaning into the bar, allowing the momentum of the J approach to carry the body across the bar.

===Flight===
The knee on the athlete&#x27;s non-takeoff leg naturally turns their body, placing them in the air with their back to the bar. The athlete then drives their shoulders towards the back of their feet, arching their body over the bar. They can look over their shoulder to judge when to kick both feet over their head, causing their body to clear the bar and land on the mat.

==All-time top 25==
*.

===Men (outdoor)===
====Annulled marks====

===Women (outdoor)===
===Men (indoor)===
====Annulled marks====

===Women (indoor)===
==Olympic medalists==
===Men===
===Women===
==World Championships medalists==
===Men===
===Women===
==World Indoor Championships medalists==
===Men===
===Women===

* Known as the &quot;World Indoor Games&quot;.

==Athletes with most medals==
Athletes who have won multiple titles at the two most important competitions, the Olympic Games and the World Championships:
*4 wins: Mariya Lasitskene (RUS) - Olympic Champion in 2020, World Champion in 2015, 2017 &amp; 2019
*4 wins: Mutaz Essa Barshim (QAT) - Olympic Champion in 2020, World Champion in 2017, 2019 &amp; 2022
*3 wins: Javier Sotomayor (CUB) - Olympic Champion in 1992, World Champion in 1993 &amp; 1997
*3 wins: Stefka Kostadinova (BUL) - Olympic Champion in 1996, World Champion in 1987 &amp; 1995
*2 wins: Gennadiy Avdeyenko (URS) - Olympic Champion in 1988, World Champion in 1983
*2 wins: Charles Austin (USA) - Olympic Champion in 1996, World Champion in 1991
*2 wins: Iolanda Balaș (ROU) - Olympic Champion in 1960 &amp; 1964
*2 wins: Ulrike Meyfarth (FRG) - Olympic Champion in 1972 &amp; 1984
*2 wins: Heike Henkel (GER) - Olympic Champion in 1992, World Champion in 1991
*2 wins: Hestrie Cloete (RSA) - World Champion in 2001 &amp; 2003
*2 wins: Blanka Vlašić (CRO) - World Champion in 2007 &amp; 2009
*2 wins: Anna Chicherova (RUS) - Olympic Champion in 2012, World Champion in 2011
*2 wins: Gianmarco Tamberi (ITA) - Olympic Champion in 2020, World Champion in 2023
*2 wins: Yaroslava Mahuchikh (UKR) - Olympic Champion in 2024, World Champion in 2023

Kostadinova, Sotomayor and Mahuchikh are the only high jumpers to have been Olympic Champion, World Champion and broken the world record.

==Season&#x27;s bests==

===Men===

===Women===

==See also==

* List of high jump national champions (men)
* List of high jump national champions (women)
* Standing high jump

== Sources ==
* &quot;The Complete Book of Track and Field&quot;, by Tom McNab
* &quot;The World Almanac and Book of Facts, 2000&quot;

==References==
==External links==
*IAAF high jump homepage
*IAAF list of high-jump records in XML
*Vertical Jump Resource</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q165704" start="4" end="13" title="High jump" label="high jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312129" start="19" end="34" title="track and field" label="track and field"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417902" start="377" end="389" title="Fosbury Flop" label="Fosbury Flop"/>
<link wikidata="Q185027" start="511" end="521" title="pole vault" label="pole vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q715044" start="567" end="592" title="Athletics at the Summer Olympics" label="Olympic athletics program"/>
<link wikidata="Q182653" start="617" end="649" title="World Championships in Athletics" label="World Championships in Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q725169" start="658" end="694" title="World Athletics Indoor Championships" label="World Athletics Indoor Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q657929" start="843" end="861" title="Athletics at the 1928 Summer Olympics" label="1928 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q208693" start="864" end="880" title="Javier Sotomayor" label="Javier Sotomayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q38236692" start="1016" end="1035" title="Yaroslava Mahuchikh" label="Yaroslava Mahuchikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158" start="1160" end="1175" title="World Athletics" label="World Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q20819710" start="2372" end="2412" title="2015 World Championships in Athletics – Men&amp;#x27;s high jump" label="2015 World Championship men&amp;#x27;s event"/>
<link wikidata="Q116496060" start="2424" end="2444" title="Athletics at the 2024 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s high jump" label="2024 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q63985740" start="2959" end="2988" title="Athletics at the 2020 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s high jump" label="2020 Olympic men&amp;#x27;s event"/>
<link wikidata="Q924818" start="3161" end="3181" title="Scissors jump" label="&amp;quot;scissors&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16213130" start="3442" end="3464" title="Michael Sweeney (athlete)" label="Michael Sweeney&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330593" start="3471" end="3486" title="Eastern cut-off" label="Eastern cut-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q945941" start="3687" end="3698" title="John Winter (athlete)" label="John Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628405" start="3738" end="3758" title="Athletics at the 1948 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s high jump" label="1948 London Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q229710" start="3833" end="3846" title="Iolanda Balaș" label="Iolanda Balaș"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507603" start="3978" end="3991" title="George Horine" label="George Horine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564960" start="4047" end="4059" title="Western roll" label="Western roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628467" start="4332" end="4352" title="Athletics at the 1936 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s high jump" label="1936 Berlin Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q544709" start="4384" end="4401" title="Cornelius Johnson (athlete)" label="Cornelius Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q595773" start="4511" end="4529" title="straddle technique" label="straddle technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q947964" start="4717" end="4730" title="Charles Dumas" label="Charles Dumas"/>
<link wikidata="Q534015" start="4786" end="4797" title="John Thomas (high jumper)" label="John Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q319789" start="4832" end="4846" title="Valeriy Brumel" label="Valeriy Brumel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628501" start="5007" end="5026" title="Athletics at the 1964 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s high jump" label="1964 Tokyo Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="5121" end="5125" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q503415" start="5157" end="5179" title="University of Maryland, College Park" label="University of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5241" end="5258" title="Vladimir Dyachkov" label="Vladimir Dyachkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q861888" start="5305" end="5328" title="Oregon State University" label="Oregon State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q310989" start="5330" end="5342" title="Dick Fosbury" label="Dick Fosbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722767" start="5834" end="5846" title="Debbie Brill" label="Debbie Brill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417902" start="5985" end="5997" title="Fosbury flop" label="Fosbury flop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628439" start="6028" end="6048" title="Athletics at the 1968 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s high jump" label="1968 Mexico Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q532087" start="6216" end="6229" title="Dwight Stones" label="Dwight Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q28736" start="6296" end="6311" title="Ulrike Meyfarth" label="Ulrike Meyfarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628859" start="6356" end="6376" title="Athletics at the 1972 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s high jump" label="1972 Munich Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q201830" start="6468" end="6484" title="Ilona Gusenbauer" label="Ilona Gusenbauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442" start="6548" end="6560" title="Sara Simeoni" label="Sara Simeoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491614" start="6711" end="6726" title="Franklin Jacobs" label="Franklin Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q311360" start="6815" end="6826" title="Stefan Holm" label="Stefan Holm"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252551" start="6862" end="6873" title="Ni Zhiqin" label="Ni-chi Chin"/>
<link wikidata="Q198120" start="6878" end="6889" title="Zhu Jianhua" label="Zhu Jianhua"/>
<link wikidata="Q434733" start="6899" end="6910" title="Gerd Wessig" label="Gerd Wessig"/>
<link wikidata="Q470372" start="6915" end="6932" title="Dietmar Mögenburg" label="Dietmar Mögenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q362389" start="6990" end="7004" title="Patrik Sjöberg" label="Patrik Sjöberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q28736" start="7021" end="7036" title="Ulrike Meyfarth" label="Ulrike Meyfarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442" start="7057" end="7069" title="Sara Simeoni" label="Sara Simeoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q294838" start="7191" end="7210" title="Vladimir Yashchenko" label="Vladimir Yashchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q57494" start="7403" end="7422" title="Rosemarie Ackermann" label="Rosemarie Ackermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628739" start="7872" end="7894" title="Athletics at the 1976 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s high jump" label="1976 Montreal Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q448350" start="8041" end="8053" title="Jacek Wszoła" label="Jacek Wszoła"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442" start="8142" end="8154" title="Sara Simeoni" label="Sara Simeoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628666" start="8340" end="8360" title="Athletics at the 1980 Summer Olympics – Women&amp;#x27;s high jump" label="1980 Moscow Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q172881" start="10489" end="10506" title="centripetal force" label="centripetal force"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="13619" end="13632" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q182653" start="13641" end="13660" title="World Championships in Athletics" label="World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q454772" start="13671" end="13688" title="Mariya Lasitskene" label="Mariya Lasitskene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739" start="13772" end="13790" title="Mutaz Essa Barshim" label="Mutaz Essa Barshim"/>
<link wikidata="Q208693" start="13874" end="13890" title="Javier Sotomayor" label="Javier Sotomayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q232008" start="13968" end="13986" title="Stefka Kostadinova" label="Stefka Kostadinova"/>
<link wikidata="Q371768" start="14064" end="14082" title="Hennadiy Avdyeyenko" label="Gennadiy Avdeyenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q430914" start="14149" end="14163" title="Charles Austin (high jumper)" label="Charles Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q229710" start="14230" end="14243" title="Iolanda Balaș" label="Iolanda Balaș"/>
<link wikidata="Q28736" start="14297" end="14312" title="Ulrike Meyfarth" label="Ulrike Meyfarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q178877" start="14366" end="14378" title="Heike Henkel" label="Heike Henkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q260582" start="14445" end="14459" title="Hestrie Cloete" label="Hestrie Cloete"/>
<link wikidata="Q210814" start="14511" end="14524" title="Blanka Vlašić" label="Blanka Vlašić"/>
<link wikidata="Q6300" start="14576" end="14591" title="Anna Chicherova" label="Anna Chicherova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012594" start="14658" end="14675" title="Gianmarco Tamberi" label="Gianmarco Tamberi"/>
<link wikidata="Q38236692" start="14742" end="14761" title="Yaroslava Mahuchikh" label="Yaroslava Mahuchikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630169" start="15024" end="15066" title="List of high jump national champions (men)" label="List of high jump national champions (men)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630165" start="15069" end="15113" title="List of high jump national champions (women)" label="List of high jump national champions (women)"/>
<link wikidata="Q640026" start="15116" end="15134" title="Standing high jump" label="Standing high jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q730361" start="15227" end="15258" title="World Almanac and Book of Facts" label="World Almanac and Book of Facts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13792" wikidata="Q41155" url="?curid=13792" title="Heraclitus">
<text>Heraclitus (; ; ) was an ancient Greek pre-Socratic philosopher from the city of Ephesus, which was then part of the Persian Empire. He exerts a wide influence on ancient and modern Western philosophy, through the works of such authors as Plato, Aristotle, Hegel, and Heidegger.

Little is known of Heraclitus&#x27;s life. He wrote a single work, only fragments of which have survived. Even in ancient times, his paradoxical philosophy, appreciation for wordplay, and cryptic, oracular epigrams earned him the epithets &quot;the dark&quot; and &quot;the obscure&quot;. He was considered arrogant and depressed, a misanthrope who was subject to melancholia. Consequently, he became known as &quot;the weeping philosopher&quot; in contrast to the ancient atomist philosopher Democritus, who was known as &quot;the laughing philosopher&quot;.

The central ideas of Heraclitus&#x27;s philosophy are the unity of opposites and the concept of change. Heraclitus saw harmony and justice in strife. He viewed the world as constantly in flux, always &quot;becoming&quot; but never &quot;being&quot;. He expressed this in sayings like &quot;Everything flows&quot; (, &quot;panta rhei&quot;) and &quot;No man ever steps in the same river twice&quot;. This insistence upon change contrasts with that of the ancient philosopher Parmenides, who believed in a reality of static &quot;being&quot;.

Heraclitus believed fire was the &quot;arche&quot;, the fundamental stuff of the world. In choosing an &quot;arche&quot; Heraclitus followed the Milesians before him – Thales with water, Anaximander with &quot;apeiron&quot; (boundless or infinite), and Anaximenes with air. Heraclitus also thought the &quot;logos&quot; (word, discourse, or reason) gave structure to the world.

==Life==

Heraclitus, the son of Blyson, was from the Ionian city of Ephesus, a port on the Cayster River, on the western coast of Asia Minor (modern-day Turkey). In the 6th century BC, Ephesus, like other cities in Ionia, lived under the effects of both the rise of Lydia under Croesus and his overthrow by Cyrus the Great c. 547 BC. Ephesus appears to have subsequently cultivated a close relationship with the Persian Empire; during the suppression of the Ionian revolt by Darius the Great in 494 BC, Ephesus was spared and emerged as the dominant Greek city in Ionia. Miletus, the home to the previous philosophers, was captured and sacked.

The main source for the life of Heraclitus is the doxographer Diogenes Laërtius. Although most of the information provided by Laertius is unreliable, and the ancient stories about Heraclitus are thought to be later fabrications based on interpretations of the preserved fragments; the anecdote that Heraclitus relinquished the hereditary title of &quot;king&quot; to his younger brother may at least imply that Heraclitus was from an aristocratic family in Ephesus. Heraclitus appears to have had little sympathy for democracy or the masses. However, it is unclear whether he was &quot;an unconditional partisan of the rich&quot;, or if, like the sage Solon, he was &quot;withdrawn from competing factions&quot;.

Since antiquity, Heraclitus has been labeled a solitary figure and an arrogant misanthrope. The skeptic Timon of Phlius called Heraclitus a &quot;mob-abuser&quot; (&quot;ochloloidoros&quot;). Heraclitus considered himself self-taught. He criticized fools for being &quot;put in a flutter by every word&quot;. He did not consider others incapable, but unwilling: &quot;And though reason is common, most people live as though they had an understanding peculiar to themselves.&quot; Heraclitus did not seem to like the prevailing religion of the time, criticizing the popular mystery cults, blood sacrifice, and prayer to statues. He also did not believe in funeral rites, saying &quot;Corpses are more fit to be cast out than dung.&quot; He further criticized Homer, Hesiod, Pythagoras, Xenophanes, and Hecataeus. He endorsed the sage Bias of Priene, who is quoted as saying &quot;Most men are bad&quot;. He praised a man named Hermodorus as the best among the Ephesians, who he says should all kill themselves for exiling him.

Heraclitus is traditionally considered to have flourished in the 69th Olympiad (504–501 BC), but this date may simply be based on a prior account synchronizing his life with the reign of Darius the Great. However, this date can be considered &quot;roughly accurate&quot; based on a fragment that references Pythagoras, Xenophanes, and Hecataeus as older contemporaries, placing him near the end of the sixth century BC.
According to Diogenes Laertius, Heraclitus died covered in dung after failing to cure himself from dropsy. This may be to parody his doctrine that for souls it is death to become water, and that a dry soul is best.

==&quot;On Nature&quot;==

Heraclitus is said to have produced a single work on papyrus, which has not survived; however, over 100 fragments of this work survive in quotations by other authors. The title is unknown, but many later writers refer to this work, and works by other pre-Socratics, as &quot;On Nature&quot;.

According to Diogenes Laërtius, Heraclitus deposited the book in the Artemision – one of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World – as a dedication. Classicist Charles Kahn states: &quot;Down to the time of Plutarch and Clement, if not later, the little book of Heraclitus was available in its original form to any reader who chose to seek it out.&quot; Yet, by the time of Simplicius of Cilicia, a 6th-century neoplatonic philosopher, who mentions Heraclitus 32 times but never quotes from him, Heraclitus&#x27;s work was so rare that it was unavailable even to Simplicius and the other scholars at the Platonic Academy in Athens.

=== Structure ===
Diogenes Laërtius wrote that the book was divided into three parts: the universe, politics, and theology, but, classicists have challenged that division. Classicist John Burnet has argued that &quot;it is not to be supposed that this division is due to [Heraclitus] himself; all we can infer is that the work fell naturally into these parts when the Stoic commentators took their editions of it in hand&quot;. The Stoics divided their own philosophy into three parts: ethics, logic, and physics. The Stoic Cleanthes further divided philosophy into dialectics, rhetoric, ethics, politics, physics, and theology, and philologist Karl Deichgräber has argued the last three are the same as the alleged division of Heraclitus. The philosopher Paul Schuster has argued the division came from the &quot;Pinakes&quot;.

Scholar Martin Litchfield West claims that while the existing fragments do not give much of an idea of the overall structure, the beginning of the discourse can probably be determined, starting with the opening lines, which are quoted by Sextus Empiricus:

=== Style ===
Heraclitus&#x27;s style has been compared to a Sibyl, who &quot;with raving lips uttering things mirthless, unbedizened, and unperfumed, reaches over a thousand years with her voice, thanks to the god in her&quot;. Kahn characterized the main features of Heraclitus&#x27;s writing as &quot;linguistic density&quot;, meaning that single words and phrases have multiple meanings, and &quot;resonance&quot;, meaning that expressions evoke one another. Heraclitus used literary devices like alliteration and chiasmus.

==== The Obscure ====
Aristotle quotes part of the opening line of Heraclitus&#x27;s work in the &quot;Rhetoric&quot; to outline the difficulty in punctuating Heraclitus without ambiguity; he debated whether &quot;forever&quot; applied to &quot;being&quot; or to &quot;prove&quot;. Aristotle&#x27;s successor at the lyceum Theophrastus says about Heraclitus that &quot;some parts of his work [are] half-finished, while other parts [made] a strange medley&quot;. Theophrastus thought an inability to finish the work showed Heraclitus was melancholic.

Diogenes Laërtius relays the story that the playwright Euripides gave Socrates a copy of Heraclitus&#x27;s work and asked for his opinion. Socrates replied: &quot;The part I understand is excellent, and so too is, I dare say, the part I do not understand; but it needs a Delian diver to get to the bottom of it.&quot;

Also according to Diogenes Laërtius, Timon of Phlius called Heraclitus &quot;the Riddler&quot; (; ) a likely reference to an alleged similarity to Pythagorean riddles. Timon said Heraclitus wrote his book &quot;rather unclearly&quot; (; ); according to Timon, this was intended to allow only the &quot;capable&quot; to attempt it. By the time of Cicero, this epithet became in Greek &quot;The Dark&quot; (; ) or in Latin &quot;The Obscure&quot; as he had spoken &quot;nimis obscurē&quot; (&quot;too obscurely&quot;) concerning nature and had done so deliberately in order to be misunderstood. The obscurity was &quot;probably with the idea that it is for us to seek within ourselves, as he sought for himself and found&quot;.

Heraclitus seemed to pattern his obscurity after oracles. Heraclitus did state &quot;nature loves to hide&quot; and &quot;a hidden connection is stronger than an obvious one&quot;. He also stated &quot;The lord whose oracle is in Delphi neither speaks nor conceals, but gives a sign.&quot; Heraclitus is the earliest known literary reference to the Delphic maxim to know thyself.

==Philosophy==
Heraclitus has been the subject of numerous interpretations. According to scholar Daniel W. Graham, Heraclitus has been seen as a &quot;material monist or a process philosopher; a scientific cosmologist, a metaphysician and a religious thinker; an empiricist, a rationalist, a mystic; a conventional thinker and a revolutionary; a developer of logic – one who denied the law of non-contradiction; the first genuine philosopher and an anti-intellectual obscurantist&quot;.

=== Unity of opposites and flux ===
The hallmarks of Heraclitus&#x27;s philosophy are the unity of opposites and change, or flux. According to Aristotle, Heraclitus was a dialetheist, or one who denies the law of noncontradiction (a law of thought or logical principle which states that something cannot be true and false at the same time). Also according to Aristotle, Heraclitus was a materialist. Attempting to follow Aristotle&#x27;s hylomorphic interpretation, scholar W. K. C. Guthrie interprets the distinction between flux and stability as one between matter and form. On this view, Heraclitus is a flux theorist because he is a materialist who believes matter always changes. There are no unchanging forms like with Plato or Aristotle. As one author puts it, &quot;Plato took flux as the greatest warning against materialism&quot;.

Several fragments seem to relate to the unity of opposites. For example: &quot;The straight and the crooked path of the fuller&#x27;s comb is one and the same&quot;; &quot;The way up is the way down&quot;; &quot;Beginning and end, on a circle&#x27;s circumference, are common&quot;; and &quot;Thou shouldst unite things whole and things not whole, that which tends to unite and that which tends to separate, the harmonious and the discordant; from all things arises the one, and from the one all things.&quot;

Over time, the opposites change into each other: &quot;Mortals are immortals and immortals are mortals, the one living the others&#x27; death and dying the others&#x27; life&quot;; &quot;As the same thing in us is living and dead, waking and sleeping, young and old. For these things having changed around are those, and those in turn having changed around are these&quot;; and &quot;Cold things warm up, the hot cools off, wet becomes dry, dry becomes wet.&quot;

It also seems they change into each other depending on one&#x27;s point of view, a case of relativism or perspectivism. Heraclitus states: &quot;Disease makes health sweet and good; hunger, satiety; toil, rest.&quot; While men drink and wash with water, fish prefer to drink saltwater, pigs prefer to wash in mud, and fowls prefer to wash in dust. &quot;Oxen are happy when they find bitter vetches to eat&quot; and &quot;asses would rather have refuse than gold.&quot;

==== &quot;Panta rhei&quot; ====
Diogenes Laërtius summarizes Heraclitus&#x27;s philosophy as follows: &quot;All things come into being by conflict of opposites, and the sum of things ( &quot;ta hola&quot; (&#x27;the whole&#x27;)) flows like a stream.&quot; Classicist Jonathan Barnes states that &quot;Panta rhei, &#x27;everything flows&#x27; is probably the most familiar of Heraclitus&#x27;s sayings, yet few modern scholars think he said it&quot;. Barnes observes that although the &quot;exact&quot; phrase was not ascribed to Heraclitus until the 6th century by Simplicius, a similar saying expressing the same idea, &quot;panta chorei&quot;, or &quot;everything moves&quot; is ascribed to Heraclitus by Plato in the &quot;Cratylus&quot;.

==== You cannot step into the same river twice ====

Since Plato, Heraclitus&#x27;s theory of flux has been associated with the metaphor of a flowing river, which cannot be stepped into twice. This fragment from Heraclitus&#x27;s writings has survived in three different forms:
* &quot;On those who step into the same rivers, different and different waters flow&quot; – Arius Didymus, quoted in Stobaeus
* &quot;We both step and do not step into the same river, we both are and are not&quot; – Heraclitus Homericus, &quot;Homeric Allegories&quot;
* &quot;It is not possible to step into the same river twice&quot; – Plutarch, &quot;On the E at Delphi&quot;

The classicist Karl Reinhardt identified the first river quote as the genuine one. The river fragments (especially the second &quot;we both are and are not&quot;) seem to suggest not only is the river constantly changing, but we do as well, perhaps commenting on existential questions about humanity and personhood.

Scholars such as Reinhardt also interpreted the metaphor as illustrating what is stable, rather than the usual interpretation of illustrating change. Classicist has said: &quot;You will not find anything, in which the river remains constant ... Just the fact, that there is a particular river bed, that there is a source and an estuary etc. is something, that stays identical. And this is ... the concept of a river.&quot; According to American philosopher W. V. O. Quine, the river parable illustrates that the river is a process through time. One cannot step twice into the same river-stage.

Professor M. M. McCabe has argued that the three statements on rivers should all be read as fragments from a discourse. McCabe suggests reading them as though they arose in succession. The three fragments &quot;could be retained, and arranged in an argumentative sequence&quot;. In McCabe&#x27;s reading of the fragments, Heraclitus can be read as a philosopher capable of sustained argument, rather than just aphorism.

==== Strife is justice ====
Heraclitus said &quot;strife is justice&quot; and &quot;all things take place by strife&quot;. He called the opposites in conflict (), &quot;strife&quot;, and theorized that the apparently unitary state, (), &quot;justice&quot;, results in &quot;the most beautiful harmony&quot;, in contrast to Anaximander, who described the same as injustice.

Aristotle said Heraclitus disagreed with Homer because Homer wished that strife would leave the world, which according to Heraclitus would destroy the world; &quot;there would be no harmony without high and low notes, and no animals without male and female, which are opposites&quot;. It may also explain why he disagreed with the Pythagorean emphasis on harmony, but not on strife.

Heraclitus suggests that the world and its various parts are kept together through the tension produced by the unity of opposites, like the string of a bow or a lyre. On one account, this is the earliest use of the concept of force. A quote about the bow shows his appreciation for wordplay: &quot;The bow&#x27;s name is life, but its work is death.&quot; Each substance contains its opposite, making for a continual circular exchange of generation, destruction, and motion that results in the stability of the world. This can be illustrated by the quote &quot;Even the &quot;kykeon&quot; separates if it is not stirred.&quot;

According to Abraham Schoener: &quot;War is the central principle in Heraclitus&#x27; thought.&quot; Another of Heraclitus&#x27;s famous sayings highlights the idea that the unity of opposites is also a conflict of opposites: &quot;War is father of all and king of all; and some he manifested as gods, some as men; some he made slaves, some free&quot;; war is a creative tension that brings things into existence. Heraclitus says further &quot;Gods and men honour those slain in war&quot;; &quot;Greater deaths gain greater portions&quot;; and &quot;Every beast is tended by blows.&quot;

=== &quot;Logos&quot; ===

A core concept for Heraclitus is &quot;logos&quot;, an ancient Greek word literally meaning &quot;word, speech, discourse, or meaning&quot;. For Heraclitus, the &quot;logos&quot; seems to designate the rational structure or ordered composition of the world. As well as the opening quote of his book, one fragment reads: &quot;Listening not to me but to the &quot;logos&quot;, it is wise to agree (&quot;homologein&quot;) that all things are one.&quot; Another fragment reads: &quot;[&quot;hoi polloi&quot;] ... do not know how to listen [to &quot;Logos&quot;] or how to speak [the truth].&quot;

The word &quot;logos&quot; has a wide variety of other uses, such that Heraclitus might have a different meaning of the word for each usage in his book. Kahn has argued that Heraclitus used the word in multiple senses, whereas Guthrie has argued that there is no evidence Heraclitus used it in a way that was significantly different from that in which it was used by contemporaneous speakers of Greek.

Professor Michael Stokes interprets Heraclitus&#x27;s use of &quot;logos&quot; as a public fact like a proposition or formula; like Guthrie, he views Heraclitus as a materialist, so he grants Heraclitus would not have considered these as abstract objects or immaterial things. Another possibility is the &quot;logos&quot; referred to the truth, or to the book itself. Classicist Walther Kranz translated it as &quot;sense&quot;.

Heraclitus&#x27;s &quot;logos&quot; doctrine may also be the origin of the doctrine of natural law. Heraclitus stated &quot;People ought to fight to keep their law as to defend the city walls. For all human laws get nourishment from the one divine law.&quot; &quot;Far from arguing like the latter Sophists, that the human law, because it is a conventional law, deserves to be abandoned in favor of the law of nature, Herakleitos argued that the human law partakes of the law of nature, which is at the same time a divine law.&quot;

=== Fire ===
The Milesians before Heraclitus had a view called material monism which conceived of certain elements as the &quot;arche&quot; – Thales with water, Anaximander with &quot;apeiron&quot;, and Anaximenes with air. Since antiquity, philosophers have concluded that Heraclitus construed of fire as the &quot;arche&quot;, the ultimate reality or the fundamental element that gave rise to the other elements. Pre-Socratic scholar Eduard Zeller has argued that Heraclitus believed that heat in general and dry exhalation in particular, rather than visible fire, was the &quot;arche&quot;.

In one fragment, Heraclitus writes:

This is the oldest extant quote using &quot;kosmos&quot;, or order, to mean the world. Heraclitus seems to say fire is the one thing eternal in the universe. From fire all things originate and all things return again in a process of never-ending cycles. Plato and Aristotle attribute to Heraclitus a periodic destruction of the world by a great conflagration, known as &quot;ekpyrosis,&quot; which happens every Great Year – according to Plato, every 36,000 years.

Heraclitus more than once describes the transformations to and from fire:


====Fire as symbolic====
However, it is also argued by many that Heraclitus never identified fire as the &quot;arche&quot;; rather, he only used fire to explain his notion of flux, as the basic stuff which changes or moves the most. Others conclude he used it as the physical form of &quot;logos&quot;.

On yet another interpretation, Heraclitus is not a material monist explicating flux nor stability, but a revolutionary process philosopher who chooses fire in an attempt to say there is no &quot;arche&quot;. Fire is a symbol or metaphor for change, rather than the basic stuff which changes the most. Perspectives of this sort emphasize his statements on change such as &quot;The way up is the way down&quot;, as well as the quote &quot;All things are an exchange for Fire, and Fire for all things, even as wares for gold and gold for wares&quot;, which has been understood as stating that while all can be transformed into fire, not everything comes from fire, just as not everything comes from gold.

=== Cosmology ===
While considered an ancient cosmologist, Heraclitus did not seem as interested in astronomy, meteorology, or mathematics as his predecessors. It is surmised Heraclitus believed that the earth was flat and extended infinitely in all directions.

Heraclitus held all things occur according to fate. He said &quot;Time (&quot;Aion&quot;) is a child playing draughts, the kingly power is a child&#x27;s.&quot; It is disputed whether this means time and life is determined by rules like a game, by conflict like a game, or by arbitrary whims of the gods like a child plays.

==== Sun ====
Similar to his views on rivers, Heraclitus believed &quot;the Sun is new each day.&quot; He also said the Sun never sets. According to Bertrand Russell, this was &quot;obviously inspired by scientific reflection, and no doubt seemed to him to obviate the difficulty of understanding how the sun can work its way underground from west to east during the night&quot;. The physician Galen explains: &quot;Heraclitus says that the sun is a burning mass, kindled at its rising, and quenched at its setting.&quot;

Heraclitus also believed that the Sun is as large as it looks, and said Hesiod &quot;did not know night and day, for they are one.&quot; However, he also explained the phenomenon of day and night by if the Sun &quot;oversteps his measures&quot;, then &quot;Erinyes, the ministers of Justice, will find him out&quot;. Heraclitus further wrote the Sun is in charge of the seasons.

==== Moon ====
On one account, Heraclitus believed the Sun and Moon were bowls containing fire, with lunar phases explained by the turning of the bowl. His study of the moon near the end of the month is contained in one of the Oxyrhynchus Papyri, a group of manuscripts found in an ancient landfill. This is the best evidence of Heraclitean astronomy.

=== God ===

Heraclitus said &quot;thunderbolt steers all things&quot;, a rare comment on meteorology and likely a reference to Zeus as the supreme being. Even his theology proves contradictory: &quot;One being, the only wise one, would and would not be called by the name of Zeus.&quot; He invokes relativism with the divine too: God sees man the same way man sees children and apes; and he seems to give a theodicy, &quot;for god all things are fair and good and just, but men suppose that some are unjust and others just&quot;.

In &quot;Parts of Animals&quot;, Aristotle relays this story: &quot;Heraclitus, when the strangers who came to visit him found him warming himself at the furnace in the kitchen and hesitated to go in, reported to have bidden them not to be afraid to enter, as even in that kitchen divinities were present, so we should venture on the study of every kind of animal without distaste; for each and all will reveal to us something natural and something beautiful.&quot;

The phrase ἦθος ἀνθρώπῳ δαίμων (&quot;ethos anthropoi daimon&quot;) is attributed to Heraclitus. It is variously translated as &quot;a man&#x27;s character is his fate&quot;, &quot;character is destiny&quot;, or perhaps most literally as &quot;a man&#x27;s character is his guardian divinity.&quot; The word &quot;ethos&quot; means &quot;character&quot;, while &quot;daimon&quot; has various meanings, one of which being &quot;the power controlling the destiny of individuals: hence, one&#x27;s lot or fortune.&quot;

=== The Soul ===
Heraclitus believed the soul (&quot;psyche&quot;) was complex, stating: &quot;The limits of the soul you could not discover, though traversing every path.&quot; Heraclitus regarded the soul as a mixture of fire and water, and believed that fire was the noble part of the soul and water the ignoble part. He considered mastery of one&#x27;s worldly desires to be a noble pursuit that purified the soul&#x27;s fire, while drunkenness damages the soul by causing it to be moist. Heraclitus seems to advise against anger: &quot;It is hard to fight with anger, for what it wants it buys at the price of the soul.&quot;

Heraclitus associates being awake with comprehension; as Sextus Empiricus explains &quot;It is by drawing in this divine reason in respiration that we become endowed with mind and in sleep we become forgetful, but in waking we regain our senses. For in sleep the passages of perception are shut, and hence the mind ... the only thing preserved is the connection through breathing.&quot; Heraclitus stated: &quot;If all things should become smoke, then perception would be by the nostrils&quot;.

Heraclitus compares the soul to a spider and the body to the web. Heraclitus believed the soul is what unifies the body and also what grants linguistic understanding, departing from Homer&#x27;s conception of it as merely the breath of life. Heraclitus ridicules Homer&#x27;s conception of souls in the afterlife as shades by saying &quot;Souls smell in Hades&quot;. His own views on the afterlife remain unclear, but Heraclitus did state: &quot;There await men after they are dead things which they do not expect or imagine.&quot;

The Aristotelian tradition is responsible for a great part of the transmission of Heraclitus&#x27;s physical conception of the soul. Aristotle wrote in &quot;De Anima&quot;: &quot;Heraclitus too says that the first principle—the &#x27;warm exhalation&#x27; of which, according to him, everything else is composed—is soul; further, that this exhalation is most incorporeal and in ceaseless flux&quot;.

=== Foreign influence ===
Heraclitus&#x27;s originality and placement near the beginning of Greek philosophy has resulted in several writers looking for possible influence from the surrounding nations.

==== Persia ====

The Persian Empire had a close connection with Ephesus and Zoroastrianism was the state religion of the Persian Empire. Heraclitus&#x27;s emphasis on fire has been investigated for influence from Zoroastrian fire worship and specifically the concept of &quot;Atar&quot;. While many of the doctrines of Zoroastrian fire do not match exactly with those of Heraclitus, such as the relation of fire to earth, it is still argued he may have taken some inspiration from them. Zoroastrian parallels to Heraclitus are often difficult to identify specifically due to a lack of surviving Zoroastrian literature from the period and mutual influence with Greek philosophy.

==== India ====
The interchange of other elements with fire also has parallels in Vedic literature from the same time period, such as the &quot;Upanishads&quot;. The &quot;Taittiriya Upanishad&quot; for instance states &quot;Fire is established in water, water is established in fire&quot;. Heraclitus may have also been influenced by a Vedic meditation known as the &quot;Doctrine of the Five Fires.&quot; West however stresses that these doctrines of the interchange of elements were common throughout written works on philosophy that have survived from that period; so Heraclitus&#x27;s doctrine of fire can not be definitively said to have been influenced by any other particular Iranian or Indian influence, but may have been part of a mutual interchange of influence over time across the Ancient Near East.

==== Egypt ====
Philosopher Gustav Teichmüller sought to prove Heraclitus was influenced by the Egyptians, either directly, by reading the &quot;Book of the Dead&quot;, or indirectly through the Greek mystery cults. &quot;As the sun of Heraclitus was daily generated from water, so Horus, as Ra of the sun, daily proceeded from Lotus the water.&quot; Paul Tannery took up Teichmüller&#x27;s interpretation. They both thought Heraclitus&#x27;s book was an offering to the temple to be read only by few initiates, rather than deposited in the temple to the public for safe-keeping. Edmund Pfleiderer argued that Heraclitus was influenced by the mystery cults. He interprets Heraclitus&#x27;s apparent condemning of the mystery cults as the condemning of abuses rather than the idea itself.

== Legacy ==
Heraclitus&#x27;s writings have exerted a wide influence on Western philosophy, including the works of Plato and Aristotle, who interpreted him in terms of their own doctrines.

His influence also extends into art, literature, and even medicine, as writings in the Hippocratic corpus show signs of Heraclitean themes. Heraclitus is also considered a potential source for understanding the Ancient Greek religion since the discovery of the Derveni papyrus, an Orphic poem which contains two fragments of Heraclitus.

=== Ancient ===

==== Pre-Socratics ====
It is unknown whether or not Heraclitus had any students in his lifetime. Diogenes Laertius states Heraclitus&#x27;s book &quot;won so great a fame that there arose followers of him called Heracliteans.&quot; Scholars took this to mean Heraclitus had no disciples and became renowned only after his death. According to one author, &quot;The school of disciples founded by Heraclitus flourished for long after his death&quot;. According to another, &quot;there were no doubt other Heracliteans whose names are now lost to us&quot;.

In his dialogue &quot;Cratylus&quot;, Plato presented Cratylus as a Heraclitean and as a linguistic naturalist who believed that names must apply naturally to their objects. According to Aristotle, Cratylus went a step beyond his master&#x27;s doctrine and said that one cannot step into the same river once. He took the view that nothing can be said about the ever-changing world and &quot;ended by thinking that one need not say anything, and only moved his finger&quot;. To explain both characterizations by Plato and Aristotle, Cratylus may have thought continuous change warrants skepticism because one cannot define a thing that does not have a permanent nature. Diogenes Laertius also lists an otherwise historically obscure Antisthenes who wrote a commentary on Heraclitus.

The Pythagorean and comic writer Epicharmus of Kos has fragments which seem to reproduce the thought of Heraclitus, and wrote a play titled &quot;Heraclitus&quot;.

===== Eleatics =====

Parmenides of Elea, a philosopher and near-contemporary, proposed a doctrine of changelessness, in contrast to the doctrine of flux put forth by Heraclitus. He is generally agreed to either have influenced or been influenced by Heraclitus. Different philosophers have argued that either one of them may have substantially influenced each other, some taking Heraclitus to be responding to Parmenides, but more often Parmenides is seen as responding to Heraclitus. Some also argue that any direct chain of influence between the two is impossible to determine. Although Heraclitus refers to older figures such as Pythagoras, neither Parmenides or Heraclitus refer to each other by name in any surviving fragments, so any speculation on influence must be based on interpretation.

===== Pluralists and atomists =====
The surviving fragments of several other pre-Socratic philosophers show Heraclitean themes. Diogenes of Apollonia thought the action of one thing on another meant they were made of one substance. The pluralists may have been influenced by Heraclitus. The philosopher Anaxagoras refuses to separate the opposites in the &quot;one cosmos&quot;. Empedocles has forces (arguably the first since Heraclitus&#x27;s tension) which are in opposition, known as Love and Hate, or more accurately, Harmony and Strife. Democritus and the atomists were also influenced by Heraclitus. The atomists and Heraclitus both believed that everything was in motion. On one interpretation: &quot;Essentially what the atomists did was try to find a middle-way between the contradictory philosophical schemes of Heraclitus and Parmenides.&quot;

===== Sophists =====
The sophists, including Protagoras of Abdera and Gorgias of Leontini, may also have been influenced by Heraclitus. Sophists in general seemed to share Heraclitus&#x27;s conception of the &quot;logos&quot;. One tradition associated the sophists&#x27; concern with politics and preventing party strife with Heraclitus.

Heraclitus and others used &quot;measure&quot; to mean the balance and order of nature; hence Protagoras&#x27; famous statement &quot;man is the measure of all things&quot;. In Plato&#x27;s dialogue &quot;Theaetetus&quot;, Socrates sees Protagoras&#x27;s &quot;man is the measure&quot; doctrine and Theaetetus&#x27; hypothesis that &quot;knowledge is perception&quot; as justified by Heraclitean flux.

Gorgias seems to have been influenced by the &quot;logos&quot;, when he argued in his work &quot;On Non-Being&quot;, possibly parodying the Eleatics, that being cannot exist or be communicated. According to one author, Gorgias &quot;in a sense ... completes Heraclitus.&quot;

==== Classical and Hellenistic philosophy ====
Plato knew of the teachings of Heraclitus through the Heraclitean philosopher Cratylus. Plato held that for Heraclitus knowledge is made impossible by the flux of sensible objects, and thus the need for the imperceptible Forms as objects of knowledge.

Scythinus of Teos, a contemporary of Plato, wrote out Heraclitus&#x27;s philosophy in verse. A four-volume work on Heraclitus was written by the academic Heraclides Ponticus, but has not survived. Plutarch also wrote a lost treatise on Heraclitus. The Neoplatonists were influenced by Heraclitus on the topic of the One; quoting Plotinus &quot;Heraclitus, with his sense of bodily forms as things of ceaseless process and passage, knows the One as eternal and intellectual.&quot;

Aristotle accused Heraclitus of denying the law of noncontradiction, and charges that he thereby failed in his reasoning. However, Aristotle&#x27;s material monist and world conflagration (&quot;ekpyrosis&quot;) interpretation of Heraclitus influenced the Stoics.

===== Stoics =====

The Stoics believed major tenets of their philosophy derived from the thought of Heraclitus; especially the &quot;logos,&quot; used to support their belief that rational law governs the universe. Scholar A. A. Long concludes the earliest Stoic fragments are &quot;modifications of Heraclitus&quot;. According to philosopher Philip Hallie, &quot;Heraclitus of Ephesus was the father of Stoic physics.&quot;

A four-volume work titled &quot;Interpretation of Heraclitus&quot; was written by the Stoic philosopher Cleanthes, but has not survived. In surviving stoic writings, Heraclitean influence is most evident in the writings of Marcus Aurelius. Marcus Aurelius understood the &quot;Logos&quot; as &quot;the account which governs everything&quot;. Heraclitus also states, &quot;We should not act and speak like children of our parents&quot;, which Marcus Aurelius interpreted to mean one should not simply accept what others believe.

Many of the later Stoics interpreted the &quot;logos&quot; as the &quot;arche&quot;, as a creative fire that ran through all things; West observes that Plato, Aristotle, Theophrastus, and Sextus Empiricus all make no mention of this doctrine, and concludes that the language and thought are &quot;obviously Stoic&quot; and not attributable to Heraclitus. Burnet cautions that these Stoic modifications of Heraclitus make it harder to interpret Heraclitus himself, as the Stoics ascribed their own interpretations of terms like &quot;logos&quot; and &quot;ekpyrosis&quot; to Heraclitus.

===== Cynics =====
The Cynics were influenced by Heraclitus, such as by his condemnation of the mystery cults. Heraclitus is sometimes even depicted as a cynic. The Cynics attributed several of the later Cynic epistles to his authorship.

According to one source, &quot;the Cynic affinity with Heraclitus lies not so much in his philosophy as in his cultural criticism and (idealised) lifestyle.&quot; Heraclitus wrote: &quot;Dogs bark at every one they do not know.&quot; Similarly, Diogenes the Cynic, when asked by Alexander why he considered himself a dog, responded that he &quot;barks at those who give me nothing&quot;.

===== Pyrrhonists =====
The skeptical philosophers known as Pyrrhonists were also influenced by Heraclitus. He may be the predecessor to Pyrrho&#x27;s relativistic doctrine &quot;No More This than That &quot;, that nothing is one way rather than another way. According to Pyrrhonist Sextus Empiricus, Aenesidemus, one of the major ancient Pyrrhonist philosophers, claimed in a now-lost work that Pyrrhonism was a way to Heraclitean philosophy because Pyrrhonist practice helps one to see how opposites appear to be the case about the same thing, leading to the Heraclitean view that opposites actually are true about the same thing. Sextus Empiricus disagreed, arguing opposites appearing to be the case about the same thing is not a dogma of the Pyrrhonists but a matter occurring to the Pyrrhonists, to the other philosophers, and to all of humanity.

==== Early Christianity ====

Heraclitus was often read by early Christian philosophers, who following the Stoics, interpreted the &quot;logos&quot; as meaning the Christian &quot;Word of God&quot;, such as in John 1:1: &quot;In the beginning was the Word (&quot;logos&quot;) and the Word was God.&quot; Hippolytus of Rome, one of the early Church Fathers of the Christian Church, identified Heraclitus along with the other pre-Socratics and Academics as a source of heresy, in Heraclitus&#x27;s case namely the heresy of Noetus. The Christian apologist Justin Martyr took a more positive view of Heraclitus. In his First Apology, he said both Socrates and Heraclitus were Christians before Christ: &quot;those who lived reasonably are Christians, even though they have been thought atheists; as, among the Greeks, Socrates and Heraclitus, and men like them.&quot; The Christian Clement of Alexandria notes Heraclitus&#x27;s similarity to the Christian prophets, and is cited as a source for more Heraclitus fragments than any other author.

Modern scholars such as John Burnet have viewed the relationship between Heraclitean &quot;logos&quot; and Johannine &quot;logos&quot; as fallacious, saying; &quot;the Johannine doctrine of the &quot;logos&quot; has nothing to do with Herakleitos or with anything at all in Greek philosophy, but comes from the Hebrew Wisdom literature&quot;. When Heraclitus speaks of &quot;God&quot; he does not mean a single deity as an omnipotent and omniscient or God as Creator, the universe being eternal; he meant the divine as opposed to human, the immortal as opposed to the mortal, and the cyclical as opposed to the transient. Thus, it is arguably more accurate to speak of &quot;the Divine&quot; and not of &quot;God&quot;.

==== Weeping philosopher ====

Heraclitus&#x27;s influence also extends outside of philosophy. A motif found in art and literature is Heraclitus as the &quot;weeping philosopher&quot; and Democritus as the &quot;laughing philosopher&quot;, which may have originated with the Cynic philosopher Menippus, and generally references their reactions to the folly of mankind.

For example, in Lucian of Samosata&#x27;s &quot;Philosophies for Sale&quot;, Heraclitus is auctioned off as the &quot;weeping philosopher&quot; and Democritus as the &quot;laughing philosopher&quot;. The Roman poet Juvenal wrote: &quot;Heraclitus, weep at life much more than you did while alive, for now life is more pitiable.&quot;

The Renaissance saw a revived interest in ancient philosophy and its depiction in art. A fresco on the wall of Marsilio Ficino&#x27;s Platonic Academy in Florence depicted Heraclitus and Democritus.

Donato Bramante painted Heraclitus and Democritus (1486) as the weeping and laughing philosopher, and may have depicted Heraclitus as Leonardo da Vinci. Heraclitus appears in painter Raphael&#x27;s &quot;School of Athens&quot; (1511), in which he is represented by Michelangelo, since they shared a &quot;sour temper and bitter scorn for all rivals&quot;.

=== Modern ===
Modern interest in early Greek philosophy can be traced back to 1573, when French printer Henri Estienne (also known as Henricus Stephanus) collected a number of pre-Socratic fragments, including some forty of those of Heraclitus, and published them in Latin in &quot;Poesis philosophica.&quot; Renaissance skeptic Michel de Montaigne&#x27;s essay &quot;On Democritus and Heraclitus,&quot; in which he sided with the laughing philosopher over the weeping philosopher, was probably written soon after. Heraclitus also influenced French poets Michel d&#x27;Ambroise and Etienne Forcadel. Huguenot minister Pierre du Moulin wrote &quot;Heraclitus, or, Meditations vpon the vanity &amp; misery of humane life&quot; in 1609.
English playwright William Shakespeare may have known of Heraclitus through Montaigne.&quot; The Merchant of Venice&quot; (1598) features the melancholic character of Antonio, who some critics contend is modeled after Heraclitus. Additionally, in one scene of the play Portia assesses her potential suitors, and says of one County Palatine: &quot;I fear he will prove the weeping philosopher when he grows old&quot;.
Several baroque artists such as Peter Paul Rubens, Hendrik ter Brugghen, and Johannes Moreelse painted Heraclitus and Democritus. Rubens&#x27; &quot;Heraclitus and Democritus&quot; (1603) was painted for the Duke of Lerma.

==== Rationalism ====

French rationalist philosopher René Descartes read Montaigne and wrote in &quot;The Passions of the Soul&quot; that indignation can be joined by pity or derision, &quot;So the laughter of Democritus and the tears of Heraclitus could have come from the same cause&quot;.

Kahn suggests Spinoza may have been influenced by Heraclitus via the Stoics. According to one author &quot;What Heraclitus really meant by the common was...nothing different from what by Spinoza was expressed by &quot;sub specie aeternitatis&quot;. According to German poet Heinrich Blücher, &quot;If you read the whole system of Spinoza, it is nothing but the changed system of Heraclitus.&quot;

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz stated in &quot;The Monadology&quot; &quot;all bodies are in a state of perpetual flux like rivers.&quot;

==== British empiricism ====
Bishop and empiricist philosopher George Berkeley claimed Sir Isaac Newton&#x27;s alchemy was influenced by Heraclitus. He remarked in &quot;Siris&quot;: &quot;In Plutarch we find it was the opinion of Heraclitus, that the death of fire was a birth to air, and the death of air a birth to water. This opinion is also maintained by Sir Isaac Newton.&quot; Scottish skeptic David Hume seems to recapitulate Heraclitus while discussing personal identity: &quot;Thus as the nature of a river consists in the motion and change of parts; tho&#x27; in less than four and twenty hours these be totally alter&#x27;d; this hinders not the river from continuing the same during several ages.&quot;

=====Common sense=====

While Heraclitus seems to criticize people in general, at other times he also seems to support common sense. On Scottish common sense philosopher Thomas Reid&#x27;s account, Heraclitus was one of the first to extol a common sense philosophy with such quotes as &quot;And though reason is common, most people live as though they had an understanding peculiar to themselves;&quot; and &quot;understanding is common to all&quot;.

==== Post-Kantianism ====
Ever since German philosopher Immanuel Kant, philosophers have sometimes been divided into rationalists and empiricists. Heraclitus has been considered each by different scholars. For rationalism, philosophers cite fragments like &quot;Poor witnesses for men are the eyes and ears of those who have barbarian souls.&quot; For empiricism, they cite fragments like &quot;The things that can be seen, heard, and learned are what I prize the most.&quot; Gottlob Mayer has argued that the philosophical pessimism of Arthur Schopenhauer recapitulated the thought of Heraclitus.

The impression of Heraclitus on German idealist G. W. F. Hegel was so profound that he remarked in his &quot;Lectures on the History of Philosophy&quot;: &quot;there is no proposition of Heraclitus which I have not adopted in my &quot;Logic&quot;.&quot; Hegel interpreted Heraclitus as a dialetheist and as a process philosopher, seeing the flux or &quot;becoming&quot; in Heraclitus as a natural result of the ontology of &quot;being&quot; and &quot;non-being&quot; in Parmenides. He also doubted the world conflagration (&quot;ekpyrosis&quot;) interpretation, which had been popular since Aristotle.

===== Heraclitean studies =====
The German theologian Friedrich Schleiermacher was one of the first to collect the fragments of Heraclitus specifically and write them out in his native tongue, the &quot;pioneer of Heraclitean studies&quot;. Schleiermacher was also one of the first to posit Persian influence upon Heraclitus, a question taken up by succeeding scholars Friedrich Creuzer and August Gladisch.

The Young Hegelian and socialist Ferdinand Lassalle wrote a book on Heraclitus. &quot;Lassalle follows Hegel in styling the doctrine of Heraclitus &#x27;the philosophy of the logical law of the identity of contradictories.&quot; Lassalle also thought Persian theology influenced Heraclitus. Fellow Young Hegelian Karl Marx compared Lasalle&#x27;s work to that of &quot;a schoolboy&quot; and Vladimir Lenin accused him of &quot;sheer plagiarism&quot;.

Classical philologist Jakob Bernays also wrote a work on Heraclitus. Inspired by Bernays, the English scholar Ingram Bywater collected all fragments of Heraclitus in a critical edition, &quot;Heracliti Ephesii Reliquiae&quot; (1877). An English translation was provided by G. T. W. Patrick in 1889. Hermann Diels wrote &quot;Bywater&#x27;s book has come to be accounted ... as the only reliable collection of the remains of that philosopher.&quot; Diels published the first edition of the authoritative &quot;Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker&quot; (&quot;The Fragments of the Pre-Socratics&quot;) in 1903, later revised and expanded three times, and finally revised in two subsequent editions by Walther Kranz. Diels–Kranz is used in academia to cite pre-Socratic philosophers. In Diels–Kranz, each ancient personality and each passage is assigned a number to uniquely identify it; Heraclitus is traditionally catalogued as philosopher number 22.

==== Continental ====

The continental existentialist and classical philologist Friedrich Nietzsche preferred Heraclitus above all the other pre-Socratics. Nietzsche saw the philosophers before Plato as &quot;pure types&quot; and Heraclitus as the proud, lonely truth-finder. The nationalist philosopher of history Oswald Spengler wrote his (failed) dissertation on Heraclitus.

Phenomenologist Edmund Husserl wrote that consciousness is &quot;the realm of Heraclitean flux.&quot; Existentialist and phenomenologist Martin Heidegger was also influenced by Heraclitus, as seen in his &quot;Introduction to Metaphysics&quot;. Heidegger believed that the thinking of Heraclitus and Parmenides was the origin of philosophy and misunderstood by Plato and Aristotle, leading all of Western philosophy astray.

French philosophers Jacques Derrida and Gilles Deleuze&#x27;s &quot;differential ontology&quot; is influenced by Heraclitus. According to Deleuze, Michel Foucault was a Heraclitean. The idea that war produces order through strife is similar to Foucault&#x27;s notion that power is a force dispersed through social relations.

In the 1950s, a term originating with Heraclitus, &quot;idios kosmos&quot;, meaning &quot;private world&quot; as distinguished from the &quot;common world&quot; () was adopted by phenomenological and existential psychologists, such as Ludwig Binswanger and Rollo May, to refer to the experience of people with delusions. It was an important part of novelist Philip K. Dick&#x27;s views on schizophrenia. Those thinkers have relied on Heraclitus&#x27;s statement that &quot;The waking have one common world, but the sleeping turn aside each into a world of his own.&quot;

The Irish author and classicist Oscar Wilde was influenced by art critic Walter Pater, a friend of Bywater&#x27;s whose &quot;pre-Socratic hero&quot; was Heraclitus. Harold Bloom noted that &quot;Pater praises Plato for Classic correctness, for a conservative centripetal impulse, against his [Pater&#x27;s] own Heraclitean Romanticism.&quot; Wilde is credited with the saying &quot;expect the unexpected&quot;, though Heraclitus said &quot;If you do not expect the unexpected, you will not find it; for it is hard to be sought out and difficult.&quot;

==== Analytic ====
The British process philosopher A. N. Whitehead has been identified as a representative of the tradition of Heraclitus. In Bertrand Russell&#x27;s essay &quot;Mysticism and Logic&quot;, he contends Heraclitus proves himself a metaphysician by his blending of mystical and scientific impulses.

===== Wittgenstein =====
Scholar Edward Hussey sees parallels between Heraclitus, the &quot;logos&quot;, and the early Ludwig Wittgenstein&#x27;s linguistic philosophy in the &quot;Tractatus&quot; (1922). Wittgenstein was known to read Plato and in his return to philosophy in 1929 he made several remarks resembling those of Heraclitus: &quot;The fundamental thing expressed grammatically: What about the sentence: One cannot step into the same river twice?&quot; He then seemed to make a dramatic shift by 1931, saying one can step twice into the same river.

Wittgenstein also uses a river image in &quot;On Certainty&quot; (1950) to say even the river-bed may change as foundational logical principles might: &quot;The mythology may change back into a state of flux, the river-bed of thoughts may shift ... And the bank of that river consists partly of hard rock, subject to no alteration or only to an imperceptible one, partly of sand, which now in one place now in another gets washed away or deposited.&quot;

===== Contradiction =====

Aristotle&#x27;s arguments for the law of non-contradiction, which he saw as refuting the position started by Heraclitus, used to be considered authoritative, but have been in doubt ever since their criticism by Polish logician Jan Łukasiewicz, and the invention of many-valued and paraconsistent logics.

Some philosophers such as Graham Priest and Jc Beall follow Heraclitus in advocating true contradictions or dialetheism, seeing it as the most natural response to the liar paradox. Jc Beall, together with Greg Restall, is a pioneer of a widely discussed version of logical pluralism.

===== Philosophy of Religion =====
Beall argues for a contradictory account of Jesus Christ as both man and divine. The philosopher Peter Geach was inspired by Heraclitus&#x27;s comments on the river to formulate his idea of relative identity, which he used to defend the coherence of the Trinity.

===== Philosophy of Time =====

The British idealist J. M. E. McTaggart is best known for his paper &quot;The Unreality of Time&quot; (1908), in which he argues that time is unreal. What he calls the &quot;A theory&quot;, also known as &quot;temporal becoming&quot;, and closely related to presentism, which conceptualizes of time as tensed (i.e., having the properties of being past, present, or future), is a view which has been seen as beginning with Heraclitus. By contrast, his &quot; &quot;B theory&quot;, under which time is tenseless (i.e., earlier than, simultaneous to, or later than), has similarly been seen as beginning with Parmenides.

==Notes==
===Explanatory notes===
===Fragment numbers===
===Citations===
==References==
===Ancient sources===
This article uses the Diels–Kranz numbering system from &quot;Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker&quot; (&quot;The Fragments of the Pre-Socratics&quot;) for testimony (labeled A), fragments (labeled B), and imitation (labeled C).

==== Testimony ====

* A1. 
* A2. 
* A3. 
* A4. 
* A5. 
* A6. 
* A7. 
* A8. 
* A9. 
* A10. 
* A11-14. 
* A15. 
* A16. 
* A17. 
* A18. 
* A19. 
* A20. 
* A21. 
* A22. 
* A23. 
====Fragments====

* B1-2. 
* B3. 
* B4. 
* B5. 
* B6. 
* B7. 
* B8-9. 
* B10-11. 
* B12. 
* B13. 
* B14-15. 
* B16. 
* B17-36. 
* B37. 
* B38. 
* B39. 
* B40-46. 
* B47. 
* B48. 
* B49. 
* B49a. 
* B50-67. 
* B67a. 
* B68-69. 
* B70. 
* B71-76. 
* B77. 
* B78-80. 
* B81. 
* B82-83. 
* B84a-84b. 
* B85-86. 
* B87. 
* B88. 
* B89. 
* B90-91. 
* B92-93. 
* B94. 
* B95-96. 
* B97. 
* B98. 
* B99. 
* B100. 
* B101. 
* B101a. 
* B102. 
* B103. 
* B104. 
* B105. 
* B106. 
* B107. 
* B108-119. 
* B120-121. 
* B122. 
* B123. 
* B124-125. 
* B125a. 
* B126. 
====Imitation====

* C1. 
* C2. 
* C3. 
* C4. 
* C5. 
===Modern scholarship===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Chapters 4-6 deal with Heraclitus


==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41155" start="0" end="10" title="Heraclitus" label="Heraclitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="25" end="38" title="Ancient Greece" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q178540" start="39" end="51" title="Pre-Socratic philosophy" label="pre-Socratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47611" start="81" end="88" title="Ephesus" label="Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="117" end="131" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q204100" start="163" end="170" title="Ancient philosophy" label="ancient"/>
<link wikidata="Q860746" start="175" end="181" title="Modern philosophy" label="modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q842333" start="182" end="200" title="Western philosophy" label="Western philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="239" end="244" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="246" end="255" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="257" end="262" title="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel" label="Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="268" end="277" title="Martin Heidegger" label="Heidegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440453" start="352" end="361" title="Literary fragment" label="fragments"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="413" end="424" title="Paradox#In philosophy" label="paradoxical"/>
<link wikidata="Q998840" start="454" end="462" title="Word play" label="wordplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q193121" start="486" end="493" title="epigram" label="epigram"/>
<link wikidata="Q219645" start="613" end="624" title="Misanthropy" label="misanthrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q192077" start="644" end="655" title="melancholia" label="melancholia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178668" start="753" end="760" title="ancient atomism" label="atomist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41980" start="773" end="783" title="Democritus" label="Democritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712971" start="899" end="917" title="unity of opposites" label="unity of opposites"/>
<link wikidata="Q220797" start="937" end="943" title="impermanence" label="change"/>
<link wikidata="Q978079" start="960" end="967" title="Harmonia" label="harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q465875" start="972" end="979" title="Dike (mythology)" label="justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q140001" start="983" end="989" title="Eris (mythology)" label="strife"/>
<link wikidata="Q216320" start="1142" end="1147" title="Fluid dynamics" label="flows"/>
<link wikidata="Q125551" start="1315" end="1325" title="Parmenides" label="Parmenides"/>
<link wikidata="Q468777" start="1369" end="1374" title="being" label="being"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="1403" end="1407" title="fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q536351" start="1422" end="1427" title="arche" label="arche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294550" start="1528" end="1537" title="Ionian School (philosophy)" label="Milesians"/>
<link wikidata="Q36303" start="1551" end="1557" title="Thales of Miletus" label="Thales"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="1563" end="1568" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q42458" start="1570" end="1581" title="Anaximander" label="Anaximander"/>
<link wikidata="Q194245" start="1593" end="1600" title="apeiron" label="apeiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q80612" start="1636" end="1646" title="Anaximenes of Miletus" label="Anaximenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="1652" end="1655" title="Atmosphere of Earth" label="air"/>
<link wikidata="Q180832" start="1691" end="1696" title="logos" label="logos"/>
<link wikidata="Q465331" start="1816" end="1822" title="Ionians" label="Ionian"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="1842" end="1846" title="port" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q922382" start="1854" end="1867" title="Küçük Menderes River" label="Cayster River"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="1893" end="1903" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="1916" end="1922" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q620874" start="1978" end="1983" title="Ionia" label="Ionia"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="2029" end="2034" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184462" start="2041" end="2048" title="Croesus" label="Croesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8423" start="2070" end="2085" title="Cyrus the Great" label="Cyrus the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q208261" start="2221" end="2234" title="Ionian revolt" label="Ionian revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q44387" start="2238" end="2254" title="Darius the Great" label="Darius the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="2313" end="2318" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q169460" start="2334" end="2341" title="Miletus" label="Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253496" start="2458" end="2469" title="doxographer" label="doxographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q59138" start="2470" end="2487" title="Diogenes Laërtius" label="Diogenes Laërtius"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="2842" end="2854" title="Aristocracy" label="aristocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="2925" end="2934" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443060" start="2938" end="2948" title="commoner" label="the masses"/>
<link wikidata="Q207782" start="3055" end="3059" title="Seven Sages of Greece" label="sage"/>
<link wikidata="Q133337" start="3060" end="3065" title="Solon" label="Solon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998646" start="3218" end="3225" title="Philosophical skepticism" label="skeptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q280872" start="3226" end="3241" title="Timon of Phlius" label="Timon of Phlius"/>
<link wikidata="Q505821" start="3695" end="3708" title="Greco-Roman mysteries" label="mystery cults"/>
<link wikidata="Q179723" start="3710" end="3725" title="Sacrifice" label="blood sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q40953" start="3731" end="3737" title="prayer" label="prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q201676" start="3777" end="3790" title="Funeral" label="funeral rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="3880" end="3885" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="3887" end="3893" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q10261" start="3895" end="3905" title="Pythagoras" label="Pythagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q131671" start="3907" end="3917" title="Xenophanes" label="Xenophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q242270" start="3923" end="3932" title="Hecataeus of Miletus" label="Hecataeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q365977" start="3955" end="3969" title="Bias of Priene" label="Bias of Priene"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="4115" end="4130" title="Suicide" label="kill themselves"/>
<link wikidata="Q36424" start="4196" end="4206" title="Floruit" label="flourished"/>
<link wikidata="Q221956" start="4219" end="4227" title="Olympiad" label="Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q44387" start="4336" end="4352" title="Darius the Great" label="Darius the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="4668" end="4674" title="Edema" label="dropsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q125576" start="4865" end="4872" title="papyrus" label="papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43018" start="5174" end="5184" title="Temple of Artemis" label="Artemision"/>
<link wikidata="Q489772" start="5198" end="5232" title="Seven Wonders of the Ancient World" label="Seven Wonders of the Ancient World"/>
<link wikidata="Q96742571" start="5263" end="5275" title="Charles H. Kahn" label="Charles Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="5310" end="5318" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q188883" start="5323" end="5330" title="Clement of Alexandria" label="Clement"/>
<link wikidata="Q351518" start="5477" end="5498" title="Simplicius of Cilicia" label="Simplicius of Cilicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q162145" start="5514" end="5525" title="Neoplatonism" label="neoplatonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="5826" end="5834" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="5836" end="5844" title="politics" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="5850" end="5858" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q725050" start="5919" end="5930" title="John Burnet (classicist)" label="John Burnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="6104" end="6109" title="Stoicism" label="Stoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q310149" start="6260" end="6269" title="Cleanthes" label="Cleanthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9453" start="6302" end="6311" title="dialectic" label="dialectic"/>
<link wikidata="Q81009" start="6314" end="6322" title="rhetoric" label="rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="6324" end="6330" title="ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="6342" end="6349" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="6369" end="6380" title="Philology" label="philologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q91073" start="6381" end="6397" title="Karl Deichgräber" label="Karl Deichgräber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238091" start="6550" end="6557" title="Pinakes" label="Pinakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q669908" start="6574" end="6596" title="Martin Litchfield West" label="Martin Litchfield West"/>
<link wikidata="Q236594" start="6804" end="6820" title="Sextus Empiricus" label="Sextus Empiricus"/>
<link wikidata="Q273320" start="6884" end="6889" title="Sibyl" label="Sibyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q10428845" start="7302" end="7318" title="List of narrative techniques" label="literary devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q484495" start="7324" end="7336" title="alliteration" label="alliteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q528728" start="7341" end="7349" title="chiasmus" label="chiasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="7374" end="7383" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896045" start="7455" end="7463" title="Rhetoric (Aristotle)" label="Rhetoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160664" start="7668" end="7674" title="Lyceum (classical)" label="lyceum"/>
<link wikidata="Q160362" start="7675" end="7687" title="Theophrastus" label="Theophrastus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="7958" end="7967" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q913" start="7973" end="7981" title="Socrates" label="Socrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q173148" start="8174" end="8180" title="Delos" label="Delian"/>
<link wikidata="Q179643" start="8181" end="8186" title="Underwater diving" label="diver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="8568" end="8574" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="8637" end="8642" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q217123" start="8998" end="9004" title="oracle" label="oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q220344" start="9166" end="9172" title="Pythia" label="oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="9179" end="9185" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15537606" start="9298" end="9311" title="Delphic maxims" label="Delphic maxim"/>
<link wikidata="Q909937" start="9315" end="9327" title="know thyself" label="know thyself"/>
<link wikidata="Q536351" start="9481" end="9496" title="Material monism" label="material monist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114360" start="9502" end="9521" title="Process philosophy" label="process philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="9536" end="9547" title="cosmologist" label="cosmologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="9551" end="9564" title="Metaphysics" label="metaphysician"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="9593" end="9603" title="empiricism" label="empiricist"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="9607" end="9618" title="rationalism" label="rationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="9622" end="9628" title="mysticism" label="mystic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="9689" end="9694" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q868437" start="9716" end="9740" title="law of non-contradiction" label="law of non-contradiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q575959" start="9779" end="9796" title="Anti-intellectualism" label="anti-intellectual"/>
<link wikidata="Q370163" start="9797" end="9809" title="Obscurantism" label="obscurantist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712971" start="9908" end="9913" title="Unity of opposites" label="unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q131779" start="9917" end="9926" title="Opposite (semantics)" label="opposites"/>
<link wikidata="Q220797" start="9942" end="9946" title="Impermanence" label="flux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844169" start="9989" end="10000" title="Dialetheism" label="dialetheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q868437" start="10024" end="10047" title="law of noncontradiction" label="law of noncontradiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187945" start="10051" end="10065" title="law of thought" label="law of thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081" start="10205" end="10216" title="Materialism" label="materialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122538" start="10256" end="10267" title="Hylomorphism" label="hylomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q725243" start="10292" end="10308" title="W. K. C. Guthrie" label="W. K. C. Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q35758" start="10378" end="10384" title="matter" label="matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077464" start="10389" end="10393" title="Substantial form" label="form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585730" start="10780" end="10786" title="Fulling" label="fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q17278" start="10896" end="10902" title="circle" label="circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12558574" start="11702" end="11715" title="Point of view (philosophy)" label="point of view"/>
<link wikidata="Q83188" start="11727" end="11737" title="relativism" label="relativism"/>
<link wikidata="Q167187" start="11741" end="11754" title="perspectivism" label="perspectivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="11890" end="11894" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="11922" end="11925" title="pig" label="pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q853058" start="11954" end="11958" title="fowl" label="fowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q473194" start="11990" end="11992" title="Ox" label="Ox"/>
<link wikidata="Q147337" start="12027" end="12034" title="Vicia" label="vetches"/>
<link wikidata="Q19707" start="12058" end="12063" title="Donkey" label="asses"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="12094" end="12098" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193088" start="12376" end="12391" title="Jonathan Barnes" label="Jonathan Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q351518" start="12674" end="12684" title="Simplicius of Cilicia" label="Simplicius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347394" start="12835" end="12843" title="Cratylus (dialogue)" label="Cratylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q641051" start="13222" end="13235" title="Arius Didymus" label="Arius Didymus"/>
<link wikidata="Q444079" start="13247" end="13255" title="Stobaeus" label="Stobaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057422" start="13346" end="13366" title="Heraclitus (commentator)" label="Heraclitus Homericus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="13468" end="13476" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q85224" start="13525" end="13539" title="Karl Reinhardt (philologist)" label="Karl Reinhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q38066" start="13773" end="13784" title="Existentialism" label="existential"/>
<link wikidata="Q214969" start="14284" end="14298" title="Willard Van Orman Quine" label="W. V. O. Quine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712227" start="14432" end="14444" title="M. M. McCabe" label="M. M. McCabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q186619" start="14805" end="14813" title="argument" label="argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q165740" start="14832" end="14840" title="aphorism" label="aphorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q140001" start="15012" end="15018" title="Eris (mythology)" label="strife"/>
<link wikidata="Q465875" start="15085" end="15092" title="Dike (mythology)" label="justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q978079" start="15136" end="15143" title="Harmonia (mythology)" label="harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q42458" start="15166" end="15177" title="Anaximander" label="Anaximander"/>
<link wikidata="Q908584" start="15688" end="15695" title="Tension (physics)" label="tension"/>
<link wikidata="Q19827042" start="15753" end="15756" title="Bow and arrow" label="bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q201129" start="15762" end="15766" title="lyre" label="lyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11402" start="15827" end="15832" title="force" label="force"/>
<link wikidata="Q908041" start="16177" end="16183" title="kykeon" label="kykeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q180832" start="16884" end="16889" title="logos" label="logos"/>
<link wikidata="Q16877777" start="16971" end="16978" title="Meaning (philosophy)" label="meaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975610" start="17334" end="17344" title="hoi polloi" label="hoi polloi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15964728" start="17854" end="17868" title="Michael Stokes (academic)" label="Michael Stokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q188572" start="17935" end="17939" title="fact" label="fact"/>
<link wikidata="Q108163" start="17947" end="17958" title="proposition" label="proposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q976981" start="17962" end="17969" title="formula" label="formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000046" start="18082" end="18098" title="Abstract object theory" label="abstract objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q3385109" start="18102" end="18112" title="Incorporeality" label="immaterial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949" start="18182" end="18187" title="truth" label="truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q67863" start="18223" end="18236" title="Walther Kranz" label="Walther Kranz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923256" start="18260" end="18265" title="Intension" label="sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="18361" end="18372" title="natural law" label="natural law"/>
<link wikidata="Q536351" start="18871" end="18886" title="material monism" label="material monism"/>
<link wikidata="Q61862" start="19244" end="19257" title="Eduard Zeller" label="Eduard Zeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862179" start="19852" end="19862" title="Great Year" label="Great Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114360" start="20405" end="20424" title="Process philosophy" label="process philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="21035" end="21046" title="Cosmology" label="cosmologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="21089" end="21098" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25261" start="21100" end="21111" title="meteorology" label="meteorology"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="21116" end="21127" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q660936" start="21193" end="21207" title="Flat Earth" label="earth was flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q216774" start="21298" end="21302" title="fate" label="fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q164846" start="21330" end="21334" title="Aion (deity)" label="Aion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293" start="21361" end="21369" title="Checkers" label="draughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3878446" start="21478" end="21483" title="Norm (philosophy)" label="rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q11410" start="21491" end="21495" title="game" label="game"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="21653" end="21656" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q166564" start="21707" end="21711" title="Sunset" label="sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="21726" end="21742" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="21971" end="21976" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q575" start="22198" end="22203" title="night" label="night"/>
<link wikidata="Q573" start="22208" end="22211" title="day" label="day"/>
<link wikidata="Q180262" start="22357" end="22364" title="Erinyes" label="Erinyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q24384" start="22466" end="22477" title="Season" label="the seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="22543" end="22547" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q153988" start="22553" end="22557" title="bowl" label="bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q26388" start="22581" end="22592" title="lunar phase" label="lunar phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249435" start="22707" end="22725" title="Oxyrhynchus Papyri" label="Oxyrhynchus Papyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q87167" start="22738" end="22748" title="manuscript" label="manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q152810" start="22770" end="22778" title="landfill" label="landfill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2794866" start="22868" end="22879" title="thunderbolt" label="thunderbolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="22961" end="22965" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q276183" start="23241" end="23249" title="theodicy" label="theodicy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180725" start="23374" end="23390" title="Parts of Animals" label="Parts of Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q484318" start="24146" end="24151" title="ethos" label="ethos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157625" start="24199" end="24205" title="daimon" label="daimon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="24391" end="24395" title="soul" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q194034" start="24403" end="24409" title="Psyche (psychology)" label="psyche"/>
<link wikidata="Q205972" start="24787" end="24798" title="Alcohol intoxication" label="drunkenness"/>
<link wikidata="Q472287" start="25113" end="25124" title="Respiration (physiology)" label="respiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q450" start="25153" end="25157" title="mind" label="mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q173253" start="25220" end="25225" title="sense" label="sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="25257" end="25267" title="perception" label="perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q9530" start="25352" end="25361" title="breathing" label="breathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q130768" start="25422" end="25427" title="smoke" label="smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357" start="25512" end="25518" title="spider" label="spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q188691" start="25539" end="25542" title="Spider web" label="web"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048935" start="25704" end="25718" title="Pneuma" label="breath of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q7460262" start="25794" end="25800" title="Shade (mythology)" label="shades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521549" start="25832" end="25837" title="Greek underworld" label="Hades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180576" start="26169" end="26177" title="On the Soul" label="De Anima"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="26693" end="26707" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638573" start="26842" end="26854" title="fire worship" label="fire worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272422" start="26893" end="26897" title="Atar" label="Atar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488752" start="27032" end="27037" title="earth (classical element)" label="earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="27378" end="27383" title="Vedas" label="Vedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113985" start="27440" end="27450" title="Upanishads" label="Upanishads"/>
<link wikidata="Q772960" start="27468" end="27488" title="Taittiriya Upanishad" label="Taittiriya Upanishad"/>
<link wikidata="Q108458" start="27639" end="27649" title="meditation" label="meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19895050" start="27669" end="27695" title="Panchagni Vidya" label="Doctrine of the Five Fires"/>
<link wikidata="Q78129" start="28138" end="28156" title="Gustav Teichmüller" label="Gustav Teichmüller"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="28206" end="28215" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q174361" start="28255" end="28271" title="Book of the Dead" label="Book of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q84122" start="28392" end="28397" title="Horus" label="Horus"/>
<link wikidata="Q95750" start="28690" end="28707" title="Edmund Pfleiderer" label="Edmund Pfleiderer"/>
<link wikidata="Q842333" start="28972" end="28990" title="Western philosophy" label="Western philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="29015" end="29020" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="29025" end="29034" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135155" start="29177" end="29195" title="Hippocratic corpus" label="Hippocratic corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q855270" start="29301" end="29323" title="Ancient Greek religion" label="Ancient Greek religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q736935" start="29351" end="29366" title="Derveni papyrus" label="Derveni papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q242517" start="29371" end="29377" title="Orphism (religion)" label="Orphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q125247" start="30055" end="30063" title="Cratylus" label="Cratylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002215" start="30090" end="30111" title="Cratylism" label="linguistic naturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q191359" start="30788" end="30799" title="Pythagoreanism" label="Pythagorean"/>
<link wikidata="Q312410" start="30817" end="30834" title="Epicharmus of Kos" label="Epicharmus of Kos"/>
<link wikidata="Q125551" start="30971" end="30981" title="Parmenides" label="Parmenides"/>
<link wikidata="Q191964" start="31876" end="31897" title="Diogenes of Apollonia" label="Diogenes of Apollonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178540" start="31984" end="31994" title="Pluralist School" label="pluralists"/>
<link wikidata="Q83041" start="32051" end="32061" title="Anaxagoras" label="Anaxagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q83375" start="32127" end="32137" title="Empedocles" label="Empedocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q178668" start="32310" end="32318" title="Atomism" label="atomists"/>
<link wikidata="Q169243" start="32650" end="32660" title="Protagoras" label="Protagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q179785" start="32675" end="32682" title="Gorgias" label="Gorgias"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026054" start="33134" end="33142" title="Socratic dialogue" label="dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q846241" start="33149" end="33159" title="Theaetetus (dialogue)" label="Theaetetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q920912" start="33243" end="33253" title="Theaetetus (mathematician)" label="Theaetetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068658" start="33892" end="33897" title="Theory of forms" label="Forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q316334" start="34078" end="34097" title="Heraclides Ponticus" label="Heraclides Ponticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q24072959" start="34236" end="34243" title="Henology" label="the One"/>
<link wikidata="Q134189" start="34253" end="34261" title="Plotinus" label="Plotinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647479" start="34894" end="34904" title="A. A. Long" label="A. A. Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183682" start="35014" end="35027" title="Philip Hallie" label="Philip Hallie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618377" start="35075" end="35088" title="Stoic physics" label="Stoic physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430" start="35320" end="35335" title="Marcus Aurelius" label="Marcus Aurelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q485459" start="36236" end="36242" title="Cynicism (philosophy)" label="Cynics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5199950" start="36417" end="36431" title="Cynic epistles" label="Cynic epistles"/>
<link wikidata="Q59180" start="36697" end="36715" title="Diogenes" label="Diogenes the Cynic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="36731" end="36740" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126340" start="36901" end="36912" title="Pyrrhonism" label="Pyrrhonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q192313" start="36978" end="36984" title="Pyrrho" label="Pyrrho"/>
<link wikidata="Q314467" start="37142" end="37153" title="Aenesidemus" label="Aenesidemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q620749" start="37575" end="37580" title="dogma" label="dogma"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="37883" end="37886" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="" start="37905" end="37913" title="John 1:1" label="John 1:1"/>
<link wikidata="Q766575" start="37958" end="37963" title="Logos (Christianity)" label="logos"/>
<link wikidata="Q207113" start="37999" end="38017" title="Hippolytus of Rome" label="Hippolytus of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="38036" end="38050" title="Church Fathers" label="Church Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q34651" start="38058" end="38074" title="Christian Church" label="Christian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q193093" start="38137" end="38146" title="Platonic Academy" label="Academics"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="38162" end="38168" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935753" start="38217" end="38223" title="Noetus" label="Noetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185117" start="38249" end="38262" title="Justin Martyr" label="Justin Martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780761" start="38311" end="38324" title="First Apology" label="First Apology"/>
<link wikidata="Q452077" start="39751" end="39759" title="Menippus" label="Menippus"/>
<link wikidata="Q177847" start="39844" end="39862" title="Lucian" label="Lucian of Samosata"/>
<link wikidata="Q193800" start="40043" end="40050" title="Juvenal" label="Juvenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="40167" end="40178" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="40252" end="40258" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q192374" start="40274" end="40289" title="Marsilio Ficino" label="Marsilio Ficino"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579791" start="40297" end="40313" title="Platonic Academy (Florence)" label="Platonic Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="40317" end="40325" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793" start="40363" end="40378" title="Donato Bramante" label="Donato Bramante"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="40497" end="40514" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="40546" end="40553" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q186953" start="40567" end="40583" title="School of Athens" label="School of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="40628" end="40640" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q664748" start="40825" end="40839" title="Henri Estienne" label="Henri Estienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="40988" end="40993" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998646" start="41030" end="41049" title="Renaissance skepticism" label="Renaissance skeptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41568" start="41050" end="41069" title="Michel de Montaigne" label="Michel de Montaigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q624852" start="41077" end="41082" title="Essays (Montaigne)" label="essay"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="41321" end="41329" title="Huguenots" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3384862" start="41339" end="41355" title="Pierre du Moulin" label="Pierre du Moulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="41474" end="41493" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q206400" start="41548" end="41570" title="The Merchant of Venice" label="The Merchant of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4776379" start="41622" end="41629" title="Antonio (The Merchant of Venice)" label="Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231797" start="41724" end="41730" title="Portia (The Merchant of Venice)" label="Portia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="41880" end="41887" title="baroque" label="baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599" start="41904" end="41921" title="Peter Paul Rubens" label="Peter Paul Rubens"/>
<link wikidata="Q437233" start="41923" end="41943" title="Hendrick ter Brugghen" label="Hendrik ter Brugghen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362754" start="41949" end="41966" title="Johannes Moreelse" label="Johannes Moreelse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5896517" start="42021" end="42046" title="Heraclitus and Democritus (Rubens)" label="Heraclitus and Democritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q691678" start="42080" end="42093" title="Francisco de Sandoval y Rojas, 1st Duke of Lerma" label="Duke of Lerma"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="42126" end="42137" title="Rationalism" label="rationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="42150" end="42164" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q195411" start="42199" end="42223" title="Passions of the Soul" label="The Passions of the Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2730592" start="42235" end="42246" title="indignation" label="indignation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724817" start="42264" end="42268" title="pity" label="pity"/>
<link wikidata="Q25635316" start="42272" end="42280" title="Mockery" label="derision"/>
<link wikidata="Q35802" start="42577" end="42584" title="Baruch Spinoza" label="Spinoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q455907" start="42608" end="42631" title="sub specie aeternitatis" label="sub specie aeternitatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q71696" start="42664" end="42680" title="Heinrich Blücher" label="Heinrich Blücher"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="42788" end="42813" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz" label="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211539" start="42830" end="42844" title="The Monadology" label="The Monadology"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="42961" end="42971" title="Empiricism" label="empiricist"/>
<link wikidata="Q82049" start="42984" end="42999" title="George Berkeley" label="George Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="43012" end="43024" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="43032" end="43039" title="alchemy" label="alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="43322" end="43332" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254571" start="43383" end="43400" title="personal identity" label="personal identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q332880" start="43757" end="43769" title="common sense" label="common sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116026" start="43774" end="43795" title="Scottish common sense realism" label="Scottish common sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q316347" start="43808" end="43819" title="Thomas Reid" label="Thomas Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="44146" end="44159" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q106718306" start="44600" end="44623" title="philosophical pessimism" label="philosophical pessimism"/>
<link wikidata="Q38193" start="44627" end="44646" title="Arthur Schopenhauer" label="Arthur Schopenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q679842" start="44721" end="44736" title="German idealism" label="German idealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="44737" end="44751" title="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel" label="G. W. F. Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6512440" start="44798" end="44835" title="Lectures on the History of Philosophy" label="Lectures on the History of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q374811" start="44924" end="44929" title="Science of Logic" label="Logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44325" start="45100" end="45108" title="ontology" label="ontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q76576" start="45346" end="45370" title="Friedrich Schleiermacher" label="Friedrich Schleiermacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q69685" start="45661" end="45678" title="Georg Friedrich Creuzer" label="Friedrich Creuzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135769" start="45705" end="45719" title="Young Hegelians" label="Young Hegelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="45724" end="45733" title="Socialism" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q75784" start="45734" end="45752" title="Ferdinand Lassalle" label="Ferdinand Lassalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985912" start="45759" end="45765" title="Die Philosophie Herakleitos des Dunklen von Ephesos" label="a book"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="46014" end="46023" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="46092" end="46106" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q164666" start="46134" end="46144" title="plagiarism" label="plagiarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="46153" end="46174" title="Classics" label="Classical philologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q69019" start="46175" end="46188" title="Jakob Bernays" label="Jakob Bernays"/>
<link wikidata="Q458401" start="46263" end="46277" title="Ingram Bywater" label="Ingram Bywater"/>
<link wikidata="Q61889" start="46452" end="46465" title="Hermann Alexander Diels" label="Hermann Diels"/>
<link wikidata="Q20065338" start="46933" end="46944" title="Diels–Kranz numbering" label="Diels–Kranz"/>
<link wikidata="Q59104" start="47127" end="47138" title="Continental philosophy" label="continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="47180" end="47199" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q131714" start="47314" end="47319" title="Archetype" label="types"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="47380" end="47391" title="Nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q190721" start="47392" end="47414" title="Philosophy of history" label="philosopher of history"/>
<link wikidata="Q57112" start="47415" end="47430" title="Oswald Spengler" label="Oswald Spengler"/>
<link wikidata="Q179235" start="47479" end="47494" title="Phenomenology (philosophy)" label="Phenomenologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q58586" start="47495" end="47509" title="Edmund Husserl" label="Edmund Husserl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="47521" end="47534" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="47616" end="47632" title="Martin Heidegger" label="Martin Heidegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q931696" start="47689" end="47716" title="Introduction to Metaphysics (Heidegger book)" label="Introduction to Metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q842333" start="47876" end="47894" title="Western philosophy" label="Western philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="47924" end="47939" title="Jacques Derrida" label="Jacques Derrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q184226" start="47944" end="47958" title="Gilles Deleuze" label="Gilles Deleuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="48051" end="48066" title="Michel Foucault" label="Michel Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="Q25107" start="48176" end="48181" title="Power (social and political)" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5988929" start="48286" end="48298" title="idios kosmos" label="idios kosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q556014" start="48430" end="48455" title="Existential psychology" label="existential psychologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q116614" start="48465" end="48482" title="Ludwig Binswanger" label="Ludwig Binswanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059597" start="48487" end="48496" title="Rollo May" label="Rollo May"/>
<link wikidata="Q171091" start="48588" end="48602" title="Philip K. Dick" label="Philip K. Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="48619" end="48632" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="48834" end="48845" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q352528" start="48875" end="48887" title="Walter Pater" label="Walter Pater"/>
<link wikidata="Q345612" start="48968" end="48980" title="Harold Bloom" label="Harold Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q172881" start="49062" end="49081" title="Centripetal force" label="centripetal impulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="49126" end="49137" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143075" start="49185" end="49206" title="An Ideal Husband" label="expect the unexpected"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114360" start="49387" end="49406" title="process philosophy" label="process philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q183372" start="49407" end="49422" title="Alfred North Whitehead" label="A. N. Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="49498" end="49514" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9391" start="49788" end="49807" title="Ludwig Wittgenstein" label="Ludwig Wittgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q655717" start="49850" end="49859" title="Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus" label="Tractatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q330929" start="50277" end="50289" title="On Certainty" label="On Certainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q313454" start="50942" end="50957" title="Jan Łukasiewicz" label="Jan Łukasiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q185502" start="50980" end="50991" title="Many-valued logic" label="many-valued"/>
<link wikidata="Q426592" start="50996" end="51010" title="Paraconsistent logic" label="paraconsistent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541962" start="51046" end="51059" title="Graham Priest" label="Graham Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q28112860" start="51064" end="51072" title="Jc Beall" label="Jc Beall"/>
<link wikidata="Q33387" start="51187" end="51199" title="liar paradox" label="liar paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q57413682" start="51225" end="51237" title="Greg Restall" label="Greg Restall"/>
<link wikidata="Q25101281" start="51285" end="51302" title="logical pluralism" label="logical pluralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="51384" end="51396" title="Jesus" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q725797" start="51437" end="51448" title="Peter Geach" label="Peter Geach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563762" start="51530" end="51547" title="sortal" label="relative identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="51594" end="51601" title="Trinity" label="Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q918561" start="51640" end="51656" title="British idealism" label="British idealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q463553" start="51657" end="51675" title="J. M. E. McTaggart" label="J. M. E. McTaggart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771686" start="51710" end="51731" title="The Unreality of Time" label="The Unreality of Time"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51810" end="51818" title="A series and B series#A series" label="A theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264656" start="51894" end="51904" title="Philosophical presentism" label="presentism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833742" start="52100" end="52108" title="B-theory of time" label="B theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q20065338" start="52387" end="52415" title="Diels–Kranz numbering system" label="Diels–Kranz numbering system"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13793" wikidata="Q108886" url="?curid=13793" title="Harrison Schmitt">
<text>Harrison Hagan &quot;Jack&quot; Schmitt (born July 3, 1935) is an American geologist, former NASA astronaut, university professor, former U.S. senator from New Mexico, and the most recent living person—and only person without a background in military aviation—to have walked on the Moon.

In December 1972, as one of the crew on board Apollo 17, Schmitt became the first member of NASA&#x27;s first scientist-astronaut group to fly in space. As Apollo 17 was the last of the Apollo missions, he also became the twelfth and second-youngest person to set foot on the Moon and the second-to-last person to step off of the Moon (he boarded the Lunar Module shortly before commander Eugene Cernan). Schmitt also remains the only professional scientist to have flown beyond low Earth orbit and to have visited the Moon. He was influential within the community of geologists supporting the Apollo program and, before starting his own preparations for an Apollo mission, had been one of the scientists training those Apollo astronauts chosen to visit the lunar surface.

Schmitt resigned from NASA in August 1975 to run for election to the United States Senate as a member from New Mexico. As the Republican candidate in the 1976 election, he defeated Democratic incumbent Joseph Montoya. In the 1982 election, Schmitt was defeated by Democrat Jeff Bingaman.

== Biography ==

=== Early life and education ===
Born July 3, 1935, in Santa Rita, New Mexico, Schmitt grew up in nearby Silver City, and is a graduate of the Western High School (Class of 1953). He received a Bachelor of Science degree in geology from the California Institute of Technology in 1957 and then spent a year studying geology at the University of Oslo in Norway, as a Fulbright Scholar. He received a Doctor of Philosophy in geology from Harvard University in 1964, based on his geological field studies in Norway.

=== NASA career ===
Before joining NASA as a member of the first group of scientist-astronauts in June 1965, he worked at the U.S. Geological Survey&#x27;s Astrogeology Center at Flagstaff, Arizona, developing geological field techniques that would be used by the Apollo crews. Following his selection, Schmitt spent his first year at Air Force UPT learning to become a jet pilot. Upon his return to the astronaut corps in Houston, he played a key role in training Apollo crews to be geologic observers when they were in lunar orbit and competent geologic field workers when they were on the lunar surface. After each of the landing missions, he participated in the examination and evaluation of the returned lunar samples and helped the crews with the scientific aspects of their mission reports.

Schmitt spent considerable time becoming proficient in the CSM and LM systems. In March 1970 he became the first of the scientist-astronauts to be assigned to space flight, joining Richard F. Gordon Jr. (Commander) and Vance Brand (Command Module Pilot) on the Apollo 15 backup crew. The flight rotation put these three in line to fly as prime crew on the third following mission, Apollo 18. When Apollo 18 and Apollo 19 were canceled in September 1970, the community of lunar geologists supporting Apollo felt so strongly about the need to land a professional geologist on the Moon, that they pressured NASA to reassign Schmitt to a remaining flight. As a result, Schmitt was assigned in August 1971 to fly on Apollo 17, replacing Joe Engle as Lunar Module Pilot. Schmitt landed on the Moon with commander Gene Cernan in December 1972.

Schmitt claims to have taken the photograph of the Earth known as &quot;The Blue Marble&quot;, one of the most widely distributed photographic images in existence. His Apollo 17 crewmates, Gene Cernan (Mission Commander) and Ronald Evans (Command Module Pilot), have made the same claim, and NASA&#x27;s official position is to credit all three together.

While on the Moon&#x27;s surface, Schmitt—the only geologist in the astronaut corps—collected the rock sample designated Troctolite 76535, which has been called &quot;without doubt the most interesting sample returned from the Moon&quot;. Among other distinctions, it is the central piece of evidence suggesting that the Moon once possessed an active magnetic field.

As he returned to the Lunar Module before Cernan, Schmitt is the next-to-last person to have walked on the Moon&#x27;s surface. Since the death of Cernan in 2017, Schmitt is the most recent person to have walked on the Moon who is still alive. After the completion of the Apollo 17 mission, Schmitt played an active role in documenting the Apollo geologic results and also took on the task of organizing NASA&#x27;s Energy Program Office.

On April 29, 2018, the Schmitt Space Communicator SC-1x named in his honor was carried aboard the Blue Origin New Shepard crew capsule in a project partly funded by NASA. It launched the first commercial two-way data and Wi-Fi hotspot service in space and sent the first commercial Twitter message from space. The device was developed by Solstar, which Schmitt had joined as an advisor, and launched above the Earth&#x27;s surface, just past the edge of space, as a technology demonstration. The device was admitted to the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum.

=== Senate career ===
On August 30, 1975, Schmitt retired from NASA to seek election as a Republican to the United States Senate representing New Mexico in the 1976 election. The astronaut-politician campaigned for fourteen months, and his campaign focused on the future. In the Republican primary, held on June 1, 1976, Schmitt defeated the unknown Eugene Peirce. In the election, Schmitt opposed two-term Democratic incumbent Joseph Montoya. He defeated Montoya 57% to 42%.

He served one term and, notably, was the chairman of the Science, Technology, and Space Subcommittee of the United States Senate Committee on Commerce. He sought a second term in 1982, facing state Attorney General Jeff Bingaman. Bingaman criticized Schmitt for not paying enough attention to local matters; his campaign slogan asked, &quot;What on Earth has he done for you lately?&quot; This, combined with the deep recession, proved too much for Schmitt to overcome; he was defeated, 54% to 46%.

=== Post-Senate career ===

Following his Senate term, Schmitt has been a consultant in business, geology, space, and public policy. Schmitt is an adjunct professor of engineering physics at the University of Wisconsin–Madison, and has long been a proponent of lunar resource utilization. In 1997 he proposed the Interlune InterMars Initiative, listing among its goals the advancement of private-sector acquisition and use of lunar resources, particularly lunar helium-3 as a fuel for notional nuclear fusion reactors.

Schmitt was chair of the NASA Advisory Council, whose mandate is to provide technical advice to the NASA Administrator, from November 2005 until his abrupt resignation on October 16, 2008. In November 2008, he quit the Planetary Society over policy advocacy differences, citing the organization&#x27;s statements on &quot;focusing on Mars as the driving goal of human spaceflight&quot; (Schmitt said that going back to the Moon would speed progress toward a crewed Mars mission), on &quot;accelerating research into global climate change through more comprehensive Earth observations&quot; (Schmitt voiced objections to the notion of a present &quot;scientific consensus&quot; on climate change as any policy guide), and on international cooperation (which he felt would retard rather than accelerate progress), among other points of divergence.

Schmitt also serves as a visiting senior research scientist at the Florida Institute for Human &amp; Machine Cognition.

In January 2011, he was appointed as secretary of the New Mexico Energy, Minerals and Natural Resources Department in the cabinet of Governor Susana Martinez, but was forced to give up the appointment the following month after refusing to submit to a required background investigation. &quot;El Paso Times&quot; called him the &quot;most celebrated&quot; candidate for New Mexico energy secretary.

Schmitt wrote a book entitled &quot;Return to the Moon: Exploration, Enterprise, and Energy in the Human Settlement of Space&quot; in 2006. Schmitt is also involved in several civic projects, including the improvement of the Senator Harrison H. Schmitt Big Sky Hang Glider Park in Albuquerque, New Mexico.

== Views on climate change ==
Schmitt has rejected the scientific consensus on climate change, which states that climate change is real, progressing, dangerous, and primarily human-caused. He has claimed that climate change is predominantly caused by natural factors, as opposed to human activity. Schmitt has argued that the risks posed by climate change are overstated and has instead supported the notion that climate change is a &quot;tool&quot; used to advocate for the expansion of the government.

Schmitt resigned from the Planetary Society due to disagreements over their &quot;Roadmap to Space Exploration&quot;, which recommended prioritizing earlier human missions to Mars over U.S. lunar expeditions. He believed lunar exploration was crucial for Mars missions, stating, &quot;The fastest way to get to Mars is by way of the Moon.&quot; Additionally, Schmitt criticized the society&#x27;s stance on global warming, writing in his resignation letter that the &quot;&#x27;global warming scare&#x27; is being used as a political tool to increase government control over American lives, incomes and decision making,&quot; asserting it should not be part of the Society&#x27;s activities. Schmitt spoke at the March 2009 International Conference on Climate Change, an anthropogenic climate change denier event hosted by the conservative Heartland Institute, where he said that climate change was a &quot;stalking horse for National Socialism.&quot; He appeared in December that year on the Fox Business Network, saying that &quot;[t]he CO2 scare is a red herring&quot;.

In a 2009 interview with far-right conspiracy theorist and radio host Alex Jones, Schmitt asserted a link between the collapse of the Soviet Union and the American environmental movement: &quot;I think the whole trend really began with the fall of the Soviet Union. Because the great champion of the opponents of liberty, namely communism, had to find some other place to go and they basically went into the environmental movement.&quot;

In 2013, Schmitt co-authored an opinion column in &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; with William Happer, contending that increasing levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere are not significantly correlated with global warming, attributing the &quot;single-minded demonization of this natural and essential atmospheric gas&quot; to advocates of government control of energy production. Noting a positive relationship between crop resistance to drought and increasing carbon dioxide levels, the authors argued, &quot;Contrary to what some would have us believe, increased carbon dioxide in the atmosphere will benefit the increasing population on the planet by increasing agricultural productivity.&quot;

== In popular culture ==
* Schmitt was portrayed by Tom Amandes in the 1998 miniseries &quot;From the Earth to the Moon&quot;.
* Schmitt appeared in a 1993 episode of &quot;Bill Nye the Science Guy&quot;.
*Comedian Norm Macdonald mentioned Schmitt in his stand-up routine from at least 2015 until shortly before his death, joking about Schmitt&#x27;s relative obscurity despite being one of only a few people to ever walk on the Moon.

== Awards and honors ==
* NASA Distinguished Service Medal (1973)
* He was made an honorary fellow of the Geological Society of America for his efforts in geoscience in 1984.
* 1989 Recipient of the G. K. Gilbert Award
* One of the elementary schools in Schmitt&#x27;s hometown of Silver City, New Mexico was named in his honor in the mid-1970s. An image of the astronaut riding a rocket through space is displayed on the front of Harrison Schmitt Elementary School.
* AAPG&#x27;s Special Award has been changed to the Harrison Schmitt Award in 2011. It recognizes individuals or organizations that, for a variety of reasons, do not qualify for other Association honors or awards. Schmitt received the award in 1973 for his contribution as the first geologist to land on the Moon and study its geology.
* 2015 Recipient of the Leif Erikson Exploration Award, awarded by The Exploration Museum, for his scientific work on the surface of the Moon in 1972, and for his part in the geology training of all the astronauts that walked on the Moon before him.

Schmitt was one of five inductees into the International Space Hall of Fame in 1977. He was one of 24 Apollo astronauts who were inducted into the U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame in 1997.

== Media ==
Schmitt is one of the astronauts featured in the 2007 documentary &quot;In the Shadow of the Moon&quot;. He also contributed to the 2006 book &quot;NASA&#x27;s Scientist-Astronauts&quot; by David Shayler and Colin Burgess.

==See also==

* The Astronaut Monument

== References ==
== External links ==

* Interview with Harrison Schmitt for NOVA series: To the Moon WGBH Educational Foundation, raw footage, 1998
* Harrison Schmitt visits University of Malta in 2009 and Handaq School
* Spacefacts biography of Harrison Schmitt
* Space Policy Directive-1, in &quot;The Federal Register&quot;
* Harrison Schmitt in Hyde Park Civilization on ČT24 10.12.2022 (moderator Daniel Stach)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q108886" start="0" end="14" title="Harrison Schmitt" label="Harrison Hagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q108886" start="21" end="25" title="Harrison Schmitt" label="Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q108886" start="32" end="39" title="Harrison Schmitt" label="Schmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="75" end="84" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869369" start="93" end="107" title="NASA astronaut" label="NASA astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="109" end="129" title="university professor" label="university professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="138" end="150" title="U.S. senator" label="U.S. senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="156" end="166" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q180971" start="335" end="344" title="Apollo 17" label="Apollo 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q848758" start="381" end="424" title="NASA Astronaut Group 4" label="NASA&amp;#x27;s first scientist-astronaut group"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="475" end="481" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="511" end="569" title="List of Apollo astronauts#People who have walked on the Moon" label="twelfth and second-youngest person to set foot on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q208382" start="640" end="652" title="Apollo Lunar Module" label="Lunar Module"/>
<link wikidata="Q158486" start="678" end="691" title="Eugene Cernan" label="Eugene Cernan"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="768" end="783" title="low Earth orbit" label="low Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="1132" end="1152" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="1189" end="1199" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891759" start="1213" end="1230" title="1976 United States Senate election in New Mexico" label="the 1976 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="1244" end="1254" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q957283" start="1265" end="1279" title="Joseph Montoya" label="Joseph Montoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891760" start="1284" end="1301" title="1982 United States Senate election in New Mexico" label="the 1982 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q705498" start="1336" end="1349" title="Jeff Bingaman" label="Jeff Bingaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419837" start="1424" end="1446" title="Santa Rita, New Mexico" label="Santa Rita, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q985526" start="1474" end="1485" title="Silver City, New Mexico" label="Silver City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987917" start="1512" end="1531" title="Western High School (New Mexico)" label="Western High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="1563" end="1582" title="Bachelor of Science" label="Bachelor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="1593" end="1600" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="1610" end="1644" title="California Institute of Technology" label="California Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q486156" start="1699" end="1717" title="University of Oslo" label="University of Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="1767" end="1787" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="Doctor of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="1804" end="1822" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="1917" end="1921" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q848758" start="1941" end="1976" title="Astronaut Group 4" label="first group of scientist-astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q79842" start="2061" end="2079" title="Flagstaff, Arizona" label="Flagstaff, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="2217" end="2226" title="U.S. Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q407064" start="2227" end="2230" title="Undergraduate Pilot Training" label="UPT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="2366" end="2374" title="geologic" label="geologic"/>
<link wikidata="Q680027" start="2740" end="2743" title="Apollo Command/Service Module" label="CSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q208382" start="2748" end="2750" title="Apollo Lunar Module" label="LM"/>
<link wikidata="Q502963" start="2862" end="2883" title="Richard F. Gordon Jr." label="Richard F. Gordon Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q463833" start="2900" end="2911" title="Vance Brand" label="Vance Brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q194068" start="2942" end="2951" title="Apollo 15" label="Apollo 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q13227060" start="3078" end="3115" title="Canceled Apollo missions" label="Apollo 18 and Apollo 19 were canceled"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="3158" end="3167" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="3285" end="3289" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q180971" start="3392" end="3401" title="Apollo 17" label="Apollo 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q374034" start="3413" end="3422" title="Joe Engle" label="Joe Engle"/>
<link wikidata="Q158486" start="3488" end="3499" title="Gene Cernan" label="Gene Cernan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="3570" end="3575" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q202014" start="3591" end="3606" title="The Blue Marble" label="The Blue Marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086706" start="3625" end="3648" title="List of photographs considered the most important" label="most widely distributed"/>
<link wikidata="Q158486" start="3708" end="3719" title="Gene Cernan" label="Gene Cernan"/>
<link wikidata="Q313543" start="3744" end="3756" title="Ronald Evans (astronaut)" label="Ronald Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143141" start="3996" end="4012" title="Troctolite 76535" label="Troctolite 76535"/>
<link wikidata="Q885836" start="4781" end="4792" title="Blue Origin" label="Blue Origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339012" start="4793" end="4804" title="New Shepard" label="New Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q334765" start="4904" end="4917" title="Wi-Fi hotspot" label="Wi-Fi hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="4965" end="4972" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066211" start="5021" end="5028" title="Solstar" label="Solstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q275565" start="5129" end="5142" title="Kármán line" label="edge of space"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="5206" end="5217" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q752669" start="5218" end="5247" title="National Air and Space Museum" label="National Air and Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="5340" end="5350" title="United States Republican Party" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="5358" end="5378" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="5392" end="5402" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891759" start="5410" end="5423" title="1976 United States Senate election in New Mexico" label="1976 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q957283" start="5678" end="5692" title="Joseph Montoya" label="Joseph Montoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378864" start="5835" end="5877" title="United States Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation" label="United States Senate Committee on Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891760" start="5906" end="5910" title="1982 United States Senate election in New Mexico" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q705498" start="5942" end="5955" title="Jeff Bingaman" label="Jeff Bingaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q838330" start="6422" end="6453" title="University of Wisconsin–Madison" label="University of Wisconsin–Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q533498" start="6689" end="6697" title="helium-3" label="helium-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="6721" end="6735" title="nuclear fusion" label="nuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="6772" end="6793" title="NASA Advisory Council" label="NASA Advisory Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461457" start="7661" end="7712" title="Florida Institute for Human &amp;amp; Machine Cognition" label="Florida Institute for Human &amp;amp; Machine Cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010172" start="7769" end="7829" title="New Mexico Energy, Minerals and Natural Resources Department" label="New Mexico Energy, Minerals and Natural Resources Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q256334" start="7857" end="7872" title="Susana Martinez" label="Susana Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="8395" end="8418" title="Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="Albuquerque, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931364" start="8463" end="8471" title="Climate change denial" label="rejected"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115646" start="8476" end="8514" title="scientific consensus on climate change" label="scientific consensus on climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q671782" start="8952" end="8969" title="Planetary Society" label="Planetary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996216" start="9650" end="9692" title="International Conference on Climate Change" label="International Conference on Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931364" start="9711" end="9732" title="climate change denier" label="climate change denier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151745" start="9766" end="9785" title="Heartland Institute" label="Heartland Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q17113046" start="9833" end="9847" title="stalking horse" label="stalking horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="9852" end="9870" title="Nazism" label="National Socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735740" start="9919" end="9939" title="Fox Business Network" label="Fox Business Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="9965" end="9968" title="carbon dioxide" label="CO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q572959" start="9980" end="9991" title="red herring" label="red herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q319121" start="10070" end="10080" title="Alex Jones" label="Alex Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="10495" end="10518" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010838" start="10530" end="10544" title="William Happer" label="William Happer"/>
<link wikidata="Q166148" start="11199" end="11210" title="Tom Amandes" label="Tom Amandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467607" start="11240" end="11266" title="From the Earth to the Moon (miniseries)" label="From the Earth to the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526152" start="11320" end="11344" title="Bill Nye the Science Guy" label="Bill Nye the Science Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371229" start="11362" end="11376" title="Norm Macdonald" label="Norm Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q4286902" start="11609" end="11641" title="NASA Distinguished Service Medal" label="NASA Distinguished Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503216" start="11689" end="11718" title="Geological Society of America" label="Geological Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008" start="11738" end="11748" title="geoscience" label="geoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q745990" start="11782" end="11801" title="G. K. Gilbert Award" label="G. K. Gilbert Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q463396" start="12052" end="12056" title="American Association of Petroleum Geologists" label="AAPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079694" start="12410" end="12440" title="Leif Erikson Awards" label="Leif Erikson Exploration Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q15117728" start="12453" end="12475" title="The Exploration Museum" label="The Exploration Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010217" start="12680" end="12712" title="International Space Hall of Fame" label="International Space Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q742943" start="12784" end="12811" title="U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame" label="U.S. Astronaut Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704813" start="12906" end="12931" title="In the Shadow of the Moon (2007 film)" label="In the Shadow of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5144936" start="13042" end="13055" title="Colin Burgess (author)" label="Colin Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q20990717" start="13074" end="13096" title="The Astronaut Monument" label="The Astronaut Monument"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13795" wikidata="Q908586" url="?curid=13795" title="Hilaire Rouelle">
<text>Hilaire Marin Rouelle (; 15 February 1718 – 7 April 1779) was an 18th-century French chemist. Commonly cited as the 1773 discoverer of urea, he was not the first to do so. Dutch scientist Herman Boerhaave had discovered this chemical as early as 1727. Rouelle is known as &quot;le cadet&quot; (the younger) to distinguish him from his older brother, Guillaume-François Rouelle, who was also a chemist.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q908586" start="0" end="21" title="Hilaire Rouelle" label="Hilaire Marin Rouelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q48318" start="135" end="139" title="urea" label="urea"/>
<link wikidata="Q313093" start="188" end="204" title="Herman Boerhaave" label="Herman Boerhaave"/>
<link wikidata="Q79529" start="225" end="233" title="chemical" label="chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q902573" start="350" end="376" title="Guillaume-François Rouelle" label="Guillaume-François Rouelle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13798" wikidata="Q15618122" url="?curid=13798" title="Halon">
<text>Halon may refer to:

* Haloalkane, or halogenoalkane, a group of chemical compounds consisting of alkanes with linked halogens (in particular, bromine-containing haloalkanes)
* Halomethane compounds:
** Halon 10001 (iodomethane)
** Halon 1001 (bromomethane)
** Halon 1011 (bromochloromethane, CH2BrCl)
** Halon 104 (carbon tetrachloride)
** Halon 1103 (tribromofluoromethane)
** Halon 112 (dichlorofluoromethane)
** Halon 1201 (bromodifluoromethane)
** Halon 1202 (dibromodifluoromethane)
** Halon 1211 (bromochlorodifluoromethane, CF2ClBr)
** Halon 122 (dichlorodifluoromethane)
** Halon 1301 (bromotrifluoromethane, CBrF3)
** Halon 14 (tetrafluoromethane)
* Halon 2011B (1-bromo-2-chloroethane)
* Halon 2301 (1,1,1-trifluoro-2-bromoethane)
* Halon 2311 (1,1,1-trifluoro-2,2-chlorobromoethane, halothane)
* Halon 242 (1,2-dichlorotetrafluoroethane)
* Halon 2402 (dibromotetrafluoroethane, C2Br2F4)—used as a fire extinguisher
* Halon 2501 (pentafluorobromoethane)
* Halon 2600 (hexafluoroethane)
* Halon 4402 (1,1,2,2-tetrafluoro-1,4-dibromobutane)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q271026" start="23" end="33" title="Haloalkane" label="Haloalkane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151641" start="177" end="188" title="Halomethane" label="Halomethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q421729" start="203" end="214" title="Halon 10001" label="Halon 10001"/>
<link wikidata="Q421758" start="232" end="242" title="Halon 1001" label="Halon 1001"/>
<link wikidata="Q421751" start="261" end="271" title="Halon 1011" label="Halon 1011"/>
<link wikidata="Q225045" start="305" end="314" title="Halon 104" label="Halon 104"/>
<link wikidata="Q843735" start="341" end="351" title="Halon 1103" label="Halon 1103"/>
<link wikidata="Q418163" start="379" end="388" title="Halon 112" label="Halon 112"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354896" start="416" end="426" title="Halon 1201" label="Halon 1201"/>
<link wikidata="Q905027" start="453" end="463" title="Halon 1202" label="Halon 1202"/>
<link wikidata="Q419723" start="492" end="502" title="Halon 1211" label="Halon 1211"/>
<link wikidata="Q423021" start="544" end="553" title="Halon 122" label="Halon 122"/>
<link wikidata="Q413018" start="583" end="593" title="Halon 1301" label="Halon 1301"/>
<link wikidata="Q423055" start="628" end="636" title="Halon 14" label="Halon 14"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="660" end="671" title="Halon 2011B" label="Halon 2011B"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="699" end="709" title="Halon 2301" label="Halon 2301"/>
<link wikidata="Q32921" start="744" end="754" title="Halothane" label="Halon 2311"/>
<link wikidata="Q420380" start="808" end="817" title="Halon 242" label="Halon 242"/>
<link wikidata="Q161472" start="852" end="862" title="Dibromotetrafluoroethane" label="Halon 2402"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="929" end="939" title="Halon 2501" label="Halon 2501"/>
<link wikidata="Q417035" start="967" end="977" title="Halon 2600" label="Halon 2600"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="999" end="1009" title="Halon 4402" label="Halon 4402"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13800" wikidata="Q414431" url="?curid=13800" title="Harrisonburg">
<text>Harrisonburg may refer to a place in the United States:

* Harrisonburg, Louisiana
* Harrisonburg, Virginia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2468416" start="59" end="82" title="Harrisonburg, Louisiana" label="Harrisonburg, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q511935" start="85" end="107" title="Harrisonburg, Virginia" label="Harrisonburg, Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13802" wikidata="Q25294" url="?curid=13802" title="Hammer">
<text>A hammer is a tool, most often a hand tool, consisting of a weighted &quot;head&quot; fixed to a long handle that is swung to deliver an impact to a small area of an object. This can be, for example, to drive nails into wood, to shape metal (as with a forge), or to crush rock. Hammers are used for a wide range of driving, shaping, breaking and non-destructive striking applications. Traditional disciplines include carpentry, blacksmithing, warfare, and percussive musicianship (as with a gong).

Hammering is use of a hammer in its strike capacity, as opposed to prying with a secondary claw or grappling with a secondary hook. Carpentry and blacksmithing hammers are generally wielded from a stationary stance against a stationary target as gripped and propelled with one arm, in a lengthy downward planar arc—downward to add kinetic energy to the impact—pivoting mainly around the shoulder and elbow, with a small but brisk wrist rotation shortly before impact; for extreme impact, concurrent motions of the torso and knee can lower the shoulder joint during the swing to further increase the length of the swing arc (but this is tiring). War hammers are often wielded in non-vertical planes of motion, with a far greater share of energy input provided from the legs and hips, which can also include a lunging motion, especially against moving targets. Small mallets can be swung from the wrists in a smaller motion permitting a much higher cadence of repeated strikes. Use of hammers and heavy mallets for demolition must adapt the hammer stroke to the location and orientation of the target, which can necessitate a clubbing or golfing motion with a two-handed grip.

The modern hammer head is typically made of steel which has been heat treated for hardness, and the handle (also known as a or ) is typically made of wood or plastic.

Ubiquitous in framing, the claw hammer has a &quot;claw&quot; to pull nails out of wood, and is commonly found in an inventory of household tools in North America. Other types of hammers vary in shape, size, and structure, depending on their purposes. Hammers used in many trades include sledgehammers, mallets, and ball-peen hammers. Although most hammers are hand tools, powered hammers, such as steam hammers and trip hammers, are used to deliver forces beyond the capacity of the human arm. There are over 40 different types of hammers that have many different types of uses.

For hand hammers, the grip of the shaft is an important consideration. Many forms of hammering by hand are heavy work, and perspiration can lead to slippage from the hand, turning a hammer into a dangerous or destructive uncontrolled projectile. Steel is highly elastic and transmits shock and vibration; steel is also a good conductor of heat, making it unsuitable for contact with bare skin in frigid conditions. Modern hammers with steel shafts are almost invariably clad with a synthetic polymer to improve grip, dampen vibration, and to provide thermal insulation. A suitably contoured handle is also an important aid in providing a secure grip during heavy use. Traditional wooden handles were reasonably good in all regards, but lack strength and durability compared to steel, and there are safety issues with wooden handles if the head becomes loose on the shaft.

The high elasticity of the steel head is important in energy transfer, especially when used in conjunction with an equally elastic anvil.

In terms of human physiology, many uses of the hammer involve coordinated ballistic movements under intense muscular forces which must be planned in advance at the neuromuscular level, as they occur too rapidly for conscious adjustment in flight. For this reason, accurate striking at speed requires more practice than a tapping movement to the same target area. It has been suggested that the cognitive demands for pre-planning, sequencing and accurate timing associated with the related ballistic movements of throwing, clubbing, and hammering precipitated aspects of brain evolution in early hominids.

== History ==
The use of simple hammers dates to around 3.3 million years ago according to the 2012 find made by Sonia Harmand and Jason Lewis of Stony Brook University, who while excavating a site near Kenya&#x27;s Lake Turkana discovered a very large deposit of various shaped stones including those used to strike wood, bone, or other stones to break them apart and shape them. The first hammers were made without handles. Stones attached to sticks with strips of leather or animal sinew were being used as hammers with handles by about 30,000 BCE during the middle of the Paleolithic Stone Age. The addition of a handle gave the user better control and less accidents. The hammer became the primary tool used for building, food, and protection.

The hammer&#x27;s archaeological record shows that it may be the oldest tool for which definite evidence exists.

==Construction and materials==
A traditional hand-held hammer consists of a separate head and a handle, which can be fastened together by means of a special wedge made for the purpose, or by glue, or both. This two-piece design is often used to combine a dense metallic striking head with a non-metallic mechanical-shock-absorbing handle (to reduce user fatigue from repeated strikes). If wood is used for the handle, it is often hickory or ash, which are tough and long-lasting materials that can dissipate shock waves from the hammer head. Rigid fiberglass resin may be used for the handle; this material does not absorb water or decay but does not dissipate shock as well as wood.

A loose hammer head is considered hazardous due to the risk of the head becoming detached from the handle while being swung becoming a dangerous uncontrolled projectile. Wooden handles can often be replaced when worn or damaged; specialized kits are available covering a range of handle sizes and designs, plus special wedges and spacers for secure attachment.

Some hammers are one-piece designs made mostly of a single material. A one-piece metallic hammer may optionally have its handle coated or wrapped in a resilient material such as rubber for improved grip and to reduce user fatigue.

The hammer head may be surfaced with a variety of materials including brass, bronze, wood, plastic, rubber, or leather. Some hammers have interchangeable striking surfaces, which can be selected as needed or replaced when worn out.

== Designs and variations ==
A large hammer-like tool is a &quot;maul&quot; (sometimes called a &quot;beetle&quot;), a wood- or rubber-headed hammer is a &quot;mallet&quot;, and a hammer-like tool with a cutting blade is usually called a &quot;hatchet&quot;. The essential part of a hammer is the head, a compact solid mass that is able to deliver a blow to the intended target without itself deforming. The impacting surface of the tool is usually flat or slightly rounded; the opposite end of the impacting mass may have a ball shape, as in the ball-peen hammer. Some upholstery hammers have a magnetized face, to pick up tacks. In the hatchet, the flat hammer head may be secondary to the cutting edge of the tool.

The impact between steel hammer heads and the objects being hit can create sparks, which may ignite flammable or explosive gases. These are a hazard in some industries such as underground coal mining (due to the presence of methane gas), or in other hazardous environments such as petroleum refineries and chemical plants. In these environments, a variety of non-sparking metal tools are used, primarily made of aluminium or beryllium copper. In recent years, the handles have been made of durable plastic or rubber, though wood is still widely used because of its shock-absorbing qualities and repairability.

===Hand-powered===
* Ball-peen hammer, or mechanic&#x27;s hammer
* Boiler scaling hammer
* Brass hammer, also known as non-sparking hammer or spark-proof hammer and used mainly in flammable areas like oil fields
* Bricklayer&#x27;s hammer
* Carpenter&#x27;s hammer (used for nailing), such as the framing hammer and the claw hammer, and pinhammers (ball-peen and cross-peen types)
* Cow hammer – sometimes used for livestock slaughter, a practice now deprecated due to animal welfare objections
* Cross-peen hammer, having one round face and one wedge-peen face.
* Dead blow hammer delivers impact with very little recoil, often due to a hollow head filled with sand, lead shot or pellets
* Demolition hammer
* Drilling hammer – a short handled sledgehammer originally used for drilling in rock with a chisel. The name usually refers to a hammer with a head and a handle, also called a &quot;single-jack&quot; hammer because it was used by one person drilling, holding the chisel in one hand and the hammer in the other. In modern usage, the term is mostly interchangeable with &quot;engineer&#x27;s hammer&quot;, although it can indicate a version with a slightly shorter handle.
* Engineer&#x27;s hammer, a short-handled hammer, was originally an essential components of a railroad engineer&#x27;s toolkit for working on steam locomotives. Typical weight is 2–4 lbs (0.9–1.8 kg) with a 12–14-inch (30–35 cm) handle. Originally these were often cross-peen hammers, with one round face and one wedge-peen face, but in modern usage the term primarily refers to hammers with two round faces.
* Gavel, used by judges and presiding authorities to draw attention 
* Geologist&#x27;s hammer or rock pick
* Joiner&#x27;s hammer, or Warrington hammer
* Knife-edged hammer, its properties developed to aid a hammerer in the act of slicing whilst bludgeoning
* Lathe hammer (also known as a lath hammer, lathing hammer, or lathing hatchet), a tool used for cutting and nailing wood lath, which has a small hatchet blade on one side (with a small, lateral nick for pulling nails) and a hammer head on the other
* Lump hammer, or club hammer
* Mallets, including versions made with hard rubber or rolled sheets of rawhide
* Railway track keying hammer
* Magnetic double-head hammer
* Magnetic tack hammer
* Rock climbing hammer
* Rounding hammer, Blacksmith or farrier hammer. Round face generally for moving or drawing metal and flat for &quot;planishing&quot; or smoothing out the surface marks.
* Shingler&#x27;s hammer
* Sledgehammer
* Soft-faced hammer
* Spiking hammer
* Splitting maul
* Strike Tack hammer
* Stonemason&#x27;s hammer
* Tinner&#x27;s hammer
* Upholstery hammer
* Welder&#x27;s chipping hammer

=== Mechanically powered ===

Mechanically powered hammers often look quite different from the hand tools, but nevertheless, most of them work on the same principle. They include:
* Hammer drill, that combines a jackhammer-like mechanism with a drill
* High Frequency Impact Treatment hammer – for after-treatment of weld transitions
* Jackhammer
* Steam hammer
* Trip hammer
* Nail gun
* Staple gun

==Associated tools==
* Anvil
* Chisel
* Pipe drift (Blacksmithing – spreading a punched hole to proper size and/or shape)
* Star drill
* Punch
* Woodsplitting maul – can be hit with a sledgehammer for splitting wood.
* Woodsplitting wedge – hit with a sledgehammer for splitting wood.

==Physics==

===As a force amplifier===
A hammer is a simple force amplifier that works by converting mechanical work into kinetic energy and back.

In the swing that precedes each blow, the hammer head stores a certain amount of kinetic energy—equal to the length &quot;D&quot; of the swing times the force &quot;f&quot; produced by the muscles of the arm and by gravity. When the hammer strikes, the head is stopped by an opposite force coming from the target, equal and opposite to the force applied by the head to the target. If the target is a hard and heavy object, or if it is resting on some sort of anvil, the head can travel only a very short distance &quot;d&quot; before stopping. Since the stopping force &quot;F&quot; times that distance must be equal to the head&#x27;s kinetic energy, it follows that &quot;F&quot; is much greater than the original driving force &quot;f&quot;—roughly, by a factor &quot;D&quot;/&quot;d&quot;. In this way, great strength is not needed to produce a force strong enough to bend steel, or crack the hardest stone.

===Effect of the head&#x27;s mass===
The amount of energy delivered to the target by the hammer-blow is equivalent to one half the mass of the head times the square of the head&#x27;s speed at the time of impact formula_1. While the energy delivered to the target increases linearly with mass, it increases quadratically with the speed (see the effect of the handle, below). High tech titanium heads are lighter and allow for longer handles, thus increasing velocity and delivering the same energy with less arm fatigue than that of a heavier steel head hammer. A titanium head has about 3% recoil energy and can result in greater efficiency and less fatigue when compared to a steel head with up to 30% recoil. Dead blow hammers use special rubber or steel shot to absorb recoil energy, rather than bouncing the hammer head after impact.

===Effect of the handle===
The handle of the hammer helps in several ways. It keeps the user&#x27;s hands away from the point of impact. It provides a broad area that is better-suited for gripping by the hand. Most importantly, it allows the user to maximize the speed of the head on each blow. The primary constraint on additional handle length is the lack of space to swing the hammer. This is why sledgehammers, largely used in open spaces, can have handles that are much longer than a standard carpenter&#x27;s hammer. The second most important constraint is more subtle. Even without considering the effects of fatigue, the longer the handle, the harder it is to guide the head of the hammer to its target at full speed.

Most designs are a compromise between practicality and energy efficiency. With too long a handle, the hammer is inefficient because it delivers force to the wrong place, off-target. With too short a handle, the hammer is inefficient because it does not deliver enough force, requiring more blows to complete a given task. Modifications have also been made with respect to the effect of the hammer on the user. Handles made of shock-absorbing materials or varying angles attempt to make it easier for the user to continue to wield this age-old device, even as nail guns and other powered drivers encroach on its traditional field of use.

As hammers must be used in many circumstances, where the position of the person using them cannot be taken for granted, trade-offs are made for the sake of practicality. In areas where one has plenty of room, a long handle with a heavy head (like a sledgehammer) can deliver the maximum amount of energy to the target. It is not practical to use such a large hammer for all tasks, however, and thus the overall design has been modified repeatedly to achieve the optimum utility in a wide variety of situations.

===Effect of gravity===
Gravity exerts a force on the hammer head. If hammering downwards, gravity increases the acceleration during the hammer stroke and increases the energy delivered with each blow. If hammering upwards, gravity reduces the acceleration during the hammer stroke and therefore reduces the energy delivered with each blow. Some hammering methods, such as traditional mechanical pile drivers, rely entirely on gravity for acceleration on the down stroke.

==Ergonomics and injury risks==

A hammer may cause significant injury if it strikes the body. Both manual and powered hammers can cause peripheral neuropathy or a variety of other ailments when used improperly. Awkward handles can cause repetitive stress injury (RSI) to hand and arm joints, and uncontrolled shock waves from repeated impacts can injure nerves and the skeleton. Additionally, striking metal objects with a hammer may produce small metallic projectiles which can become lodged in the eye. It is therefore recommended to wear safety glasses.

==War hammers==

A war hammer is a late medieval weapon of war intended for close combat action.

==Symbolism==

The hammer, being one of the most used tools by man, has been used very much in symbols such as flags and heraldry. In the Middle Ages, it was used often in blacksmith guild logos, as well as in many family symbols. The hammer and pick are used as a symbol of mining.

In mythology, the gods Thor (Norse) and Sucellus (Celtic and Gallo-Roman), and the hero Hercules (Greek), all had hammers that appear in their lore and carried different meanings. Thor, the god of thunder and lightning, wields a hammer named Mjölnir. Many artifacts of decorative hammers have been found, leading modern practitioners of this religion to often wear reproductions as a sign of their faith.

In American folklore, the hammer of John Henry represents the strength and endurance of a man.

A political party in Singapore, Workers&#x27; Party of Singapore, based their logo on a hammer to symbolize the party&#x27;s civic nationalism and social democracy ideology.

A variant, well-known symbol with a hammer in it is the hammer and sickle, which was the symbol of the former Soviet Union and is strongly linked to communism and early socialism. The hammer in this symbol represents the industrial working class (and the sickle represents the agricultural working class). The hammer is used in some coats of arms in former socialist countries like East Germany. Similarly, the Hammer and Sword symbolizes Strasserism, a strand of Nazism seeking to appeal to the working class. Another variant of the symbol was used for the North Korean party, Workers&#x27; Party of Korea, incorporated with an ink brush on the middle, which symbolizes both Juche and Songun ideologies.

In Pink Floyd – The Wall, two hammers crossed are used as a symbol for the fascist takeover of the concert during &quot;In the Flesh&quot;. This also has the meaning of the hammer beating down any &quot;nails&quot; that stick out.

The gavel, a small wooden mallet, is used to symbolize a mandate to preside over a meeting or judicial proceeding, and a graphic image of one is used as a symbol of legislative or judicial decision-making authority.

Judah Maccabee was nicknamed &quot;The Hammer&quot;, possibly in recognition of his ferocity in battle. The name &quot;Maccabee&quot; may derive from the Aramaic &quot;maqqaba&quot;. (see .)

The hammer in the song &quot;If I Had a Hammer&quot; represents a relentless message of justice broadcast across the land. The song became a symbol of the civil rights movement.

==Image gallery==

==See also==

*Hammer Museum (Haines, Alaska)
*Mjölnir

==References==
==External links==
*Types of Hammers (images and descriptions)
*&quot;Choosing a Hammer&quot;. &quot;Popular Science&quot;, June 1960, pp. 164–167.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25294" start="2" end="8" title="Hammer" label="hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q39546" start="14" end="18" title="tool" label="tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578402" start="33" end="42" title="hand tool" label="hand tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q37077" start="209" end="214" title="nail (fastener)" label="nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="220" end="224" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="235" end="240" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q40558" start="252" end="257" title="forge" label="forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="272" end="276" title="Rock (geology)" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q203605" start="417" end="426" title="carpentry" label="carpentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639825" start="428" end="441" title="blacksmithing" label="blacksmithing"/>
<link wikidata="Q824271" start="443" end="450" title="war hammer" label="warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398234" start="456" end="466" title="mallet percussion" label="percussive"/>
<link wikidata="Q208320" start="491" end="495" title="gong" label="gong"/>
<link wikidata="Q25294" start="499" end="508" title="Hammer" label="Hammering"/>
<link wikidata="Q13681" start="566" end="572" title="pry bar" label="prying"/>
<link wikidata="Q906297" start="598" end="607" title="grappling" label="grappling"/>
<link wikidata="Q43471" start="776" end="779" title="arm" label="arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285" start="803" end="809" title="plane (geometry)" label="planar"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="830" end="844" title="kinetic energy" label="kinetic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q160695" start="1013" end="1018" title="torso" label="torso"/>
<link wikidata="Q331483" start="1512" end="1522" title="demolition" label="demolition"/>
<link wikidata="Q392326" start="1623" end="1631" title="club (weapon)" label="clubbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536459" start="1635" end="1642" title="golf swing" label="golfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="1719" end="1724" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458918" start="1740" end="1752" title="heat treating" label="heat treated"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="1833" end="1840" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131593" start="1857" end="1864" title="framing (construction)" label="framing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3945253" start="1870" end="1881" title="claw hammer" label="claw hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1992" end="2005" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588761" start="2116" end="2122" title="tradesman" label="trades"/>
<link wikidata="Q10981947" start="2131" end="2143" title="sledgehammer" label="sledgehammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202271" start="2146" end="2152" title="mallet" label="mallet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535657" start="2159" end="2175" title="ball-peen hammer" label="ball-peen hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446739" start="2216" end="2231" title="power hammer" label="powered hammers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19767" start="2241" end="2253" title="steam hammer" label="steam hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121955" start="2259" end="2270" title="trip hammer" label="trip hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11402" start="2293" end="2298" title="force" label="force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503092" start="2547" end="2559" title="perspiration" label="perspiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q62932" start="2686" end="2693" title="Elasticity (physics)" label="elastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q129302" start="2708" end="2713" title="shock (mechanics)" label="shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695508" start="2718" end="2727" title="vibration" label="vibration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695508" start="2941" end="2957" title="Damped vibration" label="dampen vibration"/>
<link wikidata="Q918306" start="2974" end="2992" title="thermal insulation" label="thermal insulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q104363" start="3428" end="3433" title="anvil" label="anvil"/>
<link wikidata="Q23852" start="3448" end="3464" title="human physiology" label="human physiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851801" start="3510" end="3528" title="ballistic movement" label="ballistic movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915553" start="3600" end="3619" title="motor system" label="neuromuscular level"/>
<link wikidata="Q12898216" start="3948" end="3956" title="throwing" label="throwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q125511837" start="4006" end="4021" title="brain evolution" label="brain evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q635162" start="4031" end="4038" title="hominid" label="hominid"/>
<link wikidata="Q52704477" start="4155" end="4168" title="Sonia Harmand" label="Sonia Harmand"/>
<link wikidata="Q969850" start="4188" end="4210" title="Stony Brook University" label="Stony Brook University"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="4245" end="4250" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q182719" start="4258" end="4270" title="Lake Turkana" label="Lake Turkana"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="4359" end="4363" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q265868" start="4365" end="4369" title="bone" label="bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q286" start="4509" end="4516" title="leather" label="leather"/>
<link wikidata="Q232358" start="4520" end="4532" title="Tendon" label="animal sinew"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="4618" end="4639" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q131408" start="5063" end="5068" title="wedge" label="wedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q131790" start="5097" end="5101" title="Adhesive" label="glue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940317" start="5255" end="5267" title="muscle fatigue" label="user fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q142788" start="5336" end="5343" title="hickory" label="hickory"/>
<link wikidata="Q128887" start="5347" end="5350" title="ash (tree)" label="ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q190688" start="5414" end="5424" title="shock wave" label="shock wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="5454" end="5470" title="fiberglass" label="fiberglass resin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14955427" start="6104" end="6113" title="Resilience (engineering and construction)" label="resilient"/>
<link wikidata="Q252266" start="6131" end="6137" title="Elastomer" label="rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q39782" start="6255" end="6260" title="brass" label="brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="6262" end="6268" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202271" start="6578" end="6584" title="mallet" label="mallet"/>
<link wikidata="Q672890" start="6662" end="6669" title="hatchet" label="hatchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535657" start="6965" end="6981" title="ball-peen hammer" label="ball-peen hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418609" start="6988" end="7005" title="upholstery hammer" label="upholstery hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11421" start="7014" end="7020" title="magnet" label="magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q911679" start="7212" end="7218" title="Spark (fire)" label="sparks"/>
<link wikidata="Q910035" start="7237" end="7246" title="flammable" label="flammable"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="7250" end="7259" title="explosive" label="explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="7260" end="7263" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132455" start="7279" end="7285" title="hazard" label="hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="7313" end="7336" title="underground coal mining" label="underground coal mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="7361" end="7368" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353044" start="7418" end="7438" title="petroleum refineries" label="petroleum refineries"/>
<link wikidata="Q905286" start="7443" end="7457" title="chemical plant" label="chemical plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="7549" end="7558" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q905582" start="7562" end="7578" title="beryllium copper" label="beryllium copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535657" start="7769" end="7785" title="Ball-peen hammer" label="Ball-peen hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478000" start="8045" end="8059" title="framing hammer" label="framing hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3945253" start="8068" end="8079" title="claw hammer" label="claw hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4282505" start="8163" end="8182" title="animal slaughter" label="livestock slaughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q280943" start="8199" end="8209" title="deprecation" label="deprecated"/>
<link wikidata="Q40053" start="8217" end="8231" title="animal cruelty" label="animal welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792645" start="8313" end="8329" title="Dead blow hammer" label="Dead blow hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q278938" start="8416" end="8425" title="lead shot" label="lead shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q10981947" start="8459" end="8474" title="Lump hammer" label="Drilling hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2775569" start="9023" end="9040" title="railroad engineer" label="railroad engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625659" start="9340" end="9345" title="Gavel" label="Gavel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294756" start="9409" end="9432" title="Geologist&amp;#x27;s hammer" label="Geologist&amp;#x27;s hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q99385805" start="9473" end="9490" title="Warrington hammer" label="Warrington hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q39397" start="9599" end="9611" title="Axe" label="Lathe hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092965" start="9720" end="9724" title="lath" label="lath"/>
<link wikidata="Q10981947" start="9850" end="9861" title="Lump hammer" label="Lump hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202271" start="9880" end="9886" title="Mallet" label="Mallet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4448003" start="9950" end="9957" title="rawhide (material)" label="rawhide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656105" start="10043" end="10063" title="Rock climbing hammer" label="Rock climbing hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10981947" start="10261" end="10273" title="Sledgehammer" label="Sledgehammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q28458086" start="10276" end="10293" title="Soft-faced hammer" label="Soft-faced hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577224" start="10296" end="10310" title="Spiking hammer" label="Spiking hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531992" start="10313" end="10327" title="Splitting maul" label="Splitting maul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464970" start="10351" end="10375" title="Stonemason&amp;#x27;s hammer" label="Stonemason&amp;#x27;s hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q272953" start="10378" end="10384" title="Tinning" label="Tinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418609" start="10401" end="10418" title="Upholstery hammer" label="Upholstery hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131172" start="10421" end="10427" title="Welding" label="Welder"/>
<link wikidata="Q19599600" start="10634" end="10646" title="Hammer drill" label="Hammer drill"/>
<link wikidata="Q58964" start="10697" end="10702" title="drill" label="drill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617762" start="10705" end="10736" title="High Frequency Impact Treatment" label="High Frequency Impact Treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q19766" start="10788" end="10798" title="Jackhammer" label="Jackhammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19767" start="10801" end="10813" title="Steam hammer" label="Steam hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121955" start="10816" end="10827" title="Trip hammer" label="Trip hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q77257" start="10830" end="10838" title="Nail gun" label="Nail gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2801795" start="10841" end="10851" title="Staple gun" label="Staple gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q104363" start="10876" end="10881" title="Anvil" label="Anvil"/>
<link wikidata="Q474188" start="10884" end="10890" title="Chisel" label="Chisel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197237" start="10893" end="10903" title="Pipe drift" label="Pipe drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q335283" start="10977" end="10987" title="Star drill" label="Star drill"/>
<link wikidata="Q916207" start="10990" end="10995" title="Punch (engineering)" label="Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531992" start="10998" end="11016" title="Splitting maul" label="Woodsplitting maul"/>
<link wikidata="Q131408" start="11072" end="11091" title="Wedge (mechanical device)" label="Woodsplitting wedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11402" start="11200" end="11205" title="force" label="force"/>
<link wikidata="Q211554" start="11206" end="11215" title="amplifier" label="amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q42213" start="11241" end="11256" title="mechanical work" label="mechanical work"/>
<link wikidata="Q46276" start="11262" end="11276" title="kinetic energy" label="kinetic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365" start="11477" end="11483" title="muscle" label="muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="11503" end="11510" title="gravity" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q104363" start="11747" end="11752" title="anvil" label="anvil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711325" start="12531" end="12536" title="speed" label="speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="12586" end="12594" title="titanium" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080698" start="12792" end="12798" title="Deflection (physics)" label="recoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792645" start="12913" end="12929" title="Dead blow hammer" label="Dead blow hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q749601" start="12974" end="12980" title="recoil" label="recoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q924713" start="13823" end="13840" title="Efficient energy use" label="energy efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="14942" end="14949" title="Gravity" label="Gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11376" start="15031" end="15043" title="acceleration" label="acceleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="15087" end="15093" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339821" start="15314" end="15325" title="pile driver" label="pile driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q945238" start="15528" end="15549" title="peripheral neuropathy" label="peripheral neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q877796" start="15629" end="15653" title="repetitive stress injury" label="repetitive stress injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q37501" start="15933" end="15947" title="safety glasses" label="safety glasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="15985" end="15998" title="late medieval" label="late medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q728" start="15999" end="16005" title="weapon" label="weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="16009" end="16012" title="war" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102423" start="16026" end="16038" title="close combat" label="close combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="16111" end="16114" title="Homo sapiens" label="man"/>
<link wikidata="Q14660" start="16159" end="16163" title="flag" label="flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q18336" start="16169" end="16177" title="heraldry" label="heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433023" start="16283" end="16298" title="hammer and pick" label="hammer and pick"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="16355" end="16359" title="Thor" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="16361" end="16366" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q930633" start="16372" end="16380" title="Sucellus" label="Sucellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q263031" start="16382" end="16388" title="Ancient Celtic religion" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q385393" start="16393" end="16404" title="Gallo-Roman religion" label="Gallo-Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q240679" start="16420" end="16428" title="Hercules" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="16430" end="16435" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q193813" start="16574" end="16581" title="Mjölnir" label="Mjölnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q778075" start="16741" end="16758" title="Folklore of the United States" label="American folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596171" start="16774" end="16784" title="John Henry (folklore)" label="John Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299911" start="16866" end="16898" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Party (Singapore)" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q59599" start="16959" end="16976" title="civic nationalism" label="civic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="16981" end="16997" title="social democracy" label="social democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170266" start="17065" end="17082" title="hammer and sickle" label="hammer and sickle"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="17119" end="17131" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="17158" end="17167" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="17178" end="17187" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="17391" end="17403" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q701333" start="17448" end="17459" title="Strasserism" label="Strasserism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="17473" end="17479" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q49623" start="17587" end="17615" title="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea" label="Workers&amp;#x27; Party of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q494618" start="17638" end="17647" title="ink brush" label="ink brush"/>
<link wikidata="Q181800" start="17685" end="17690" title="Juche" label="Juche"/>
<link wikidata="Q502144" start="17695" end="17701" title="Songun" label="Songun"/>
<link wikidata="Q213683" start="17718" end="17739" title="Pink Floyd – The Wall" label="Pink Floyd – The Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q960719" start="17835" end="17847" title="In the Flesh (Pink Floyd song)" label="In the Flesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625659" start="17951" end="17956" title="gavel" label="gavel"/>
<link wikidata="Q111559" start="18164" end="18178" title="Judah Maccabee" label="Judah Maccabee"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="18318" end="18325" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880395" start="18385" end="18402" title="If I Had a Hammer" label="If I Had a Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="18511" end="18532" title="civil rights movement" label="civil rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q14680007" start="18569" end="18599" title="Hammer Museum (Haines, Alaska)" label="Hammer Museum (Haines, Alaska)"/>
<link wikidata="Q193813" start="18601" end="18608" title="Mjölnir" label="Mjölnir"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13804" wikidata="Q48332" url="?curid=13804" title="Hiragana">
<text>is a Japanese syllabary, part of the Japanese writing system, along with &quot;katakana&quot; as well as &quot;kanji&quot;.

It is a phonetic lettering system. The word &quot;hiragana&quot; means &quot;common&quot; or &quot;plain&quot; kana (originally also &quot;easy&quot;, as contrasted with kanji).

Hiragana and katakana are both kana systems. With few exceptions, each mora in the Japanese language is represented by one character (or one digraph) in each system. This may be a vowel such as /a/ (hiragana ); a consonant followed by a vowel such as /ka/ (); or /N/ (), a nasal sonorant which, depending on the context and dialect, sounds either like English &quot;m&quot;, &quot;n&quot; or &quot;ng&quot; () when syllable-final or like the nasal vowels of French, Portuguese or Polish. Because the characters of the kana do not represent single consonants (except in the case of the aforementioned ん), the kana are referred to as syllabic symbols and not alphabetic letters.

Hiragana is used to write &quot;okurigana&quot; (kana suffixes following a kanji root, for example to inflect verbs and adjectives), various grammatical and function words including particles, and miscellaneous other native words for which there are no kanji or whose kanji form is obscure or too formal for the writing purpose. Words that do have common kanji renditions may also sometimes be written instead in hiragana, according to an individual author&#x27;s preference, for example to impart an informal feel. Hiragana is also used to write &quot;furigana&quot;, a reading aid that shows the pronunciation of kanji characters.

There are two main systems of ordering hiragana: the old-fashioned iroha ordering and the more prevalent gojūon ordering.

==Writing system==
After the 1900 script reform, which deemed hundreds of characters &quot;hentaigana&quot;, the hiragana syllabary consists of 48 base characters, of which two (ゐ and ゑ) are only used in some proper names:

* 5 singular vowels: あ /a/, い /i/, う /u/, え /e/, お /o/ (respectively pronounced , , , and )
* 42 consonant–vowel unions: for example き /ki/, て /te/, ほ /ho/, ゆ /ju/, わ /wa/ (respectively pronounced , , , and )
* 1 singular consonant (ん), romanized as &quot;n&quot;.

These are conceived as a 5×10 grid (&quot;gojūon&quot;, , &quot;Fifty Sounds&quot;), as illustrated in the adjacent table, read and so forth (but &quot;si&quot;→&quot;shi&quot;, &quot;ti&quot;→&quot;chi&quot;, &quot;tu&quot;→&quot;tsu&quot;, &quot;hu&quot;→&quot;fu&quot;, &quot;wi&quot;→&quot;i&quot;, &quot;we&quot;→&quot;e&quot;, &quot;wo&quot;→&quot;o&quot;). Of the 50 theoretically possible combinations, &quot;yi&quot;, &quot;ye&quot;, and &quot;wu&quot; are completely unused. On the &quot;w&quot; row, ゐ and ゑ, pronounced and respectively, are uncommon in modern Japanese, while を, pronounced , is common as a particle but otherwise rare. Strictly speaking, the singular consonant is considered to be outside the &quot;gojūon&quot;.

These basic characters can be modified in various ways. By adding a &quot;dakuten&quot; marker ( ゛), a voiceless consonant is turned into a voiced consonant: &quot;k&quot;→&quot;g&quot;, &quot;ts/s&quot;→&quot;z&quot;, &quot;t&quot;→&quot;d&quot;, &quot;h/f&quot;→&quot;b&quot; and &quot;ch&quot;/&quot;sh&quot;→&quot;j&quot; (also &quot;u&quot;→&quot;v(u)&quot;). For example, か (&quot;ka&quot;) becomes が (&quot;ga&quot;). Hiragana beginning with an &quot;h&quot; (or &quot;f&quot;) sound can also add a &quot;handakuten&quot; marker ( ゜) changing the &quot;h&quot; (&quot;f&quot;) to a &quot;p&quot;. For example, は (&quot;ha&quot;) becomes ぱ (&quot;pa&quot;).

A small version of the hiragana for &quot;ya&quot;, &quot;yu&quot;, or &quot;yo&quot; (ゃ, ゅ or ょ respectively) may be added to hiragana ending in &quot;i&quot;. This changes the &quot;i&quot; vowel sound to a glide (palatalization) to &quot;a&quot;, &quot;u&quot; or &quot;o&quot;. For example, き (&quot;ki&quot;) plus ゃ (small &quot;ya&quot;) becomes (&quot;kya&quot;). Addition of the small &quot;y&quot; kana is called &quot;yōon&quot;.

A small &quot;tsu&quot; っ, called a &quot;sokuon&quot;, indicates that the following consonant is geminated (doubled). In Japanese this is an important distinction in pronunciation; for example, compare , &quot;saka&quot;, &quot;hill&quot; with , &quot;sakka&quot;, &quot;author&quot;. However, it cannot be used to double an &quot;n&quot; – for this purpose, the singular &quot;n&quot; (ん) is added in front of the syllable, as in みんな (&quot;minna&quot;, &quot;all&quot;). The &quot;sokuon&quot; also sometimes appears at the end of utterances, where it denotes a glottal stop, as in (, &quot;Ouch!&quot;).

Two hiragana have pronunciations that depend on the context:
* は is pronounced when used as a particle (otherwise, ).
* へ is pronounced when used as a particle (otherwise, ).

Hiragana usually spells long vowels with the addition of a second vowel kana; for example, おかあさん (&quot;o-ka-a-sa-n&quot;, &quot;mother&quot;). The &quot;chōonpu&quot; (long vowel mark) (ー) used in katakana is rarely used with hiragana, for example in the word , &quot;rāmen&quot;, but this usage is considered non-standard in Japanese. However, the Okinawan language uses chōonpu with hiragana. In informal writing, small versions of the five vowel kana are sometimes used to represent trailing off sounds (, &quot;haa&quot;, , &quot;nee&quot;). Plain (clear) and voiced iteration marks are written in hiragana as ゝ and ゞ, respectively. These marks are rarely used nowadays.

==Table of hiragana==
The following table shows the complete hiragana together with the modified Hepburn romanization and IPA transcription, arranged in four categories, each of them displayed in the &quot;gojūon&quot; order. Those whose romanization are in bold do not use the initial consonant for that row. For all syllables besides ん, the pronunciation indicated is for word-initial syllables; for mid-word pronunciations see below.



=== Spelling–phonology correspondence ===
In the middle of words, the &quot;g&quot; sound (normally ) may turn into a velar nasal or velar fricative . For example, かぎ (&quot;kagi&quot;, key) is often pronounced . However, じゅうご (&quot;jūgo&quot;, fifteen) is pronounced as if it was &quot;jū&quot; and &quot;go&quot; stacked end to end: .

In many accents, the &quot;j&quot; and &quot;z&quot; sounds are pronounced as affricates ( and , respectively) at the beginning of utterances and fricatives in the middle of words. For example, &quot;sūji&quot; &#x27;number&#x27;, &quot;zasshi&quot; &#x27;magazine&#x27;.

The singular &quot;n&quot; is pronounced before &quot;m&quot;, &quot;b&quot; and &quot;p&quot;, before &quot;t&quot;, &quot;ch&quot;, &quot;ts&quot;, &quot;n&quot;, &quot;r&quot;, &quot;z&quot;, &quot;j&quot; and &quot;d&quot;, before &quot;k&quot; and &quot;g&quot;, at the end of utterances, and some kind of high nasal vowel before vowels, palatal approximants (&quot;y&quot;), and fricative consonants (&quot;s&quot;, &quot;sh&quot;, &quot;h&quot;, &quot;f&quot; and &quot;w&quot;).

In kanji readings, the diphthongs &quot;ou&quot; and &quot;ei&quot; are usually pronounced (long o) and (long e) respectively. For example, (lit. &quot;toukyou&quot;) is pronounced &#x27;Tokyo&#x27;, and &quot;sensei&quot; is &#x27;teacher&#x27;. However, &quot;tou&quot; is pronounced &#x27;to inquire&#x27;, because the &quot;o&quot; and &quot;u&quot; are considered distinct, &quot;u&quot; being the verb ending in the dictionary form. Similarly, &quot;shite iru&quot; is pronounced , present progressive form of (&quot;suru&quot;, &quot;to do&quot;).

In archaic forms of Japanese, there existed the &quot;kwa&quot; ( ) and &quot;gwa&quot; ( ) digraphs. In modern Japanese, these phonemes have been phased out of usage.

For a more thorough discussion on the sounds of Japanese, please refer to Japanese phonology.

==Spelling rules==
With a few exceptions, such as for the three particles は (pronounced instead of ), へ (pronounced instead of ) and (written を instead of お), Japanese when written in kana is phonemically orthographic, i.e. there is a one-to-one correspondence between kana characters and sounds, leaving only words&#x27; pitch accent unrepresented. This has not always been the case: a previous system of spelling, now referred to as historical kana usage, differed substantially from pronunciation; the three above-mentioned exceptions in modern usage are the legacy of that system.

There are two hiragana pronounced &quot;ji&quot; (じ and ぢ) and two hiragana pronounced &quot;zu&quot; (ず and づ), but to distinguish them, particularly when typing Japanese, sometimes ぢ is written as &quot;di&quot; and づ is written as &quot;du&quot;. These pairs are not interchangeable. Usually, &quot;ji&quot; is written as じ and &quot;zu&quot; is written as ず. There are some exceptions. If the first two syllables of a word consist of one syllable without a &quot;dakuten&quot; and the same syllable with a &quot;dakuten&quot;, the same hiragana is used to write the sounds. For example, &quot;chijimeru&quot; (&#x27;to boil down&#x27; or &#x27;to shrink&#x27;) is spelled ちぢめる and &quot;tsuzuku&quot; (&#x27;to continue&#x27;) is .

For compound words where the dakuten reflects &quot;rendaku&quot; voicing, the original hiragana is used. For example, &quot;chi&quot; ( &#x27;blood&#x27;) is spelled ち in plain hiragana. When &quot;hana&quot; (&#x27;nose&#x27;) and &quot;chi&quot; (&#x27;blood&#x27;) combine to make &quot;hanaji&quot; ( &#x27;nose bleed&#x27;), the sound of changes from &quot;chi&quot; to &quot;ji&quot;. So &quot;hanaji&quot; is spelled . Similarly, &quot;tsukau&quot; (; &#x27;to use&#x27;) is spelled in hiragana, so &quot;kanazukai&quot; (; &#x27;kana use&#x27;, or &#x27;kana orthography&#x27;) is spelled in hiragana. However, there are cases where ぢ and づ are not used, such as the word for &#x27;lightning&#x27;, &quot;inazuma&quot; (). The first component, , meaning &#x27;rice plant&#x27;, is written いな (&quot;ina&quot;). The second component, (etymologically ), meaning &#x27;spouse&#x27;, is pronounced (&quot;tsuma&quot;) when standalone or often as づま (zuma) when following another syllable, such in (&quot;hitozuma&quot;, &#x27;married woman&#x27;). Even though these components of are etymologically linked to &#x27;lightning&#x27;, it is generally arduous for a contemporary speaker to consciously perceive &quot;inazuma&quot; as separable into two discrete words. Thus, the default spelling is used instead of . Other examples include &quot;kizuna&quot; () and &quot;sakazuki&quot; (). Although these rules were officially established by a Cabinet Notice in 1986 revising the modern kana usage, they have sometimes faced criticism due to their perceived arbitrariness.

Officially, ぢ and づ do not occur word-initially pursuant to modern spelling rules. There were words such as &quot;jiban&quot; &#x27;ground&#x27; in the historical kana usage, but they were unified under じ in the modern kana usage in 1946, so today it is spelled exclusively . However, &quot;zura&quot; &#x27;wig&#x27; (from &quot;katsura&quot;) and &quot;zuke&quot; (a sushi term for lean tuna soaked in soy sauce) are examples of word-initial づ today.

No standard Japanese words begin with the kana ん (&quot;n&quot;). This is the basis of the word game shiritori. ん &quot;n&quot; is normally treated as its own syllable and is separate from the other &quot;n&quot;-based kana (&quot;na&quot;, &quot;ni&quot; etc.).

ん is sometimes directly followed by a vowel (&quot;a&quot;, &quot;i&quot;, &quot;u&quot;, &quot;e&quot; or &quot;o&quot;) or a palatal approximant (&quot;ya&quot;, &quot;yu&quot; or &quot;yo&quot;). These are clearly distinct from the &quot;na&quot;, &quot;ni&quot; etc. syllables, and there are minimal pairs such as &quot;kin&#x27;en&quot; &#x27;smoking forbidden&#x27;, &quot;kinen&quot; &#x27;commemoration&#x27;, &quot;kinnen&quot; &#x27;recent years&#x27;. In Hepburn romanization, they are distinguished with an apostrophe, but not all romanization methods make the distinction. For example, past prime minister Junichiro Koizumi&#x27;s first name is actually &quot;Jun&#x27;ichirō&quot; pronounced 

There are a few hiragana that are rarely used. Outside of Okinawan orthography, ゐ &quot;wi&quot; and ゑ &quot;we&quot; are only used in some proper names. 𛀁 &quot;e&quot; was an alternate version of え &quot;e&quot; before spelling reform, and was briefly reused for &quot;ye&quot; during initial spelling reforms, but is now completely obsolete. ゔ &quot;vu&quot; is a modern addition used to represent the /v/ sound in foreign languages such as English, but since Japanese from a phonological standpoint does not have a /v/ sound, it is pronounced as /b/ and mostly serves as a more accurate indicator of a word&#x27;s pronunciation in its original language. However, it is rarely seen because loanwords and transliterated words are usually written in katakana, where the corresponding character would be written as ヴ. The digraphs , , for &quot;ja&quot;/&quot;ju&quot;/&quot;jo&quot; are theoretically possible in rendaku, but are nearly never used in modern kana usage; for example, the word , &quot;meoto-jawan&quot; (couple bowls), spelled , where alone is spelled (&quot;chawan&quot;).

The &quot;myu&quot; kana is extremely rare in originally Japanese words; linguist Haruhiko Kindaichi raises the example of the Japanese family name Omamyūda and claims it is the only occurrence amongst pure Japanese words. Its katakana counterpart is used in many loanwords, however.

== Obsolete kana ==
=== Hentaigana ===
=== Polysyllabic kana ===
=== &quot;e&quot; and &quot;i&quot; ===
On the row beginning with わ /wa/, the hiragana ゐ /wi/ and ゑ /we/ are both quasi-obsolete, only used in some names. They are usually respectively pronounced [i] and [e]. In modified Hepburn romanization, they are generally written &quot;i&quot; and &quot;e&quot;.

=== &quot;yi&quot;, &quot;ye&quot; and &quot;wu&quot; ===
==== &quot;yi&quot; ====

It has not been demonstrated whether the mora /ji/ existed in old Japanese. Though &quot;ye&quot; did appear in some textbooks during the Meiji period along with another kana for &quot;yi&quot; in the form of cursive 以. Today it is considered a Hentaigana by scholars and is encoded in Unicode 10 () This kana could have a colloquial use, to convert the combo yui (ゆい) into yii (い), due to other Japanese words having a similar change.

==== &quot;ye&quot; ====

An early, now obsolete, hiragana-esque form of &quot;ye&quot; may have existed (𛀁 ) in pre-Classical Japanese (prior to the advent of kana), but is generally represented for purposes of reconstruction by the kanji 江, and its hiragana form is not present in any known orthography. In modern orthography, &quot;ye&quot; can also be written as いぇ (イェ in katakana).

While hiragana and katakana letters for &quot;ye&quot; were used for a short period after the advent of kana, the distinction between /ye/ and /e/ disappeared before glyphs could become established.

==== &quot;wu&quot; ====

It has not been demonstrated whether the mora /wu/ existed in old Japanese. However, hiragana also appeared in different Meiji-era textbooks (). Although there are several possible source kanji, it is likely to have been derived from a cursive form of the , although a related variant sometimes listed () is from a cursive form of . However, it was never commonly used. This character is included in Unicode 14 as HIRAGANA LETTER ARCHAIC WU (𛄟).

==History==

Hiragana developed from &quot;man&#x27;yōgana&quot;, Chinese characters used for their pronunciations, a practice that started in the 5th century. The oldest examples of Man&#x27;yōgana include the Inariyama Sword, an iron sword excavated at the Inariyama Kofun. This sword is thought to be made in the year (most commonly taken to be C.E. 471).
The forms of the hiragana originate from the cursive script style of Chinese calligraphy. The table to the right shows the derivation of hiragana from manyōgana via cursive script. The upper part shows the character in the regular script form, the center character in red shows the cursive script form of the character, and the bottom shows the equivalent hiragana. The cursive script forms are not strictly confined to those in the illustration.

When it was first developed, hiragana was not accepted by everyone. The educated or elites preferred to use only the kanji system. Historically, in Japan, the regular script (&quot;kaisho&quot;) form of the characters was used by men and called , &quot;men&#x27;s writing&quot;, while the cursive script (&quot;sōsho&quot;) form of the kanji was used by women. Hence hiragana first gained popularity among women, who were generally not allowed access to the same levels of education as men, thus hiragana was first widely used among court women in the writing of personal communications and literature. From this comes the alternative name of &quot;women&#x27;s writing&quot;. For example, &quot;The Tale of Genji&quot; and other early novels by female authors used hiragana extensively or exclusively. Even today, hiragana is felt to have a feminine quality.

Male authors came to write literature using hiragana. Hiragana was used for unofficial writing such as personal letters, while katakana and kanji were used for official documents. In modern times, the usage of hiragana has become mixed with katakana writing. Katakana is now relegated to special uses such as recently borrowed words (i.e., since the 19th century), names in transliteration, the names of animals, in telegrams, and for emphasis.

Originally, for all syllables there was more than one possible hiragana. In 1900, the system was simplified so each syllable had only one hiragana. The deprecated hiragana are now known as .

The pangram poem &quot;Iroha-uta&quot; (&quot;ABC song/poem&quot;), which dates to the 10th century, uses every hiragana once (except &quot;n&quot; ん, which was just a variant of む before the Muromachi era).

== Stroke order and direction ==
The following table shows the method for writing each hiragana character. The table is arranged in a traditional manner, beginning top right and reading columns down. The numbers and arrows indicate the stroke order and direction respectively.
== Unicode ==

Hiragana was added to the Unicode Standard in October, 1991 with the release of version 1.0.

The Unicode block for Hiragana is U+3040–U+309F:

The Unicode hiragana block contains precomposed characters for all hiragana in the modern set, including small vowels and yōon kana for compound syllables as well as the rare ゐ &quot;wi&quot; and ゑ &quot;we&quot;; the archaic 𛀁 &quot;ye&quot; is included in plane 1 at U+1B001 (see below). All combinations of hiragana with &quot;dakuten&quot; and &quot;handakuten&quot; used in modern Japanese are available as precomposed characters (including the rare ゔ &quot;vu&quot;), and can also be produced by using a base hiragana followed by the combining dakuten and handakuten characters (U+3099 and U+309A, respectively). This method is used to add the diacritics to kana that are not normally used with them, for example applying the dakuten to a pure vowel or the handakuten to a kana not in the h-group.

Characters U+3095 and U+3096 are small か (&quot;ka&quot;) and small け (&quot;ke&quot;), respectively. U+309F is a ligature of より (&quot;yori&quot;) occasionally used in vertical text. U+309B and U+309C are spacing (non-combining) equivalents to the combining dakuten and handakuten characters, respectively.

Historic and variant forms of Japanese kana characters were first added to the Unicode Standard in October, 2010 with the release of version 6.0, with significantly more added in 2017 as part of Unicode 10.

The Unicode block for Kana Supplement is U+1B000–U+1B0FF, and is immediately followed by the Kana Extended-A block (U+1B100–U+1B12F). These blocks include mainly hentaigana (historic or variant hiragana):


The Unicode block for Kana Extended-B is U+1AFF0–U+1AFFF:
The Unicode block for Small Kana Extension is U+1B130–U+1B16F:

In the following character sequences a kana from the /k/ row is modified by a &quot;handakuten&quot; combining mark to indicate that a syllable starts with an initial nasal, known as &quot;&quot;. As of Unicode , these character combinations are explicitly called out as Named Sequences:

==See also==
*Bopomofo (Zhùyīn fúhào, &quot;phonetic symbols&quot;), a phonetic system of 37 characters for writing Chinese developed in the 1900s and which is more common in Taiwan.
*Iteration mark explains the iteration marks used with hiragana.
*Japanese phonology explains Japanese pronunciation in detail.
*Japanese typographic symbols gives other non-kana, non-kanji symbols.
*Japanese writing system
*Katakana
*Nüshu, a syllabary writing system used by women in China&#x27;s Hunan province
*Shodō, Japanese calligraphy.

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===

* Yujiro Nakata, &quot;The Art of Japanese Calligraphy&quot;, , gives details of the development of &quot;onode&quot; and &quot;onnade&quot;.
=== Notes ===
== External links ==
* Hiragana unicode chart
* Hiragana table with strokes animations
* Practice Hiragana</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="5" end="13" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q182133" start="14" end="23" title="syllabary" label="syllabary"/>
<link wikidata="Q190502" start="37" end="60" title="Japanese writing system" label="Japanese writing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q82946" start="79" end="87" title="katakana" label="katakana"/>
<link wikidata="Q82772" start="111" end="116" title="kanji" label="kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q187659" start="236" end="240" title="kana" label="kana"/>
<link wikidata="Q187659" start="335" end="339" title="kana" label="kana"/>
<link wikidata="Q521164" start="375" end="379" title="mora (linguistics)" label="mora"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="387" end="404" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese language"/>
<link wikidata="Q51593" start="577" end="582" title="nasal stop" label="nasal"/>
<link wikidata="Q31627" start="583" end="591" title="sonorant" label="sonorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321760" start="746" end="757" title="nasal vowel" label="nasal vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="762" end="768" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="770" end="780" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="784" end="790" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335954" start="1014" end="1023" title="okurigana" label="okurigana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480213" start="1164" end="1173" title="Japanese particles" label="particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q82772" start="1235" end="1240" title="kanji" label="kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q504694" start="1535" end="1543" title="furigana" label="furigana"/>
<link wikidata="Q184377" start="1580" end="1593" title="pronunciation" label="pronunciation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1646" end="1663" title="Kana#Collation" label="ordering hiragana"/>
<link wikidata="Q908402" start="1683" end="1688" title="iroha" label="iroha"/>
<link wikidata="Q240357" start="1721" end="1727" title="gojūon" label="gojūon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1768" end="1786" title="Japanese script reform#Pre-World War II reforms" label="1900 script reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q607460" start="1830" end="1840" title="hentaigana" label="hentaigana"/>
<link wikidata="Q40833" start="1917" end="1918" title="ゐ" label="ゐ"/>
<link wikidata="Q40830" start="1923" end="1924" title="ゑ" label="ゑ"/>
<link wikidata="Q40454" start="1984" end="1985" title="あ" label="あ"/>
<link wikidata="Q40462" start="1991" end="1992" title="い" label="い"/>
<link wikidata="Q40472" start="1998" end="1999" title="う" label="う"/>
<link wikidata="Q40481" start="2005" end="2006" title="え" label="え"/>
<link wikidata="Q40488" start="2012" end="2013" title="お" label="お"/>
<link wikidata="Q40548" start="2096" end="2097" title="き" label="き"/>
<link wikidata="Q40648" start="2104" end="2105" title="て" label="て"/>
<link wikidata="Q40725" start="2112" end="2113" title="ほ" label="ほ"/>
<link wikidata="Q40778" start="2120" end="2121" title="ゆ" label="ゆ"/>
<link wikidata="Q40809" start="2128" end="2129" title="わ" label="わ"/>
<link wikidata="Q40818" start="2196" end="2197" title="ん" label="ん"/>
<link wikidata="Q240357" start="2271" end="2277" title="gojūon" label="gojūon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40833" start="2740" end="2741" title="ゐ" label="ゐ"/>
<link wikidata="Q40830" start="2746" end="2747" title="ゑ" label="ゑ"/>
<link wikidata="Q40812" start="2817" end="2818" title="を" label="を"/>
<link wikidata="Q184943" start="2848" end="2856" title="grammatical particle" label="particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q48327414" start="3046" end="3053" title="dakuten" label="dakuten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148563" start="3075" end="3094" title="Obstruent" label="voiceless consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q31627" start="3112" end="3128" title="sonorant" label="voiced consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q40472" start="3304" end="3317" title="U (kana)" label="&amp;quot;u&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q48327414" start="3484" end="3494" title="handakuten" label="handakuten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808790" start="3853" end="3867" title="Palatalization (phonetics)" label="palatalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318742" start="4065" end="4069" title="yōon" label="yōon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199708" start="4120" end="4126" title="sokuon" label="sokuon"/>
<link wikidata="Q852201" start="4176" end="4185" title="geminated" label="geminated"/>
<link wikidata="Q178034" start="4643" end="4655" title="glottal stop" label="glottal stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q40694" start="4750" end="4751" title="は" label="は"/>
<link wikidata="Q40714" start="4807" end="4808" title="へ" label="へ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110362" start="4887" end="4897" title="long vowel" label="long vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091164" start="5017" end="5024" title="chōonpu" label="chōonpu"/>
<link wikidata="Q234646" start="5132" end="5137" title="rāmen" label="rāmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34233" start="5213" end="5230" title="Okinawan language" label="Okinawan language"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5435" end="5450" title="Iteration mark#Japanese" label="iteration marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q667558" start="5628" end="5657" title="Hepburn romanization" label="modified Hepburn romanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q21204" start="5662" end="5665" title="International Phonetic Alphabet" label="IPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q463515" start="6098" end="6109" title="velar nasal" label="velar nasal"/>
<link wikidata="Q654670" start="6113" end="6128" title="voiced velar fricative" label="velar fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q17582" start="6397" end="6406" title="affricate" label="affricate"/>
<link wikidata="Q815839" start="6903" end="6907" title="Close vowel" label="high"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321760" start="6908" end="6919" title="nasal vowel" label="nasal vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q31427" start="6977" end="6996" title="fricative consonant" label="fricative consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986628" start="7879" end="7897" title="Japanese phonology" label="Japanese phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q184943" start="7964" end="7973" title="grammatical particles" label="particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033526" start="8092" end="8117" title="Phonemic principle" label="phonemically orthographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5952542" start="8222" end="8234" title="Japanese pitch accent" label="pitch accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142552" start="8335" end="8356" title="historical kana usage" label="historical kana usage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570277" start="8642" end="8657" title="Wāpuro rōmaji" label="typing Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q48327414" start="8953" end="8960" title="dakuten" label="dakuten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192464" start="9275" end="9282" title="rendaku" label="rendaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572881" start="10705" end="10722" title="modern kana usage" label="modern kana usage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142552" start="10951" end="10972" title="historical kana usage" label="historical kana usage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572881" start="11011" end="11028" title="modern kana usage" label="modern kana usage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374115" start="11354" end="11363" title="shiritori" label="shiritori"/>
<link wikidata="Q815955" start="11813" end="11825" title="minimal pair" label="minimal pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q130852" start="12136" end="12153" title="Junichiro Koizumi" label="Junichiro Koizumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q40833" start="12305" end="12306" title="ゐ" label="ゐ"/>
<link wikidata="Q40830" start="12326" end="12327" title="ゑ" label="ゑ"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="12918" end="12926" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q134550" start="12932" end="12946" title="Transliteration" label="transliterated"/>
<link wikidata="Q82946" start="12976" end="12984" title="katakana" label="katakana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192464" start="13139" end="13146" title="rendaku" label="rendaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572881" start="13177" end="13194" title="modern kana usage" label="modern kana usage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5675629" start="13398" end="13416" title="Haruhiko Kindaichi" label="Haruhiko Kindaichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q82946" start="13543" end="13551" title="katakana" label="katakana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="14192" end="14204" title="Meiji period" label="Meiji period"/>
<link wikidata="Q607460" start="14299" end="14309" title="Hentaigana" label="Hentaigana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172694" start="14597" end="14598" title="𛀁" label="𛀁"/>
<link wikidata="Q187659" start="14651" end="14655" title="kana" label="kana"/>
<link wikidata="Q82946" start="14868" end="14876" title="katakana" label="katakana"/>
<link wikidata="Q862803" start="15596" end="15611" title="man&amp;#x27;yōgana" label="man&amp;#x27;yōgana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="15619" end="15626" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q856395" start="15764" end="15779" title="Inariyama Sword" label="Inariyama Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q607543" start="15957" end="15971" title="cursive script (East Asia)" label="cursive script"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498317" start="15981" end="16000" title="Chinese calligraphy" label="Chinese calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196029" start="16135" end="16149" title="regular script" label="regular script"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269" start="17056" end="17073" title="The Tale of Genji" label="The Tale of Genji"/>
<link wikidata="Q82946" start="17462" end="17470" title="katakana" label="katakana"/>
<link wikidata="Q134550" start="17595" end="17610" title="transliteration" label="transliteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q188546" start="17863" end="17870" title="pangram" label="pangram"/>
<link wikidata="Q908402" start="17882" end="17887" title="Iroha" label="Iroha"/>
<link wikidata="Q334845" start="18051" end="18064" title="Muromachi era" label="Muromachi era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991980" start="18304" end="18316" title="stroke order" label="stroke order"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="18386" end="18393" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18762" end="18769" title="plane (Unicode)#Supplementary Multilingual Plane" label="plane 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977001" start="19435" end="19437" title="Yori (kana)" label="より"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="19697" end="19704" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q607460" start="19988" end="19998" title="hentaigana" label="hentaigana"/>
<link wikidata="Q198269" start="20458" end="20466" title="Bopomofo" label="Bopomofo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332298" start="20628" end="20642" title="Iteration mark" label="Iteration mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986628" start="20693" end="20711" title="Japanese phonology" label="Japanese phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507493" start="20756" end="20784" title="Japanese typographic symbols" label="Japanese typographic symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q190502" start="20827" end="20850" title="Japanese writing system" label="Japanese writing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q82946" start="20852" end="20860" title="Katakana" label="Katakana"/>
<link wikidata="Q56436" start="20862" end="20867" title="Nüshu" label="Nüshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q45761" start="20926" end="20931" title="Hunan" label="Hunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q660086" start="20942" end="20947" title="Shodō" label="Shodō"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13805" wikidata="Q130875" url="?curid=13805" title="Hohenstaufen">
<text>The Hohenstaufen dynasty (, , ), also known as the Staufer, was a noble family of unclear origin that rose to rule the Duchy of Swabia from 1079, and to royal rule in the Holy Roman Empire during the Middle Ages from 1138 until 1254. The dynasty&#x27;s most prominent rulers – Frederick I (1155), Henry VI (1191) and Frederick II (1220) – ascended the imperial throne and also reigned over Italy and Burgundy. The non-contemporary name of &#x27;Hohenstaufen&#x27; is derived from the family&#x27;s Hohenstaufen Castle on Hohenstaufen mountain at the northern fringes of the Swabian Jura, near the town of Göppingen. Under Hohenstaufen rule, the Holy Roman Empire reached its greatest territorial extent from 1155 to 1268.

==Name==

The name Hohenstaufen was first used in the 14th century to distinguish the &#x27;high&#x27; (&quot;hohen&quot;) conical hill named Staufen in the Swabian Jura (in the district of Göppingen) from the village of the same name in the valley below. The new name was applied to the hill castle of Staufen by historians only in the 19th century to distinguish it from other castles of the same name. The name of the dynasty followed suit, but in recent decades, the trend in German historiography has been to prefer the name &#x27;Staufer&#x27;, which is closer to contemporary usage.

The name &#x27;Staufen&#x27; itself derives from &quot;Stauf&quot; (OHG &quot;stouf&quot;, akin to Early Modern English ), meaning &#x27;chalice&#x27;. This term was commonly applied to conical hills in Swabia during the Middle Ages. It is a contemporary term for both the hill and the castle, although its spelling in the Latin documents of the time varies considerably: , etc. The castle was built or at least acquired by Duke Frederick I of Swabia in the latter half of the 11th century.

Members of the family occasionally used the toponymic surname &quot;de Stauf&quot; or variants thereof. Only in the 13th century would the name come to be applied to the family as a whole. Around 1215, a chronicler referred to the &quot;emperors of Stauf&quot;. In 1247, the Emperor Frederick II himself referred to his family as the &quot;domus Stoffensis&quot; (Staufer house), but this was an isolated instance. Otto of Freising (d. 1158) associated the Staufer with the town of Waiblingen, and around 1230, Burchard of Ursberg referred to the Staufer as of the &quot;royal lineage of the Waiblingens&quot; (&quot;regia stirps Waiblingensium&quot;). The exact connection between the family and Waiblingen is not clear, but as a name for the family, it became very popular. The pro-imperial Ghibelline faction of the Italian civic rivalries of the 13th and 14th centuries derived its name from Waiblingen.

In Italian historiography, the Staufer are known as the &quot;Svevi&quot; (Swabians).

==Origins==
The origin remains unclear, however, Staufer counts are mentioned in a document of emperor Otto III in 987 as descendants of counts of the region of &quot;Riesgau&quot; near Nördlingen in the Duchy of Swabia, who were related to the Bavarian &quot;Sieghardinger&quot; family. A local count Frederick (d. about 1075) is mentioned as progenitor in a pedigree drawn up by Abbot Wibald of Stavelot at the behest of Emperor Frederick Barbarossa in 1153. He held the office of a Swabian count palatine; his son Frederick of Büren (–1053) married Hildegard of Egisheim-Dagsburg (d. 1094/95), a niece of Pope Leo IX. Their son Frederick I was appointed Duke of Swabia at Hohenstaufen Castle by the Salian king Henry IV of Germany in 1079.

At the same time, Duke Frederick I was engaged to the king&#x27;s approximately seventeen-year-old daughter, Agnes. Nothing is known about Frederick&#x27;s life before this event, but he proved to be an imperial ally throughout Henry&#x27;s struggles against other Swabian lords, namely Rudolf of Rheinfelden, Frederick&#x27;s predecessor, and the Zähringen and Welf lords. Frederick&#x27;s brother Otto was elevated to the Strasbourg bishopric in 1082.

Upon Frederick&#x27;s death, he was succeeded by his son, Duke Frederick II, in 1105. Frederick II remained a close ally of the Salians, he and his younger brother Conrad were named the king&#x27;s representatives in Germany when the king was in Italy. Around 1120, Frederick II married Judith of Bavaria from the rival House of Welf.

==Ruling in Germany==

When the last male member of the Salian dynasty, Emperor Henry V, died without heirs in 1125, a controversy arose about the succession. Duke Frederick II and Conrad, the two current male Staufers, by their mother Agnes, were grandsons of late Emperor Henry IV and nephews of Henry V. Frederick attempted to succeed to the throne of the Holy Roman Emperor (formally known as the King of the Romans) through a customary election, but lost to the Saxon duke Lothair of Supplinburg. A civil war between Frederick&#x27;s dynasty and Lothair&#x27;s ended with Frederick&#x27;s submission in 1134. After Lothair&#x27;s death in 1137, Frederick&#x27;s brother Conrad was elected King as Conrad III.

Because the Welf duke Henry the Proud, son-in-law and heir of Lothair and the most powerful prince in Germany, who had been passed over in the election, refused to acknowledge the new king, Conrad III deprived him of all his territories, giving the Duchy of Saxony to Albert the Bear and that of Bavaria to Leopold IV, Margrave of Austria. In 1147, Conrad heard Bernard of Clairvaux preach the Second Crusade at Speyer, and he agreed to join King Louis VII of France in a great expedition to the Holy Land which failed.

Conrad&#x27;s brother Duke Frederick II died in 1147, and was succeeded in Swabia by his son, Duke Frederick III. When King Conrad III died without adult heir in 1152, Frederick also succeeded him, taking both German royal and Imperial titles.

===Frederick Barbarossa===
Frederick I (Reign 2 January 1155 – 10 June 1190), known as Frederick Barbarossa because of his red beard, struggled throughout his reign to restore the power and prestige of the German monarchy against the dukes, whose power had grown both before and after the Investiture Controversy under his Salian predecessors. As royal access to the resources of the church in Germany was much reduced, Frederick was forced to go to Italy to find the finances needed to restore the king&#x27;s power in Germany. He was soon crowned emperor in Italy, but decades of warfare on the peninsula yielded scant results. The Papacy and the prosperous city-states of the Lombard League in northern Italy were traditional enemies, but the fear of Imperial domination caused them to join ranks to fight Frederick. Under the skilled leadership of Pope Alexander III, the alliance suffered many defeats but ultimately was able to deny the emperor a complete victory in Italy. Frederick returned to Germany. He had vanquished one notable opponent, his Welf cousin, Duke Henry the Lion of Saxony and Bavaria in 1180, but his hopes of restoring the power and prestige of the monarchy seemed unlikely to be met by the end of his life.

During Frederick&#x27;s long stays in Italy, the German princes became stronger and began a successful colonization of Slavic lands. Offers of reduced taxes and manorial duties enticed many Germans to settle in the east in the course of the &quot;Ostsiedlung&quot;. In 1163 Frederick waged a successful campaign against the Kingdom of Poland in order to re-install the Silesian dukes of the Piast dynasty. With the German colonization, the Empire increased in size and came to include the Duchy of Pomerania. A quickening economic life in Germany increased the number of towns and Imperial cities, and gave them greater importance. It was also during this period that castles and courts replaced monasteries as centers of culture. Growing out of this courtly culture, Middle High German literature reached its peak in lyrical love poetry, the Minnesang, and in narrative epic poems such as &quot;Tristan&quot;, &quot;Parzival&quot;, and the &quot;Nibelungenlied&quot;.

===Henry VI===
Frederick died in 1190 while on the Third Crusade and was succeeded by his son, Henry VI. Elected king even before his father&#x27;s death, Henry went to Rome to be crowned emperor. He married Princess Constance of Sicily, and deaths in his wife&#x27;s family gave him claim of succession and possession of the Kingdom of Sicily in 1189 and 1194 respectively, a source of vast wealth. Henry failed to make royal and Imperial succession hereditary, but in 1196 he succeeded in gaining a pledge that his infant son Frederick would receive the German crown. Faced with difficulties in Italy and confident that he would realize his wishes in Germany at a later date, Henry returned to the south, where it appeared he might unify the peninsula under the Hohenstaufen name. After a series of military victories, however, he fell ill and died of natural causes in Sicily in 1197. His underage son Frederick could only succeed him in Sicily and Malta, while in the Empire the struggle between the House of Staufen and the House of Welf erupted once again.

===Philip of Swabia===
Because the election of a three-year-old boy to be German king appeared likely to make orderly rule difficult, the boy&#x27;s uncle, Duke Philip of Swabia, brother of late Henry VI, was designated to serve in his place. Other factions however favoured a Welf candidate. In 1198, two rival kings were chosen: the Hohenstaufen Philip of Swabia and the son of the deprived Duke Henry the Lion, the Welf Otto IV. A long civil war began; Philip was about to win when he was murdered by the Bavarian count palatine Otto VIII of Wittelsbach in 1208. Pope Innocent III initially had supported the Welfs, but when Otto, now sole elected monarch, moved to appropriate Sicily, Innocent changed sides and accepted young Frederick II and his ally, King Philip II of France, who defeated Otto at the 1214 Battle of Bouvines. Frederick had returned to Germany in 1212 from Sicily, where he had grown up, and was elected king in 1215. When Otto died in 1218, Frederick became the undisputed ruler, and in 1220 was crowned Holy Roman Emperor.

Philip changed the coat of arms from a black lion on a gold shield to three leopards, probably derived from the arms of his Welf rival Otto IV.

==Ruling in Italy==
The conflict between the Staufer dynasty and the Welf had irrevocably weakened the Imperial authority and the Norman kingdom of Sicily became the base for Staufer rule.

===Frederick II===
Emperor Frederick II was the most brilliant and extraordinary of the Hohenstaufen but he spent little time in Germany. His main concerns lay in Italy and the Kingdom of Sicily, where he ruled as an absolute monarch supported by a sophisticated administrative apparatus. The institutions of Sicily and Italy seemed to be better political laboratories, more conducive to Frederick’s remarkable brand of innovation and absolutist tendencies. He founded the University of Naples in 1224 to train future state officials and reigned over Germany primarily through the allocation of royal prerogatives, leaving the sovereign authority and imperial estates to the ecclesiastical and secular princes. In 1232, Henry (VII), King of Germany and Frederick’s eldest son, was forced by the German princes to promulgate the &quot;Statutum in favorem principum&quot; (&quot;statute in favor of princes&quot;). Frederick II, embittered but aiming to promote cohesion in Germany in preparation for his campaigns in northern Italy, pragmatically agreed to Henry’s confirmation of the charter. It was a charter of liberties for the leading German princes at the expense of the lesser nobility and the entirety of the commoners. The princes gained whole power of jurisdiction, and the power to strike their own coins. The emperor lost his right to establish new cities, castles and mints over their territories. The &quot;Statutum&quot; was more a confirmation of political realities which had existed for generations in Germany than a wholesale denuding of royal power and it did not prevent imperial officials from enforcing Frederick’s prerogatives. The &quot;Statutum&quot; affirmed a division of labor between the emperor and the princes and laid much groundwork for the development of particularism and, perhaps even federalism in Germany. Even so, from 1232 the vassals of the emperor had a veto over imperial legislative decisions and any new law established by the emperor had to be approved by the princes. These provisions not withstanding, royal power in Germany remained strong under Frederick. 

By the 1240s the crown was almost as rich in fiscal resources, towns, castles, enfeoffed retinues, monasteries, ecclesiastical advocacies, manors, tolls, and all other rights, revenues, and jurisdictions as it had ever been at any time since the death of Henry VI. It is unlikely that a particularly &quot;strong ruler&quot; such as Frederick II would have even pragmatically agreed to legislation that was concessionary rather than cooperative, neither would the princes have insisted on such. Frederick II used the political loyalty and practical jurisdictions of the German aristocracy to support his kingly duty of imposing peace, order, and justice upon the German realm. This is shown clearly in the imperial Landfried issued at Mainz in 1235, which explicitly enjoined the princes as loyal vassals to exercise their own jurisdictions in their own localities. The jurisdictional autarky of the German princes was favoured by the crown itself in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries in the interests of order and local peace. The inevitable result was the territorial particularism of churchmen, lay princes, and interstitial cities. However, Frederick II was a ruler of vast territories and &quot;could not be everywhere at once&quot;. The transference of jurisdiction was a practical solution to secure the further support of the German princes.

By the 1226 Golden Bull of Rimini, Frederick had assigned the military order of the Teutonic Knights to complete the conquest and conversion of the Prussian lands. A reconciliation with the Welfs took place in 1235, whereby Otto the Child, grandson of the late Saxon duke Henry the Lion, was named Duke of Brunswick and Lüneburg. The power struggle with the popes continued and resulted in Frederick&#x27;s excommunication in 1227. In 1239, Pope Gregory IX excommunicated Frederick again, and in 1245 he was condemned as a heretic by a church council. Although Frederick II was perhaps one of the most energetic, imaginative, and capable rulers of the entire Middle Ages, he seemed to be less concerned with drawing the disparate forces in Germany together. Frederick was pragmatic enough to realize that for all his ability and power, his time and focus could only be fully concentrated either north or south of the Alps, where the bulk of his resources lay.

Frederick II’s most profound legal legacy remains the Constitutions of Melfi promulgated in 1231 in the Kingdom of Sicily. The sophistication of the Constitutions or the &quot;Liber Augustalis&quot; set Frederick as perhaps the supreme lawgiver of the Middle Ages. The Constitutions drew upon decades of Siculo-Norman governmental tradition stretching back to his maternal grandfather, Roger II of Sicily. Almost every aspect in Frederick’s tightly-governed kingdom was regulated, from a rigorously centralized judiciary and bureaucracy, to commerce, coinage, financial policy, weights and measures, legal equality for all citizens, protections for women, and even provisions for the environment and public health. Per the Constitutions, Frederick II was &quot;lex animata&quot; and ruled as an absolute monarch. The Constitutions have been regarded as perhaps the &quot;birth certificate&quot; of the modern continental European state.

From 1240, Frederick II was determined to push through far-reaching reforms to establish the Sicilian kingdom and Imperial Italy as a unified state bound by a centralized administration. The new unified administration was taken over directly by the emperor and his highly trained Sicilian officials whose jurisdiction now ranged across all of Italy. For the rest of Frederick’s reign, there was a continuous movement toward the extension and perfection of this new unified administrative system, with the emperor himself as the driving force. Despite his mighty efforts however, Frederick’s unified Italian state proved ephemeral after his death. The vicars and captains-general provided the prototype for the great signori who dominated Italy in later generations, each a petty sovereign in Frederick’s image—some even continued to claim the title of imperial vicar.

By the time of Frederick&#x27;s death in 1250, the crown in Germany was still formidable and Conrad IV, Frederick’s eldest surviving legitimate son and heir, enjoyed a strong position. However after Conrad’s death in 1254, The Great Interregnum followed which saw several rival claimants elected as King of the Romans in Germany. None of these claimants were able to achieve any position of authority much less the power and imperial grandeur of the Hohenstaufen. The German princes vied for individual advantage and managed to strip many powers away from the diminished monarchy. Rather than establish sovereign states however, many nobles tended to look after their families. Their many male heirs created more and smaller estates, and from a largely free class of officials previously formed, many of these assumed or acquired hereditary rights to administrative and legal offices. These trends compounded political fragmentation within Germany. The period was ended in 1273 with the election of Rudolph of Habsburg, a godson of Frederick.

===End of the Staufer dynasty ===
Conrad IV was succeeded as duke of Swabia by his only son, two-year-old Conradin. By this time, the office of duke of Swabia had been fully subsumed into the office of the king, and without royal authority had become meaningless. In 1261, attempts to elect young Conradin king were unsuccessful. He also had to defend Sicily against an invasion, sponsored by Pope Urban IV (Jacques Pantaléon) and Pope Clement IV (Guy Folques), by Charles of Anjou, a brother of the French king. Charles had been promised by the popes the Kingdom of Sicily, where he would replace the relatives of Frederick II. Charles had defeated Conradin&#x27;s uncle Manfred, King of Sicily, in the Battle of Benevento on 26 February 1266. The king himself, refusing to flee, rushed into the midst of his enemies and was killed. Conradin&#x27;s campaign to retake control ended with his defeat in 1268 at the Battle of Tagliacozzo, after which he was handed over to Charles, who had him publicly executed at Naples. With Conradin, the direct line of the Dukes of Swabia finally ceased to exist, though most of the later emperors were descended from the Staufer dynasty indirectly.

The last member of the dynasty was Manfred&#x27;s son, Henry [Enrico], who died in captivity at Castel dell&#x27;Ovo on 31 October 1318.

During the political decentralization of the late Staufer period, the population had grown from an estimated 8 million in 1200 to about 14 million in 1300, and the number of towns increased tenfold. The most heavily urbanized areas of Germany were in the south and the west. Towns often developed a degree of independence, but many were subordinate to local rulers if not immediate to the emperor. Colonization of the east also continued in the thirteenth century, most notably through the efforts of the Teutonic Knights. German merchants also began trading extensively on the Baltic.

==Legacy==

The Kyffhäuser Monument was erected to commemorate Frederick I, and was inaugurated in 1896.

On October 29, 1968, the 700th anniversary of the death of Konradin, a society known as &quot;Society for Staufer History&quot; (de) was founded in Göppingen.

The Castel del Monte, Apulia which was built during the 1240s by the Emperor Frederick II was designated as a World Heritage Site in 1996.

The German artist, Hans Kloss, painted his &quot;Staufer-Rundbild&quot; depicting in great detail the history of the House of Hohenstaufen, in Lorch Monastery.

From 2000 to 2018, the Committee of Staufer Friends (de) has built thirty-eight Staufer steles (de) in Germany, France, Italy, Austria, Czech Republic and the Netherlands.

==Members of the Hohenstaufen family==

===Holy Roman Emperors and Kings of the Romans===
*Conrad III, king 1138–1152
*Frederick Barbarossa, king 1152–1190, emperor after 1155
*Henry VI, king 1190–1197, emperor after 1191
*Philip of Swabia, king 1198–1208
*Frederick II, king 1208–1250, emperor after 1220
*Henry (VII), king 1220–1235 (under his father Emperor Frederick II)
*Conrad IV, king 1237–1254 (until 1250 under his father Emperor Frederick II)
The first ruling Hohenstaufen, Conrad III, like the last one, Conrad IV, was never crowned emperor. After a 20-year period (Great interregnum 1254–1273), the first Habsburg was elected king.

===Kings of Italy===
&quot;Note: The following kings are already listed above as German Kings&quot;
*Conrad III 1128–1135
*Frederick I 1154–1190 
*Henry VI 1191–1197

===Kings of Sicily===

&quot;Note: Some of the following kings are already listed above as German Kings&quot;
*Henry VI 1194–1197
*Frederick 1198–1250
**Henry (VII) 1212–1217 (nominal king under his father)
*Conrad 1250–1254
*Conradin 1254–1258/1268
*Manfred 1258–1266
*Constance II (Queen) 1282–1285

===Dukes of Swabia===
&quot;Note: Some of the following dukes are already listed above as German Kings&quot;
* Frederick I, Duke of Swabia (&quot;Friedrich&quot;) (r. 1079–1105)
* Frederick II, Duke of Swabia (r. 1105–1147)
* Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor (Frederick III of Swabia)(r. 1147–1152) &quot;King in 1152 and Holy Roman Emperor in 1155&quot;
* Frederick IV, Duke of Swabia (r. 1152–1167)
* Frederick V, Duke of Swabia (r. 1167–1170)
* Frederick VI, Duke of Swabia (r. 1170–1191)
* Conrad II, Duke of Swabia (r. 1191–1196)
* Philip of Swabia (r. 1196–1208) &quot;King in 1198&quot;
* Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor (r. 1212–1216) &quot;King in 1212 and Holy Roman Emperor in 1220&quot;
* Henry (VII) of Germany (r. 1216–1235), &quot;King 1220–1235&quot;
* Conrad IV (r. 1235–1254) &quot;King in 1237&quot;
* Conrad V (Conradin) (r. 1254–1268)

==Family tree of the House of Hohenstaufen==







 






|
|style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot;|
Notes:
&quot;For further detailed dynastic relationships, see also :Family tree of the German monarchs&quot;.

==See also==
* Dukes of Swabia family tree
* Guelphs and Ghibellines

==Notes==
==References==
* 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q130875" start="4" end="16" title="Hohenstaufen" label="Hohenstaufen"/>
<link wikidata="Q130875" start="51" end="58" title="Hohenstaufen" label="Staufer"/>
<link wikidata="Q693980" start="119" end="134" title="Duchy of Swabia" label="Duchy of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883514" start="153" end="163" title="List of German monarchs" label="royal rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="171" end="188" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="200" end="211" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q79789" start="277" end="288" title="Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick I"/>
<link wikidata="Q150953" start="297" end="305" title="Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="317" end="329" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="352" end="367" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="imperial throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q838931" start="390" end="395" title="Kingdom of Italy (Holy Roman Empire)" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271735" start="400" end="408" title="Kingdom of Burgundy-Arles" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q650474" start="498" end="517" title="Hohenstaufen Castle" label="Hohenstaufen Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q542505" start="521" end="542" title="Hohenstaufen (mountain)" label="Hohenstaufen mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q159589" start="574" end="586" title="Swabian Jura" label="Swabian Jura"/>
<link wikidata="Q4072" start="605" end="614" title="Göppingen" label="Göppingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671747" start="846" end="858" title="conical hill" label="conical hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q542505" start="865" end="872" title="Hohenstaufen (mountain)" label="Staufen"/>
<link wikidata="Q159589" start="880" end="892" title="Swabian Jura" label="Swabian Jura"/>
<link wikidata="Q8525" start="913" end="922" title="Göppingen (district)" label="Göppingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15710038" start="1011" end="1022" title="hill castle" label="hill castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q650474" start="1026" end="1033" title="Hohenstaufen Castle" label="Staufen"/>
<link wikidata="Q50675" start="1210" end="1224" title="historiography" label="historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="1382" end="1385" title="Old High German" label="OHG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472196" start="1413" end="1433" title="Early Modern English" label="Early Modern English"/>
<link wikidata="Q210723" start="1451" end="1458" title="chalice" label="chalice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="1637" end="1642" title="Medieval Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q281245" start="1743" end="1764" title="Frederick I of Swabia" label="Frederick I of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143070" start="1850" end="1867" title="toponymic surname" label="toponymic surname"/>
<link wikidata="Q435942" start="2221" end="2237" title="Otto of Freising" label="Otto of Freising"/>
<link wikidata="Q4140" start="2288" end="2298" title="Waiblingen" label="Waiblingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010365" start="2317" end="2336" title="Burchard of Ursberg" label="Burchard of Ursberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="2599" end="2609" title="Ghibelline" label="Ghibelline"/>
<link wikidata="Q151090" start="2905" end="2913" title="Otto III, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Otto III"/>
<link wikidata="Q489902" start="2988" end="2998" title="Nördlingen" label="Nördlingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q693980" start="3006" end="3021" title="Duchy of Swabia" label="Duchy of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47261" start="3047" end="3055" title="Duchy of Bavaria" label="Bavarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283964" start="3062" end="3075" title="Sieghardinger" label="Sieghardinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q257071" start="3189" end="3207" title="Wibald" label="Wibald of Stavelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q22932" start="3295" end="3309" title="count palatine" label="count palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q323896" start="3319" end="3337" title="Frederick of Büren" label="Frederick of Büren"/>
<link wikidata="Q272897" start="3367" end="3375" title="Eguisheim" label="Egisheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q322763" start="3376" end="3384" title="County of Dagsburg" label="Dagsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q58559" start="3410" end="3421" title="Pope Leo IX" label="Pope Leo IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q281245" start="3433" end="3444" title="Frederick I, Duke of Swabia" label="Frederick I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399669" start="3459" end="3473" title="Duke of Swabia" label="Duke of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161204" start="3504" end="3510" title="Salian dynasty" label="Salian"/>
<link wikidata="Q60094" start="3516" end="3535" title="Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry IV of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q242187" start="3655" end="3660" title="Agnes of Waiblingen" label="Agnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q438435" start="3833" end="3854" title="Rudolf of Rheinfelden" label="Rudolf of Rheinfelden"/>
<link wikidata="Q247331" start="3894" end="3903" title="House of Zähringen" label="Zähringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q156433" start="3908" end="3912" title="House of Welf" label="Welf"/>
<link wikidata="Q257553" start="3970" end="3990" title="bishop of Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg bishopric"/>
<link wikidata="Q552414" start="4064" end="4076" title="Frederick II, Duke of Swabia" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q157133" start="4165" end="4171" title="Conrad III of Germany" label="Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q156433" start="4321" end="4334" title="House of Welf" label="House of Welf"/>
<link wikidata="Q151707" start="4417" end="4424" title="Henry V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry V"/>
<link wikidata="Q552414" start="4501" end="4513" title="Frederick II, Duke of Swabia" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q157133" start="4518" end="4524" title="Conrad III of Germany" label="Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="4696" end="4714" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q782985" start="4738" end="4756" title="King of the Romans" label="King of the Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q164092" start="4804" end="4809" title="Duchy of Saxony" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q77189" start="4815" end="4837" title="Lothair III, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Lothair of Supplinburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q156433" start="5064" end="5073" title="House of Welf" label="Welf duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q366696" start="5074" end="5089" title="Henry the Proud" label="Henry the Proud"/>
<link wikidata="Q164092" start="5301" end="5316" title="Duchy of Saxony" label="Duchy of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q156041" start="5320" end="5335" title="Albert the Bear" label="Albert the Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q47261" start="5348" end="5355" title="Duchy of Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5359" end="5390" title="Leopold IV, Margrave of Austria" label="Leopold IV, Margrave of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q188411" start="5414" end="5434" title="Bernard of Clairvaux" label="Bernard of Clairvaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q51654" start="5446" end="5460" title="Second Crusade" label="Second Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829" start="5464" end="5470" title="Speyer" label="Speyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q134259" start="5499" end="5518" title="Louis VII of France" label="Louis VII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q51654" start="5530" end="5540" title="Second Crusade" label="expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="5548" end="5557" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q79789" start="5672" end="5685" title="Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick III"/>
<link wikidata="Q79789" start="5845" end="5856" title="Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick I"/>
<link wikidata="Q154764" start="6107" end="6130" title="Investiture Controversy" label="Investiture Controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q838931" start="6268" end="6273" title="Kingdom of Italy (medieval)" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="6452" end="6458" title="Papal States" label="Papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q623476" start="6497" end="6511" title="Lombard League" label="Lombard League"/>
<link wikidata="Q160116" start="6670" end="6688" title="Pope Alexander III" label="Pope Alexander III"/>
<link wikidata="Q105378" start="6891" end="6905" title="Henry the Lion" label="Henry the Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q47261" start="6920" end="6927" title="Duchy of Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q170346" start="7301" end="7312" title="Ostsiedlung" label="Ostsiedlung"/>
<link wikidata="Q577867" start="7378" end="7395" title="Kingdom of Poland (1025–1385)" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q568638" start="7423" end="7431" title="Duchy of Silesia" label="Silesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929625" start="7445" end="7450" title="Silesian Piasts" label="Piast"/>
<link wikidata="Q696640" start="7543" end="7561" title="Duchy of Pomerania" label="Duchy of Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q57318" start="7635" end="7650" title="Free imperial city" label="Imperial cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q837985" start="7822" end="7840" title="Middle High German" label="Middle High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q830634" start="7897" end="7906" title="Minnesang" label="Minnesang"/>
<link wikidata="Q954012" start="7950" end="7957" title="Tristan" label="Tristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247232" start="7971" end="7979" title="Parzival" label="Parzival"/>
<link wikidata="Q131554" start="8001" end="8015" title="Nibelungenlied" label="Nibelungenlied"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="8075" end="8088" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q150953" start="8119" end="8127" title="Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="8193" end="8197" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q170335" start="8232" end="8260" title="Constance I of Sicily" label="Princess Constance of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q188586" start="8350" end="8367" title="Kingdom of Sicily" label="Kingdom of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="8552" end="8561" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q121130" start="9249" end="9265" title="Philip of Swabia" label="Philip of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105378" start="9486" end="9500" title="Henry the Lion" label="Henry the Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q151457" start="9511" end="9518" title="Otto IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Otto IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q22932" start="9605" end="9619" title="count palatine" label="count palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131621" start="9633" end="9644" title="Wittelsbach" label="Wittelsbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q128076" start="9654" end="9671" title="Pope Innocent III" label="Pope Innocent III"/>
<link wikidata="Q34428" start="9851" end="9870" title="Philip II of France" label="Philip II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q830626" start="9902" end="9920" title="Battle of Bouvines" label="Battle of Bouvines"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="10117" end="10135" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q151457" start="10273" end="10280" title="Otto IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Otto IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q156433" start="10352" end="10356" title="House of Welf" label="Welf"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10413" end="10437" title="Norman conquest of southern Italy#Conquest of Sicily, 1061–1091" label="Norman kingdom of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="10492" end="10512" title="Emperor Frederick II" label="Emperor Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q691851" start="10946" end="10966" title="University of Naples" label="University of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q317573" start="11307" end="11336" title="Statutum in favorem principum" label="Statutum in favorem principum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195673" start="13296" end="13305" title="Landfrieden" label="Landfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q651836" start="13947" end="13968" title="Golden Bull of Rimini" label="Golden Bull of Rimini"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="14019" end="14035" title="Teutonic Knights" label="Teutonic Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q918723" start="14083" end="14091" title="Prussia (region)" label="Prussian"/>
<link wikidata="Q703249" start="14159" end="14173" title="Otto I, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="Otto the Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q556263" start="14233" end="14263" title="Duchy of Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="Duke of Brunswick and Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="14342" end="14357" title="excommunication" label="excommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q124831" start="14376" end="14391" title="Pope Gregory IX" label="Pope Gregory IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q549684" start="14950" end="14972" title="Constitutions of Melfi" label="Constitutions of Melfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q193901" start="15282" end="15300" title="Roger II of Sicily" label="Roger II of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537611" start="15657" end="15668" title="lex animata" label="lex animata"/>
<link wikidata="Q157179" start="16796" end="16805" title="Conrad IV, King of Germany" label="Conrad IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884356" start="16930" end="16947" title="Great Interregnum" label="Great Interregnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q76956" start="17702" end="17721" title="Rudolph I of Germany" label="Rudolph of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q223973" start="17725" end="17731" title="Godparent" label="godson"/>
<link wikidata="Q158246" start="17853" end="17861" title="Conradin" label="Conradin"/>
<link wikidata="Q169305" start="18140" end="18153" title="Pope Urban IV" label="Pope Urban IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q172928" start="18178" end="18193" title="Pope Clement IV" label="Pope Clement IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q203829" start="18212" end="18228" title="Charles of Anjou" label="Charles of Anjou"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="18247" end="18253" title="Kingdom of France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q164889" start="18419" end="18442" title="Manfred, King of Sicily" label="Manfred, King of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q283062" start="18451" end="18470" title="Battle of Benevento" label="Battle of Benevento"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894062" start="18661" end="18682" title="Battle of Tagliacozzo" label="Battle of Tagliacozzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="18748" end="18756" title="executed" label="executed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="18760" end="18766" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q645041" start="19030" end="19050" title="Castel dell&amp;#x27;Ovo" label="Castel dell&amp;#x27;Ovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341156" start="19444" end="19453" title="Imperial immediacy" label="immediate"/>
<link wikidata="Q579938" start="19650" end="19656" title="Baltic region" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q573639" start="19675" end="19694" title="Kyffhäuser Monument" label="Kyffhäuser Monument"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19894" end="19896" title=":de:Gesellschaft für staufische Geschichte" label="de"/>
<link wikidata="Q4072" start="19913" end="19922" title="Göppingen" label="Göppingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q215897" start="19929" end="19953" title="Castel del Monte, Apulia" label="Castel del Monte, Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="20035" end="20054" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237733" start="20084" end="20094" title="Hans Kloss (artist)" label="Hans Kloss"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20114" end="20130" title=":de:Staufer-Rundbild" label="Staufer-Rundbild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539999" start="20208" end="20223" title="Lorch Monastery" label="Lorch Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20279" end="20281" title=":de:Komitee der Stauferfreunde" label="de"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20322" end="20324" title=":de:Stauferstele" label="de"/>
<link wikidata="Q157133" start="20490" end="20500" title="Conrad III of Germany" label="Conrad III"/>
<link wikidata="Q79789" start="20518" end="20538" title="Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q150953" start="20576" end="20584" title="Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q121130" start="20622" end="20638" title="Philip of Swabia" label="Philip of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="20656" end="20668" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q163102" start="20706" end="20717" title="Henry (VII) of Germany" label="Henry (VII)"/>
<link wikidata="Q157179" start="20775" end="20784" title="Conrad IV of Germany" label="Conrad IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q22771585" start="20982" end="20993" title="interregnum" label="interregnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="21016" end="21024" title="Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q157133" start="21145" end="21155" title="Conrad III of Germany" label="Conrad III"/>
<link wikidata="Q79789" start="21167" end="21178" title="Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick I"/>
<link wikidata="Q150953" start="21191" end="21199" title="Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q150953" start="21322" end="21330" title="Henry VI, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="21342" end="21351" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick"/>
<link wikidata="Q163102" start="21364" end="21375" title="Henry (VII) of Germany" label="Henry (VII)"/>
<link wikidata="Q157179" start="21419" end="21425" title="Conrad IV of Germany" label="Conrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q158246" start="21437" end="21445" title="Conradin" label="Conradin"/>
<link wikidata="Q164889" start="21462" end="21469" title="Manfred of Sicily" label="Manfred"/>
<link wikidata="Q286537" start="21481" end="21493" title="Constance of Sicily, Queen of Aragon" label="Constance II"/>
<link wikidata="Q281245" start="21624" end="21651" title="Frederick I, Duke of Swabia" label="Frederick I, Duke of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q552414" start="21693" end="21721" title="Frederick II, Duke of Swabia" label="Frederick II, Duke of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79789" start="21739" end="21770" title="Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick I, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="21834" end="21852" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q702861" start="21869" end="21897" title="Frederick IV, Duke of Swabia" label="Frederick IV, Duke of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2190533" start="21915" end="21942" title="Frederick V, Duke of Swabia" label="Frederick V, Duke of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q504733" start="21960" end="21988" title="Frederick VI, Duke of Swabia" label="Frederick VI, Duke of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664749" start="22006" end="22031" title="Conrad II, Duke of Swabia" label="Conrad II, Duke of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q121130" start="22049" end="22065" title="Philip of Swabia" label="Philip of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="22108" end="22140" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="22179" end="22197" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q163102" start="22214" end="22236" title="Henry (VII) of Germany" label="Henry (VII) of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q157179" start="22282" end="22291" title="Conrad IV of Germany" label="Conrad IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q158246" start="22334" end="22353" title="Conradin" label="Conrad V (Conradin)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22536" end="22571" title=":Family tree of the German monarchs" label=":Family tree of the German monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399669" start="22595" end="22622" title="Dukes of Swabia family tree" label="Dukes of Swabia family tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q187742" start="22625" end="22648" title="Guelphs and Ghibellines" label="Guelphs and Ghibellines"/>
</links>
</doc>
