<doc id="14734" wikidata="Q677" url="?curid=14734" title="Iron">
<text>Iron is a chemical element; it has the symbol Fe () and atomic number 26. It is a metal that belongs to the first transition series and group 8 of the periodic table. It is, by mass, the most common element on Earth, forming much of Earth&#x27;s outer and inner core. It is the fourth most abundant element in the Earth&#x27;s crust, being mainly deposited by meteorites in its metallic state.

Extracting usable metal from iron ores requires kilns or furnaces capable of reaching , about higher than that required to smelt copper. Humans started to master that process in Eurasia during the 2nd millennium BC and the use of iron tools and weapons began to displace copper alloys – in some regions, only around 1200 BC. That event is considered the transition from the Bronze Age to the Iron Age. In the modern world, iron alloys, such as steel, stainless steel, cast iron and special steels, are by far the most common industrial metals, due to their mechanical properties and low cost. The iron and steel industry is thus very important economically, and iron is the cheapest metal, with a price of a few dollars per kilogram or pound.

Pristine and smooth pure iron surfaces are a mirror-like silvery-gray. Iron reacts readily with oxygen and water to produce brown-to-black hydrated iron oxides, commonly known as rust. Unlike the oxides of some other metals that form passivating layers, rust occupies more volume than the metal and thus flakes off, exposing more fresh surfaces for corrosion. Chemically, the most common oxidation states of iron are iron(II) and iron(III). Iron shares many properties of other transition metals, including the other group 8 elements, ruthenium and osmium. Iron forms compounds in a wide range of oxidation states, −4 to +7. Iron also forms many coordination complexes; some of them, such as ferrocene, ferrioxalate, and Prussian blue have substantial industrial, medical, or research applications.

The body of an adult human contains about 4 grams (0.005% body weight) of iron, mostly in hemoglobin and myoglobin. These two proteins play essential roles in oxygen transport by blood and oxygen storage in muscles. To maintain the necessary levels, human iron metabolism requires a minimum of iron in the diet. Iron is also the metal at the active site of many important redox enzymes dealing with cellular respiration and oxidation and reduction in plants and animals.

==Characteristics==
===Allotropes===

At least four allotropes of iron (differing atom arrangements in the solid) are known, conventionally denoted α, γ, δ, and ε.

The first three forms are observed at ordinary pressures. As molten iron cools past its freezing point of 1538 °C, it crystallizes into its δ allotrope, which has a body-centered cubic (bcc) crystal structure. As it cools further to 1394 °C, it changes to its γ-iron allotrope, a face-centered cubic (fcc) crystal structure, or austenite. At 912 °C and below, the crystal structure again becomes the bcc α-iron allotrope.

The physical properties of iron at very high pressures and temperatures have also been studied extensively, because of their relevance to theories about the cores of the Earth and other planets. Above approximately 10 GPa and temperatures of a few hundred kelvin or less, α-iron changes into another hexagonal close-packed (hcp) structure, which is also known as ε-iron. The higher-temperature γ-phase also changes into ε-iron, but does so at higher pressure.

Some controversial experimental evidence exists for a stable β phase at pressures above 50 GPa and temperatures of at least 1500 K. It is supposed to have an orthorhombic or a double hcp structure. (Confusingly, the term &quot;β-iron&quot; is sometimes also used to refer to α-iron above its Curie point, when it changes from being ferromagnetic to paramagnetic, even though its crystal structure has not changed.)

The Earth&#x27;s inner core is generally presumed to consist of an iron-nickel alloy with ε (or β) structure.

===Melting and boiling points===

The melting and boiling points of iron, along with its enthalpy of atomization, are lower than those of the earlier 3d elements from scandium to chromium, showing the lessened contribution of the 3d electrons to metallic bonding as they are attracted more and more into the inert core by the nucleus; however, they are higher than the values for the previous element manganese because that element has a half-filled 3d sub-shell and consequently its d-electrons are not easily delocalized. This same trend appears for ruthenium but not osmium.

The melting point of iron is experimentally well defined for pressures less than 50 GPa. For greater pressures, published data (as of 2007) still varies by tens of gigapascals and over a thousand kelvin.

===Magnetic properties===

Below its Curie point of , α-iron changes from paramagnetic to ferromagnetic: the spins of the two unpaired electrons in each atom generally align with the spins of its neighbors, creating an overall magnetic field. This happens because the orbitals of those two electrons (d&quot;z&quot;2 and d&quot;x&quot;2 − &quot;y&quot;2) do not point toward neighboring atoms in the lattice, and therefore are not involved in metallic bonding.

In the absence of an external source of magnetic field, the atoms get spontaneously partitioned into magnetic domains, about 10 micrometers across, such that the atoms in each domain have parallel spins, but some domains have other orientations. Thus a macroscopic piece of iron will have a nearly zero overall magnetic field.

Application of an external magnetic field causes the domains that are magnetized in the same general direction to grow at the expense of adjacent ones that point in other directions, reinforcing the external field. This effect is exploited in devices that need to channel magnetic fields to fulfill design function, such as electrical transformers, magnetic recording heads, and electric motors. Impurities, lattice defects, or grain and particle boundaries can &quot;pin&quot; the domains in the new positions, so that the effect persists even after the external field is removed – thus turning the iron object into a (permanent) magnet.

Similar behavior is exhibited by some iron compounds, such as the ferrites including the mineral magnetite, a crystalline form of the mixed iron(II,III) oxide (although the atomic-scale mechanism, ferrimagnetism, is somewhat different). Pieces of magnetite with natural permanent magnetization (lodestones) provided the earliest compasses for navigation. Particles of magnetite were extensively used in magnetic recording media such as core memories, magnetic tapes, floppies, and disks, until they were replaced by cobalt-based materials.

===Isotopes===

Iron has four stable isotopes: 54Fe (5.845% of natural iron), 56Fe (91.754%), 57Fe (2.119%) and 58Fe (0.282%). Twenty-four artificial isotopes have also been created. Of these stable isotopes, only 57Fe has a nuclear spin (−). The nuclide 54Fe theoretically can undergo double electron capture to 54Cr, but the process has never been observed and only a lower limit on the half-life of 4.4×1020 years has been established.

60Fe is an extinct radionuclide of long half-life (2.6 million years). It is not found on Earth, but its ultimate decay product is its granddaughter, the stable nuclide 60Ni. Much of the past work on isotopic composition of iron has focused on the nucleosynthesis of 60Fe through studies of meteorites and ore formation. In the last decade, advances in mass spectrometry have allowed the detection and quantification of minute, naturally occurring variations in the ratios of the stable isotopes of iron. Much of this work is driven by the Earth and planetary science communities, although applications to biological and industrial systems are emerging.

In phases of the meteorites &quot;Semarkona&quot; and &quot;Chervony Kut,&quot; a correlation between the concentration of 60Ni, the granddaughter of 60Fe, and the abundance of the stable iron isotopes provided evidence for the existence of 60Fe at the time of formation of the Solar System. Possibly the energy released by the decay of 60Fe, along with that released by 26Al, contributed to the remelting and differentiation of asteroids after their formation 4.6 billion years ago. The abundance of 60Ni present in material may bring further insight into the origin and early history of the Solar System.

The most abundant iron isotope 56Fe is of particular interest to nuclear scientists because it represents the most common endpoint of nucleosynthesis. Since 56Ni (14 alpha particles) is easily produced from lighter nuclei in the alpha process in nuclear reactions in supernovae (see silicon burning process), it is the endpoint of fusion chains inside extremely massive stars. Although adding more alpha particles is possible, but nonetheless the sequence does effectively end at 56Ni because conditions in stellar interiors cause the competition between photodisintegration and the alpha process to favor photodisintegration around 56Ni. This 56Ni, which has a half-life of about 6 days, is created in quantity in these stars, but soon decays by two successive positron emissions within supernova decay products in the supernova remnant gas cloud, first to radioactive 56Co, and then to stable 56Fe. As such, iron is the most abundant element in the core of red giants, and is the most abundant metal in iron meteorites and in the dense metal cores of planets such as Earth. It is also very common in the universe, relative to other stable metals of approximately the same atomic weight. Iron is the sixth most abundant element in the universe, and the most common refractory element.

Although a further tiny energy gain could be extracted by synthesizing 62Ni, which has a marginally higher binding energy than 56Fe, conditions in stars are unsuitable for this process. Element production in supernovas greatly favor iron over nickel, and in any case, 56Fe still has a lower mass per nucleon than 62Ni due to its higher fraction of lighter protons. Hence, elements heavier than iron require a supernova for their formation, involving rapid neutron capture by starting 56Fe nuclei.

In the far future of the universe, assuming that proton decay does not occur, cold fusion occurring via quantum tunnelling would cause the light nuclei in ordinary matter to fuse into 56Fe nuclei. Fission and alpha-particle emission would then make heavy nuclei decay into iron, converting all stellar-mass objects to cold spheres of pure iron.

==Origin and occurrence in nature==
===Cosmogenesis===
Iron&#x27;s abundance in rocky planets like Earth is due to its abundant production during the runaway fusion and explosion of type Ia supernovae, which scatters the iron into space.

===Metallic iron===

Metallic or native iron is rarely found on the surface of the Earth because it tends to oxidize. However, both the Earth&#x27;s inner and outer core, which together account for 35% of the mass of the whole Earth, are believed to consist largely of an iron alloy, possibly with nickel. Electric currents in the liquid outer core are believed to be the origin of the Earth&#x27;s magnetic field. The other terrestrial planets (Mercury, Venus, and Mars) as well as the Moon are believed to have a metallic core consisting mostly of iron. The M-type asteroids are also believed to be partly or mostly made of metallic iron alloy.

The rare iron meteorites are the main form of natural metallic iron on the Earth&#x27;s surface. Items made of cold-worked meteoritic iron have been found in various archaeological sites dating from a time when iron smelting had not yet been developed; and the Inuit in Greenland have been reported to use iron from the Cape York meteorite for tools and hunting weapons. About 1 in 20 meteorites consist of the unique iron-nickel minerals taenite (35–80% iron) and kamacite (90–95% iron). Native iron is also rarely found in basalts that have formed from magmas that have come into contact with carbon-rich sedimentary rocks, which have reduced the oxygen fugacity sufficiently for iron to crystallize. This is known as telluric iron and is described from a few localities, such as Disko Island in West Greenland, Yakutia in Russia and Bühl in Germany.

===Mantle minerals===
Ferropericlase , a solid solution of periclase (MgO) and wüstite (FeO), makes up about 20% of the volume of the lower mantle of the Earth, which makes it the second most abundant mineral phase in that region after silicate perovskite ; it also is the major host for iron in the lower mantle. At the bottom of the transition zone of the mantle, the reaction γ- transforms γ-olivine into a mixture of silicate perovskite and ferropericlase and vice versa. In the literature, this mineral phase of the lower mantle is also often called magnesiowüstite. Silicate perovskite may form up to 93% of the lower mantle, and the magnesium iron form, , is considered to be the most abundant mineral in the Earth, making up 38% of its volume.

===Earth&#x27;s crust===
While iron is the most abundant element on Earth, most of this iron is concentrated in the inner and outer cores. The fraction of iron that is in Earth&#x27;s crust only amounts to about 5% of the overall mass of the crust and is thus only the fourth most abundant element in that layer (after oxygen, silicon, and aluminium).

Most of the iron in the crust is combined with various other elements to form many iron minerals. An important class is the iron oxide minerals such as hematite (Fe2O3), magnetite (Fe3O4), and siderite (FeCO3), which are the major ores of iron. Many igneous rocks also contain the sulfide minerals pyrrhotite and pentlandite. During weathering, iron tends to leach from sulfide deposits as the sulfate and from silicate deposits as the bicarbonate. Both of these are oxidized in aqueous solution and precipitate in even mildly elevated pH as iron(III) oxide.
Large deposits of iron are banded iron formations, a type of rock consisting of repeated thin layers of iron oxides alternating with bands of iron-poor shale and chert. The banded iron formations were laid down in the time between and .

Materials containing finely ground iron(III) oxides or oxide-hydroxides, such as ochre, have been used as yellow, red, and brown pigments since pre-historical times. They contribute as well to the color of various rocks and clays, including entire geological formations like the Painted Hills in Oregon and the Buntsandstein (&quot;colored sandstone&quot;, British Bunter). Through &quot;Eisensandstein&quot; (a jurassic &#x27;iron sandstone&#x27;, e.g. from Donzdorf in Germany) and Bath stone in the UK, iron compounds are responsible for the yellowish color of many historical buildings and sculptures. The proverbial red color of the surface of Mars is derived from an iron oxide-rich regolith.

Significant amounts of iron occur in the iron sulfide mineral pyrite (FeS2), but it is difficult to extract iron from it and it is therefore not exploited. In fact, iron is so common that production generally focuses only on ores with very high quantities of it.

According to the International Resource Panel&#x27;s Metal Stocks in Society report, the global stock of iron in use in society is 2,200 kg per capita. More-developed countries differ in this respect from less-developed countries (7,000–14,000 vs 2,000 kg per capita).

===Oceans===
Ocean science demonstrated the role of the iron in the ancient seas in both marine biota and climate.

==Chemistry and compounds==


Iron shows the characteristic chemical properties of the transition metals, namely the ability to form variable oxidation states differing by steps of one and a very large coordination and organometallic chemistry: indeed, it was the discovery of an iron compound, ferrocene, that revolutionalized the latter field in the 1950s. Iron is sometimes considered as a prototype for the entire block of transition metals, due to its abundance and the immense role it has played in the technological progress of humanity. Its 26 electrons are arranged in the configuration [Ar]3d64s2, of which the 3d and 4s electrons are relatively close in energy, and thus a number of electrons can be ionized.

Iron forms compounds mainly in the oxidation states +2 (iron(II), &quot;ferrous&quot;) and +3 (iron(III), &quot;ferric&quot;). Iron also occurs in higher oxidation states, e.g., the purple potassium ferrate (K2FeO4), which contains iron in its +6 oxidation state. The anion [FeO4]– with iron in its +7 oxidation state, along with an iron(V)-peroxo isomer, has been detected by infrared spectroscopy at 4 K after cocondensation of laser-ablated Fe atoms with a mixture of O2/Ar. Iron(IV) is a common intermediate in many biochemical oxidation reactions. Numerous organoiron compounds contain formal oxidation states of +1, 0, −1, or even −2. The oxidation states and other bonding properties are often assessed using the technique of Mössbauer spectroscopy. Many mixed valence compounds contain both iron(II) and iron(III) centers, such as magnetite and Prussian blue (). The latter is used as the traditional &quot;blue&quot; in blueprints.

Iron is the first of the transition metals that cannot reach its group oxidation state of +8, although its heavier congeners ruthenium and osmium can, with ruthenium having more difficulty than osmium. Ruthenium exhibits an aqueous cationic chemistry in its low oxidation states similar to that of iron, but osmium does not, favoring high oxidation states in which it forms anionic complexes. In the second half of the 3d transition series, vertical similarities down the groups compete with the horizontal similarities of iron with its neighbors cobalt and nickel in the periodic table, which are also ferromagnetic at room temperature and share similar chemistry. As such, iron, cobalt, and nickel are sometimes grouped together as the iron triad.

Unlike many other metals, iron does not form amalgams with mercury. As a result, mercury is traded in standardized 76 pound flasks (34 kg) made of iron.

Iron is by far the most reactive element in its group; it is pyrophoric when finely divided and dissolves easily in dilute acids, giving Fe2+. However, it does not react with concentrated nitric acid and other oxidizing acids due to the formation of an impervious oxide layer, which can nevertheless react with hydrochloric acid. High-purity iron, called electrolytic iron, is considered to be resistant to rust, due to its oxide layer.

===Binary compounds===
====Oxides and sulfides====

Iron forms various oxide and hydroxide compounds; the most common are iron(II,III) oxide (Fe3O4), and iron(III) oxide (Fe2O3). Iron(II) oxide also exists, though it is unstable at room temperature. Despite their names, they are actually all non-stoichiometric compounds whose compositions may vary. These oxides are the principal ores for the production of iron (see bloomery and blast furnace). They are also used in the production of ferrites, useful magnetic storage media in computers, and pigments. The best known sulfide is iron pyrite (FeS2), also known as fool&#x27;s gold owing to its golden luster. It is not an iron(IV) compound, but is actually an iron(II) polysulfide containing Fe2+ and ions in a distorted sodium chloride structure.

====Halides====

The binary ferrous and ferric halides are well-known. The ferrous halides typically arise from treating iron metal with the corresponding hydrohalic acid to give the corresponding hydrated salts.
:Fe + 2 HX → FeX2 + H2 (X = F, Cl, Br, I)
Iron reacts with fluorine, chlorine, and bromine to give the corresponding ferric halides, ferric chloride being the most common.
:2 Fe + 3 X2 → 2 FeX3 (X = F, Cl, Br)
Ferric iodide is an exception, being thermodynamically unstable due to the oxidizing power of Fe3+ and the high reducing power of I−:
:2 I− + 2 Fe3+ → I2 + 2 Fe2+ (E0 = +0.23 V)

Ferric iodide, a black solid, is not stable in ordinary conditions, but can be prepared through the reaction of iron pentacarbonyl with iodine and carbon monoxide in the presence of hexane and light at the temperature of −20 °C, with oxygen and water excluded. Complexes of ferric iodide with some soft bases are known to be stable compounds.

===Solution chemistry===

The standard reduction potentials in acidic aqueous solution for some common iron ions are given below:

The red-purple tetrahedral ferrate(VI) anion is such a strong oxidizing agent that it oxidizes ammonia to nitrogen (N2) and water to oxygen:
:4 + 34 → 4 + 20 + 3 O2

The pale-violet hexaquo complex is an acid such that above pH 0 it is fully hydrolyzed:

As pH rises above 0 the above yellow hydrolyzed species form and as it rises above 2–3, reddish-brown hydrous iron(III) oxide precipitates out of solution. Although Fe3+ has a d5 configuration, its absorption spectrum is not like that of Mn2+ with its weak, spin-forbidden d–d bands, because Fe3+ has higher positive charge and is more polarizing, lowering the energy of its ligand-to-metal charge transfer absorptions. Thus, all the above complexes are rather strongly colored, with the single exception of the hexaquo ion – and even that has a spectrum dominated by charge transfer in the near ultraviolet region. On the other hand, the pale green iron(II) hexaquo ion does not undergo appreciable hydrolysis. Carbon dioxide is not evolved when carbonate anions are added, which instead results in white iron(II) carbonate being precipitated out. In excess carbon dioxide this forms the slightly soluble bicarbonate, which occurs commonly in groundwater, but it oxidises quickly in air to form iron(III) oxide that accounts for the brown deposits present in a sizeable number of streams.

===Coordination compounds===
Due to its electronic structure, iron has a very large coordination and organometallic chemistry.

Many coordination compounds of iron are known. A typical six-coordinate anion is hexachloroferrate(III), [FeCl6]3−, found in the mixed salt tetrakis(methylammonium) hexachloroferrate(III) chloride. Complexes with multiple bidentate ligands have geometric isomers. For example, the &quot;trans&quot;-chlorohydridobis(bis-1,2-(diphenylphosphino)ethane)iron(II) complex is used as a starting material for compounds with the moiety. The ferrioxalate ion with three oxalate ligands displays helical chirality with its two non-superposable geometries labelled &quot;Λ&quot; (lambda) for the left-handed screw axis and &quot;Δ&quot; (delta) for the right-handed screw axis, in line with IUPAC conventions. Potassium ferrioxalate is used in chemical actinometry and along with its sodium salt undergoes photoreduction applied in old-style photographic processes. The dihydrate of iron(II) oxalate has a polymeric structure with co-planar oxalate ions bridging between iron centres with the water of crystallisation located forming the caps of each octahedron, as illustrated below.

Iron(III) complexes are quite similar to those of chromium(III) with the exception of iron(III)&#x27;s preference for &quot;O&quot;-donor instead of &quot;N&quot;-donor ligands. The latter tend to be rather more unstable than iron(II) complexes and often dissociate in water. Many Fe–O complexes show intense colors and are used as tests for phenols or enols. For example, in the ferric chloride test, used to determine the presence of phenols, iron(III) chloride reacts with a phenol to form a deep violet complex:
:3 ArOH + FeCl3 → Fe(OAr)3 + 3 HCl (Ar = aryl)

Among the halide and pseudohalide complexes, fluoro complexes of iron(III) are the most stable, with the colorless [FeF5(H2O)]2− being the most stable in aqueous solution. Chloro complexes are less stable and favor tetrahedral coordination as in [FeCl4]−; [FeBr4]− and [FeI4]− are reduced easily to iron(II). Thiocyanate is a common test for the presence of iron(III) as it forms the blood-red [Fe(SCN)(H2O)5]2+. Like manganese(II), most iron(III) complexes are high-spin, the exceptions being those with ligands that are high in the spectrochemical series such as cyanide. An example of a low-spin iron(III) complex is [Fe(CN)6]3−. Iron shows a great variety of electronic spin states, including every possible spin quantum number value for a d-block element from 0 (diamagnetic) to (5 unpaired electrons). This value is always half the number of unpaired electrons. Complexes with zero to two unpaired electrons are considered low-spin and those with four or five are considered high-spin.

Iron(II) complexes are less stable than iron(III) complexes but the preference for &quot;O&quot;-donor ligands is less marked, so that for example is known while is not. They have a tendency to be oxidized to iron(III) but this can be moderated by low pH and the specific ligands used.

===Organometallic compounds===

Organoiron chemistry is the study of organometallic compounds of iron, where carbon atoms are covalently bound to the metal atom. They are many and varied, including cyanide complexes, carbonyl complexes, sandwich and half-sandwich compounds.
Prussian blue or &quot;ferric ferrocyanide&quot;, Fe4[Fe(CN)6]3, is an old and well-known iron-cyanide complex, extensively used as pigment and in several other applications. Its formation can be used as a simple wet chemistry test to distinguish between aqueous solutions of Fe2+ and Fe3+ as they react (respectively) with potassium ferricyanide and potassium ferrocyanide to form Prussian blue.

Another old example of an organoiron compound is iron pentacarbonyl, Fe(CO)5, in which a neutral iron atom is bound to the carbon atoms of five carbon monoxide molecules. The compound can be used to make carbonyl iron powder, a highly reactive form of metallic iron. Thermolysis of iron pentacarbonyl gives triiron dodecacarbonyl, , a complex with a cluster of three iron atoms at its core. Collman&#x27;s reagent, disodium tetracarbonylferrate, is a useful reagent for organic chemistry; it contains iron in the −2 oxidation state. Cyclopentadienyliron dicarbonyl dimer contains iron in the rare +1 oxidation state.
A landmark in this field was the discovery in 1951 of the remarkably stable sandwich compound ferrocene , by Pauson and Kealy and independently by Miller and colleagues, whose surprising molecular structure was determined only a year later by Woodward and Wilkinson and Fischer.
Ferrocene is still one of the most important tools and models in this class.

Iron-centered organometallic species are used as catalysts. The Knölker complex, for example, is a transfer hydrogenation catalyst for ketones.

===Industrial uses===
The iron compounds produced on the largest scale in industry are iron(II) sulfate (FeSO4·7H2O) and iron(III) chloride (FeCl3). The former is one of the most readily available sources of iron(II), but is less stable to aerial oxidation than Mohr&#x27;s salt (). Iron(II) compounds tend to be oxidized to iron(III) compounds in the air.

==History==
===Development of iron metallurgy===
Iron is one of the elements undoubtedly known to the ancient world. It has been worked, or wrought, for millennia. However, iron artefacts of great age are much rarer than objects made of gold or silver due to the ease with which iron corrodes. The technology developed slowly, and even after the discovery of smelting it took many centuries for iron to replace bronze as the metal of choice for tools and weapons.

====Meteoritic iron====

Beads made from meteoric iron in 3500 BC or earlier were found in Gerzeh, Egypt by G. A. Wainwright. The beads contain 7.5% nickel, which is a signature of meteoric origin since iron found in the Earth&#x27;s crust generally has only minuscule nickel impurities.

Meteoric iron was highly regarded due to its origin in the heavens and was often used to forge weapons and tools. For example, a dagger made of meteoric iron was found in the tomb of Tutankhamun, containing similar proportions of iron, cobalt, and nickel to a meteorite discovered in the area, deposited by an ancient meteor shower. Items that were likely made of iron by Egyptians date from 3000 to 2500 BC.

Meteoritic iron is comparably soft and ductile and easily cold forged but may get brittle when heated because of the nickel content.

====Wrought iron====
 

The first iron production started in the Middle Bronze Age, but it took several centuries before iron displaced bronze. Samples of smelted iron from Asmar, Mesopotamia and Tall Chagar Bazaar in northern Syria were made sometime between 3000 and 2700 BC. The Hittites established an empire in north-central Anatolia around 1600 BC. They appear to be the first to understand the production of iron from its ores and regard it highly in their society. The Hittites began to smelt iron between 1500 and 1200 BC and the practice spread to the rest of the Near East after their empire fell in 1180 BC. The subsequent period is called the Iron Age.

Artifacts of smelted iron are found in India dating from 1800 to 1200 BC, and in the Levant from about 1500 BC (suggesting smelting in Anatolia or the Caucasus). Alleged references (compare history of metallurgy in South Asia) to iron in the Indian Vedas have been used for claims of a very early usage of iron in India respectively to date the texts as such. The rigveda term &quot;ayas&quot; (metal) refers to copper, while iron which is called as &quot;śyāma ayas&quot;, literally &quot;black copper&quot;, first is mentioned in the post-rigvedic Atharvaveda.

Some archaeological evidence suggests iron was smelted in Zimbabwe and southeast Africa as early as the eighth century BC. Iron working was introduced to Greece in the late 11th century BC, from which it spread quickly throughout Europe.
The spread of ironworking in Central and Western Europe is associated with Celtic expansion. According to Pliny the Elder, iron use was common in the Roman era. In the lands of what is now considered China, iron appears approximately 700–500 BC. Iron smelting may have been introduced into China through Central Asia. The earliest evidence of the use of a blast furnace in China dates to the 1st century AD, and cupola furnaces were used as early as the Warring States period (403–221 BC). Usage of the blast and cupola furnace remained widespread during the Tang and Song dynasties.

During the Industrial Revolution in Britain, Henry Cort began refining iron from pig iron to wrought iron (or bar iron) using innovative production systems. In 1783 he patented the puddling process for refining iron ore. It was later improved by others, including Joseph Hall.

====Cast iron====

Cast iron was first produced in China during 5th century BC, but was hardly in Europe until the medieval period. The earliest cast iron artifacts were discovered by archaeologists in what is now modern Luhe County, Jiangsu in China. Cast iron was used in ancient China for warfare, agriculture, and architecture. During the medieval period, means were found in Europe of producing wrought iron from cast iron (in this context known as pig iron) using finery forges. For all these processes, charcoal was required as fuel.

Medieval blast furnaces were about tall and made of fireproof brick; forced air was usually provided by hand-operated bellows. Modern blast furnaces have grown much bigger, with hearths fourteen meters in diameter that allow them to produce thousands of tons of iron each day, but essentially operate in much the same way as they did during medieval times.

In 1709, Abraham Darby I established a coke-fired blast furnace to produce cast iron, replacing charcoal, although continuing to use blast furnaces. The ensuing availability of inexpensive iron was one of the factors leading to the Industrial Revolution. Toward the end of the 18th century, cast iron began to replace wrought iron for certain purposes, because it was cheaper. Carbon content in iron was not implicated as the reason for the differences in properties of wrought iron, cast iron, and steel until the 18th century.

Since iron was becoming cheaper and more plentiful, it also became a major structural material following the building of the innovative first iron bridge in 1778. This bridge still stands today as a monument to the role iron played in the Industrial Revolution. Following this, iron was used in rails, boats, ships, aqueducts, and buildings, as well as in iron cylinders in steam engines. Railways have been central to the formation of modernity and ideas of progress and various languages refer to railways as &quot;iron road&quot; (e.g. French , German , Turkish , Russian , Chinese, Japanese, and Korean 鐵道, Vietnamese &quot;).

====Steel====
Steel (with smaller carbon content than pig iron but more than wrought iron) was first produced in antiquity by using a bloomery. Blacksmiths in Luristan in western Persia were making good steel by 1000 BC. Then improved versions, Wootz steel by India and Damascus steel were developed around 300 BC and AD 500 respectively. These methods were specialized, and so steel did not become a major commodity until the 1850s.

New methods of producing it by carburizing bars of iron in the cementation process were devised in the 17th century. In the Industrial Revolution, new methods of producing bar iron without charcoal were devised and these were later applied to produce steel. In the late 1850s, Henry Bessemer invented a new steelmaking process, involving blowing air through molten pig iron, to produce mild steel. This made steel much more economical, thereby leading to wrought iron no longer being produced in large quantities.

===Foundations of modern chemistry===
In 1774, Antoine Lavoisier used the reaction of water steam with metallic iron inside an incandescent iron tube to produce hydrogen in his experiments leading to the demonstration of the conservation of mass, which was instrumental in changing chemistry from a qualitative science to a quantitative one.
==Symbolic role==

Iron plays a certain role in mythology and has found various usage as a metaphor and in folklore. The Greek poet Hesiod&#x27;s &quot;Works and Days&quot; (lines 109–201) lists different ages of man named after metals like gold, silver, bronze and iron to account for successive ages of humanity. The Iron Age was closely related with Rome, and in Ovid&#x27;s &quot;Metamorphoses&quot;

An example of the importance of iron&#x27;s symbolic role may be found in the German Campaign of 1813. Frederick William III commissioned then the first Iron Cross as military decoration. Berlin iron jewellery reached its peak production between 1813 and 1815, when the Prussian royal family urged citizens to donate gold and silver jewellery for military funding. The inscription &quot;Ich gab Gold für Eisen&quot; (I gave gold for iron) was used as well in later war efforts.


===Laboratory routes===
For a few limited purposes when it is needed, pure iron is produced in the laboratory in small quantities by reducing the pure oxide or hydroxide with hydrogen, or forming iron pentacarbonyl and heating it to 250 °C so that it decomposes to form pure iron powder. Another method is electrolysis of ferrous chloride onto an iron cathode.

===Main industrial route===
Nowadays, the industrial production of iron or steel consists of two main stages. In the first stage, iron ore is reduced with coke in a blast furnace, and the molten metal is separated from gross impurities such as silicate minerals. This stage yields an alloy – pig iron – that contains relatively large amounts of carbon. In the second stage, the amount of carbon in the pig iron is lowered by oxidation to yield wrought iron, steel, or cast iron. Other metals can be added at this stage to form alloy steels.

====Blast furnace processing====

The blast furnace is loaded with iron ores, usually hematite or magnetite , along with coke (coal that has been separately baked to remove volatile components) and flux (limestone or dolomite). &quot;Blasts&quot; of air pre-heated to 900 °C (sometimes with oxygen enrichment) is blown through the mixture, in sufficient amount to turn the carbon into carbon monoxide:

This reaction raises the temperature to about 2000 °C. The carbon monoxide reduces the iron ore to metallic iron:

Some iron in the high-temperature lower region of the furnace reacts directly with the coke:

The flux removes silicaceous minerals in the ore, which would otherwise clog the furnace: The heat of the furnace decomposes the carbonates to calcium oxide, which reacts with any excess silica to form a slag composed of calcium silicate or other products. At the furnace&#x27;s temperature, the metal and the slag are both molten. They collect at the bottom as two immiscible liquid layers (with the slag on top), that are then easily separated. The slag can be used as a material in road construction or to improve mineral-poor soils for agriculture.

Steelmaking thus remains one of the largest industrial contributors of CO2 emissions in the world.

====Steelmaking====
The pig iron produced by the blast furnace process contains up to 4–5% carbon (by mass), with small amounts of other impurities like sulfur, magnesium, phosphorus, and manganese. This high level of carbon makes it relatively weak and brittle. Reducing the amount of carbon to 0.002–2.1% produces steel, which may be up to 1000 times harder than pure iron. A great variety of steel articles can then be made by cold working, hot rolling, forging, machining, etc. Removing the impurities from pig iron, but leaving 2–4% carbon, results in cast iron, which is cast by foundries into articles such as stoves, pipes, radiators, lamp-posts, and rails.

Steel products often undergo various heat treatments after they are forged to shape. Annealing consists of heating them to 700–800 °C for several hours and then gradual cooling. It makes the steel softer and more workable.

===Direct iron reduction===
Owing to environmental concerns, alternative methods of processing iron have been developed. &quot;Direct iron reduction&quot; reduces iron ore to a ferrous lump called &quot;sponge&quot; iron or &quot;direct&quot; iron that is suitable for steelmaking. Two main reactions comprise the direct reduction process:

Natural gas is partially oxidized (with heat and a catalyst):

Iron ore is then treated with these gases in a furnace, producing solid sponge iron:

Silica is removed by adding a limestone flux as described above.

===Thermite process===

Ignition of a mixture of aluminium powder and iron oxide yields metallic iron via the thermite reaction:

Alternatively pig iron may be made into steel (with up to about 2% carbon) or wrought iron (commercially pure iron). Various processes have been used for this, including finery forges, puddling furnaces, Bessemer converters, open hearth furnaces, basic oxygen furnaces, and electric arc furnaces. In all cases, the objective is to oxidize some or all of the carbon, together with other impurities. On the other hand, other metals may be added to make alloy steels.

=== Molten oxide electrolysis ===
Molten oxide electrolysis (MOE) uses electrolysis of molten iron oxide to yield metallic iron. It is studied in laboratory-scale experiments and is proposed as a method for industrial iron production that has no direct emissions of carbon dioxide. It uses a liquid iron cathode, an anode formed from an alloy of chromium, aluminium and iron, and the electrolyte is a mixture of molten metal oxides into which iron ore is dissolved. The current keeps the electrolyte molten and reduces the iron oxide. Oxygen gas is produced in addition to liquid iron. The only carbon dioxide emissions come from any fossil fuel-generated electricity used to heat and reduce the metal.

==Applications==
===As structural material===
Iron is the most widely used of all the metals, accounting for over 90% of worldwide metal production. Its low cost and high strength often make it the material of choice to withstand stress or transmit forces, such as the construction of machinery and machine tools, rails, automobiles, ship hulls, concrete reinforcing bars, and the load-carrying framework of buildings. Since pure iron is quite soft, it is most commonly combined with alloying elements to make steel.

====Mechanical properties====
The mechanical properties of iron and its alloys are extremely relevant to their structural applications. Those properties can be evaluated in various ways, including the Brinell test, the Rockwell test and the Vickers hardness test.

The properties of pure iron are often used to calibrate measurements or to compare tests. However, the mechanical properties of iron are significantly affected by the sample&#x27;s purity: pure, single crystals of iron are actually softer than aluminium, and the purest industrially produced iron (99.99%) has a hardness of 20–30 Brinell. The pure iron (99.9%～99.999%), especially called electrolytic iron, is industrially produced by electrolytic refining.

An increase in the carbon content will cause a significant increase in the hardness and tensile strength of iron. Maximum hardness of 65 Rc is achieved with a 0.6% carbon content, although the alloy has low tensile strength. Because of the softness of iron, it is much easier to work with than its heavier congeners ruthenium and osmium.

====Types of steels and alloys====
α-Iron is a fairly soft metal that can dissolve only a small concentration of carbon (no more than 0.021% by mass at 910 °C). Austenite (γ-iron) is similarly soft and metallic but can dissolve considerably more carbon (as much as 2.04% by mass at 1146 °C). This form of iron is used in the type of stainless steel used for making cutlery, and hospital and food-service equipment.

Commercially available iron is classified based on purity and the abundance of additives. Pig iron has 3.5–4.5% carbon and contains varying amounts of contaminants such as sulfur, silicon and phosphorus. Pig iron is not a saleable product, but rather an intermediate step in the production of cast iron and steel. The reduction of contaminants in pig iron that negatively affect material properties, such as sulfur and phosphorus, yields cast iron containing 2–4% carbon, 1–6% silicon, and small amounts of manganese. Pig iron has a melting point in the range of 1420–1470 K, which is lower than either of its two main components, and makes it the first product to be melted when carbon and iron are heated together. Its mechanical properties vary greatly and depend on the form the carbon takes in the alloy.

&quot;White&quot; cast irons contain their carbon in the form of cementite, or iron carbide (Fe3C). This hard, brittle compound dominates the mechanical properties of white cast irons, rendering them hard, but unresistant to shock. The broken surface of a white cast iron is full of fine facets of the broken iron carbide, a very pale, silvery, shiny material, hence the appellation. Cooling a mixture of iron with 0.8% carbon slowly below 723 °C to room temperature results in separate, alternating layers of cementite and α-iron, which is soft and malleable and is called pearlite for its appearance. Rapid cooling, on the other hand, does not allow time for this separation and creates hard and brittle martensite. The steel can then be tempered by reheating to a temperature in between, changing the proportions of pearlite and martensite. The end product below 0.8% carbon content is a pearlite-αFe mixture, and that above 0.8% carbon content is a pearlite-cementite mixture.

In gray iron the carbon exists as separate, fine flakes of graphite, and also renders the material brittle due to the sharp edged flakes of graphite that produce stress concentration sites within the material. A newer variant of gray iron, referred to as ductile iron, is specially treated with trace amounts of magnesium to alter the shape of graphite to spheroids, or nodules, reducing the stress concentrations and vastly increasing the toughness and strength of the material.

Wrought iron contains less than 0.25% carbon but large amounts of slag that give it a fibrous characteristic. Wrought iron is more corrosion resistant than steel. It has been almost completely replaced by mild steel, which corrodes more readily than wrought iron, but is cheaper and more widely available. Carbon steel contains 2.0% carbon or less, with small amounts of manganese, sulfur, phosphorus, and silicon. Alloy steels contain varying amounts of carbon as well as other metals, such as chromium, vanadium, molybdenum, nickel, tungsten, etc. Their alloy content raises their cost, and so they are usually only employed for specialist uses. One common alloy steel, though, is stainless steel. Recent developments in ferrous metallurgy have produced a growing range of microalloyed steels, also termed &#x27;HSLA&#x27; or high-strength, low alloy steels, containing tiny additions to produce high strengths and often spectacular toughness at minimal cost.

Alloys with high purity elemental makeups (such as alloys of electrolytic iron) have specifically enhanced properties such as ductility, tensile strength, toughness, fatigue strength, heat resistance, and corrosion resistance.

Apart from traditional applications, iron is also used for protection from ionizing radiation. Although it is lighter than another traditional protection material, lead, it is much stronger mechanically.

The main disadvantage of iron and steel is that pure iron, and most of its alloys, suffer badly from rust if not protected in some way, a cost amounting to over 1% of the world&#x27;s economy. Painting, galvanization, passivation, plastic coating and bluing are all used to protect iron from rust by excluding water and oxygen or by cathodic protection. The mechanism of the rusting of iron is as follows:

:Cathode: 3 O2 + 6 H2O + 12 e− → 12 OH−
:Anode: 4 Fe → 4 Fe2+ + 8 e−; 4 Fe2+ → 4 Fe3+ + 4 e−
:Overall: 4 Fe + 3 O2 + 6 H2O → 4 Fe3+ + 12 OH− → 4 Fe(OH)3 or 4 FeO(OH) + 4 H2O

The electrolyte is usually iron(II) sulfate in urban areas (formed when atmospheric sulfur dioxide attacks iron), and salt particles in the atmosphere in seaside areas.

===Catalysts and reagents===
Because Fe is inexpensive and nontoxic, much effort has been devoted to the development of Fe-based catalysts and reagents. Iron is however less common as a catalyst in commercial processes than more expensive metals. In biology, Fe-containing enzymes are pervasive.

Iron catalysts are traditionally used in the Haber–Bosch process for the production of ammonia and the Fischer–Tropsch process for conversion of carbon monoxide to hydrocarbons for fuels and lubricants. Powdered iron in an acidic medium is used in the Bechamp reduction, the conversion of nitrobenzene to aniline.

===Iron compounds===
Iron(III) oxide mixed with aluminium powder can be ignited to create a thermite reaction, used in welding large iron parts (like rails) and purifying ores. Iron(III) oxide and oxyhydroxide are used as reddish and ocher pigments.

Iron(III) chloride finds use in water purification and sewage treatment, in the dyeing of cloth, as a coloring agent in paints, as an additive in animal feed, and as an etchant for copper in the manufacture of printed circuit boards. It can also be dissolved in alcohol to form tincture of iron, which is used as a medicine to stop bleeding in canaries.

Iron(II) sulfate is used as a precursor to other iron compounds. It is also used to reduce chromate in cement. It is used to fortify foods and treat iron deficiency anemia. Iron(III) sulfate is used in settling minute sewage particles in tank water. Iron(II) chloride is used as a reducing flocculating agent, in the formation of iron complexes and magnetic iron oxides, and as a reducing agent in organic synthesis.

Sodium nitroprusside is a drug used as a vasodilator. It is on the World Health Organization&#x27;s List of Essential Medicines.

==Biological and pathological role==
Iron is required for life. The iron–sulfur clusters are pervasive and include nitrogenase, the enzymes responsible for biological nitrogen fixation. Iron-containing proteins participate in transport, storage and use of oxygen. Iron proteins are involved in electron transfer.
Examples of iron-containing proteins in higher organisms include hemoglobin, cytochrome (see high-valent iron), and catalase. The average adult human contains about 0.005% body weight of iron, or about four grams, of which three quarters is in hemoglobin—a level that remains constant despite only about one milligram of iron being absorbed each day, because the human body recycles its hemoglobin for the iron content.

Microbial growth may be assisted by oxidation of iron(II) or by reduction of iron(III).

===Biochemistry===
Iron acquisition poses a problem for aerobic organisms because ferric iron is poorly soluble near neutral pH. Thus, these organisms have developed means to absorb iron as complexes, sometimes taking up ferrous iron before oxidising it back to ferric iron. In particular, bacteria have evolved very high-affinity agents called siderophores.

After uptake in human cells, iron storage is precisely regulated. A major component of this regulation is the protein transferrin, which binds iron ions absorbed from the duodenum and carries it in the blood to cells. Transferrin contains Fe3+ in the middle of a distorted octahedron, bonded to one nitrogen, three oxygens and a chelating carbonate anion that traps the Fe3+ ion: it has such a high stability constant that it is very effective at taking up Fe3+ ions even from the most stable complexes. At the bone marrow, transferrin is reduced from Fe3+ to Fe2+ and stored as ferritin to be incorporated into hemoglobin. 

The most commonly known and studied bioinorganic iron compounds (biological iron molecules) are the heme proteins: examples are hemoglobin, myoglobin, and cytochrome P450. These compounds participate in transporting gases, building enzymes, and transferring electrons. Metalloproteins are a group of proteins with metal ion cofactors. Some examples of iron metalloproteins are ferritin and rubredoxin. Many enzymes vital to life contain iron, such as catalase, lipoxygenases, and IRE-BP.

Hemoglobin is an oxygen carrier that occurs in red blood cells and contributes their color, transporting oxygen in the arteries from the lungs to the muscles where it is transferred to myoglobin, which stores it until it is needed for the metabolic oxidation of glucose, generating energy. Here the hemoglobin binds to carbon dioxide, produced when glucose is oxidized, which is transported through the veins by hemoglobin (predominantly as bicarbonate anions) back to the lungs where it is exhaled. In hemoglobin, the iron is in one of four heme groups and has six possible coordination sites; four are occupied by nitrogen atoms in a porphyrin ring, the fifth by an imidazole nitrogen in a histidine residue of one of the protein chains attached to the heme group, and the sixth is reserved for the oxygen molecule it can reversibly bind to. When hemoglobin is not attached to oxygen (and is then called deoxyhemoglobin), the Fe2+ ion at the center of the heme group (in the hydrophobic protein interior) is in a high-spin configuration. It is thus too large to fit inside the porphyrin ring, which bends instead into a dome with the Fe2+ ion about 55 picometers above it. In this configuration, the sixth coordination site reserved for the oxygen is blocked by another histidine residue.

When deoxyhemoglobin picks up an oxygen molecule, this histidine residue moves away and returns once the oxygen is securely attached to form a hydrogen bond with it. This results in the Fe2+ ion switching to a low-spin configuration, resulting in a 20% decrease in ionic radius so that now it can fit into the porphyrin ring, which becomes planar. Additionally, this hydrogen bonding results in the tilting of the oxygen molecule, resulting in a Fe–O–O bond angle of around 120° that avoids the formation of Fe–O–Fe or Fe–O2–Fe bridges that would lead to electron transfer, the oxidation of Fe2+ to Fe3+, and the destruction of hemoglobin. This results in a movement of all the protein chains that leads to the other subunits of hemoglobin changing shape to a form with larger oxygen affinity. Thus, when deoxyhemoglobin takes up oxygen, its affinity for more oxygen increases, and vice versa. Myoglobin, on the other hand, contains only one heme group and hence this cooperative effect cannot occur. Thus, while hemoglobin is almost saturated with oxygen in the high partial pressures of oxygen found in the lungs, its affinity for oxygen is much lower than that of myoglobin, which oxygenates even at low partial pressures of oxygen found in muscle tissue. As described by the Bohr effect (named after Christian Bohr, the father of Niels Bohr), the oxygen affinity of hemoglobin diminishes in the presence of carbon dioxide.
Carbon monoxide and phosphorus trifluoride are poisonous to humans because they bind to hemoglobin similarly to oxygen, but with much more strength, so that oxygen can no longer be transported throughout the body. Hemoglobin bound to carbon monoxide is known as carboxyhemoglobin. This effect also plays a minor role in the toxicity of cyanide, but there the major effect is by far its interference with the proper functioning of the electron transport protein cytochrome a. The cytochrome proteins also involve heme groups and are involved in the metabolic oxidation of glucose by oxygen. The sixth coordination site is then occupied by either another imidazole nitrogen or a methionine sulfur, so that these proteins are largely inert to oxygen—with the exception of cytochrome a, which bonds directly to oxygen and thus is very easily poisoned by cyanide. Here, the electron transfer takes place as the iron remains in low spin but changes between the +2 and +3 oxidation states. Since the reduction potential of each step is slightly greater than the previous one, the energy is released step-by-step and can thus be stored in adenosine triphosphate. Cytochrome a is slightly distinct, as it occurs at the mitochondrial membrane, binds directly to oxygen, and transports protons as well as electrons, as follows:

:4 Cytc2+ + O2 + 8H → 4 Cytc3+ + 2 H2O + 4H

Although the heme proteins are the most important class of iron-containing proteins, the iron–sulfur proteins are also very important, being involved in electron transfer, which is possible since iron can exist stably in either the +2 or +3 oxidation states. These have one, two, four, or eight iron atoms that are each approximately tetrahedrally coordinated to four sulfur atoms; because of this tetrahedral coordination, they always have high-spin iron. The simplest of such compounds is rubredoxin, which has only one iron atom coordinated to four sulfur atoms from cysteine residues in the surrounding peptide chains. Another important class of iron–sulfur proteins is the ferredoxins, which have multiple iron atoms. Transferrin does not belong to either of these classes.

The ability of sea mussels to maintain their grip on rocks in the ocean is facilitated by their use of organometallic iron-based bonds in their protein-rich cuticles. Based on synthetic replicas, the presence of iron in these structures increased elastic modulus 770 times, tensile strength 58 times, and toughness 92 times. The amount of stress required to permanently damage them increased 76 times.

===Nutrition===
==== Diet====
Iron is pervasive, but particularly rich sources of dietary iron include red meat, oysters, beans, poultry, fish, leaf vegetables, watercress, tofu, and blackstrap molasses. Bread and breakfast cereals are sometimes specifically fortified with iron.

Iron provided by dietary supplements is often found as iron(II) fumarate, although iron(II) sulfate is cheaper and is absorbed equally well. Elemental iron, or reduced iron, despite being absorbed at only one-third to two-thirds the efficiency (relative to iron sulfate), is often added to foods such as breakfast cereals or enriched wheat flour. Iron is most available to the body when chelated to amino acids and is also available for use as a common iron supplement. Glycine, the least expensive amino acid, is most often used to produce iron glycinate supplements.

====Dietary recommendations====
The U.S. Institute of Medicine (IOM) updated Estimated Average Requirements (EARs) and Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for iron in 2001. The current EAR for iron for women ages 1418 is 7.9 mg/day, 8.1 mg/day for ages 1950 and 5.0 mg/day thereafter (postmenopause). For men, the EAR is 6.0 mg/day for ages 19 and up. The RDA is 15.0 mg/day for women ages 1518, 18.0 mg/day for ages 1950 and 8.0 mg/day thereafter. For men, 8.0 mg/day for ages 19 and up. RDAs are higher than EARs so as to identify amounts that will cover people with higher-than-average requirements. RDA for pregnancy is 27 mg/day and, for lactation, 9 mg/day. For children ages 13 years 7 mg/day, 10 mg/day for ages 4–8 and 8 mg/day for ages 913. As for safety, the IOM also sets Tolerable upper intake levels (ULs) for vitamins and minerals when evidence is sufficient. In the case of iron, the UL is set at 45 mg/day. Collectively the EARs, RDAs and ULs are referred to as Dietary Reference Intakes.

The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) refers to the collective set of information as Dietary Reference Values, with Population Reference Intake (PRI) instead of RDA, and Average Requirement instead of EAR. AI and UL are defined the same as in the United States. For women the PRI is 13 mg/day ages 1517 years, 16 mg/day for women ages 18 and up who are premenopausal and 11 mg/day postmenopausal. For pregnancy and lactation, 16 mg/day. For men the PRI is 11 mg/day ages 15 and older. For children ages 1 to 14, the PRI increases from 7 to 11 mg/day. The PRIs are higher than the U.S. RDAs, with the exception of pregnancy. The EFSA reviewed the same safety question did not establish a UL.

Infants may require iron supplements if they are bottle-fed cow&#x27;s milk. Frequent blood donors are at risk of low iron levels and are often advised to supplement their iron intake.

For U.S. food and dietary supplement labeling purposes, the amount in a serving is expressed as a percent of Daily Value (%DV). For iron labeling purposes, 100% of the Daily Value was 18 mg, and remained unchanged at 18 mg. A table of the old and new adult daily values is provided at Reference Daily Intake.

===Deficiency===
Iron deficiency is the most common nutritional deficiency in the world. When loss of iron is not adequately compensated by adequate dietary iron intake, a state of latent iron deficiency occurs, which over time leads to iron-deficiency anemia if left untreated, which is characterised by an insufficient number of red blood cells and an insufficient amount of hemoglobin. Children, pre-menopausal women (women of child-bearing age), and people with poor diet are most susceptible to the disease. Most cases of iron-deficiency anemia are mild, but if not treated can cause problems like fast or irregular heartbeat, complications during pregnancy, and delayed growth in infants and children.

The brain is resistant to acute iron deficiency due to the slow transport of iron through the blood brain barrier. Acute fluctuations in iron status (marked by serum ferritin levels) do not reflect brain iron status, but prolonged nutritional iron deficiency is suspected to reduce brain iron concentrations over time. In the brain, iron plays a role in oxygen transport, myelin synthesis, mitochondrial respiration, and as a cofactor for neurotransmitter synthesis and metabolism. Animal models of nutritional iron deficiency report biomolecular changes resembling those seen in Parkinson&#x27;s and Huntington&#x27;s disease. However, age-related accumulation of iron in the brain has also been linked to the development of Parkinson&#x27;s.

===Excess===

Iron uptake is tightly regulated by the human body, which has no regulated physiological means of excreting iron. Only small amounts of iron are lost daily due to mucosal and skin epithelial cell sloughing, so control of iron levels is primarily accomplished by regulating uptake. Regulation of iron uptake is impaired in some people as a result of a genetic defect that maps to the HLA-H gene region on chromosome 6 and leads to abnormally low levels of hepcidin, a key regulator of the entry of iron into the circulatory system in mammals. In these people, excessive iron intake can result in iron overload disorders, known medically as hemochromatosis. Many people have an undiagnosed genetic susceptibility to iron overload, and are not aware of a family history of the problem. For this reason, people should not take iron supplements unless they suffer from iron deficiency and have consulted a doctor. Hemochromatosis is estimated to be the cause of 0.3–0.8% of all metabolic diseases of Caucasians. 

Overdoses of ingested iron can cause excessive levels of free iron in the blood. High blood levels of free ferrous iron react with peroxides to produce highly reactive free radicals that can damage DNA, proteins, lipids, and other cellular components. Iron toxicity occurs when the cell contains free iron, which generally occurs when iron levels exceed the availability of transferrin to bind the iron. Damage to the cells of the gastrointestinal tract can also prevent them from regulating iron absorption, leading to further increases in blood levels. Iron typically damages cells in the heart, liver and elsewhere, causing adverse effects that include coma, metabolic acidosis, shock, liver failure, coagulopathy, long-term organ damage, and even death. Humans experience iron toxicity when the iron exceeds 20 milligrams for every kilogram of body mass; 60 milligrams per kilogram is considered a lethal dose. Overconsumption of iron, often the result of children eating large quantities of ferrous sulfate tablets intended for adult consumption, is one of the most common toxicological causes of death in children under six. The Dietary Reference Intake (DRI) sets the Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) for adults at 45 mg/day. For children under fourteen years old the UL is 40 mg/day.

The medical management of iron toxicity is complicated, and can include use of a specific chelating agent called deferoxamine to bind and expel excess iron from the body.

===ADHD===
Some research has suggested that low thalamic iron levels may play a role in the pathophysiology of ADHD. Some researchers have found that iron supplementation can be effective especially in the inattentive subtype of the disorder.

Some researchers in the 2000s suggested a link between low levels of iron in the blood and ADHD. A 2012 study found no such correlation.

===Cancer===
The role of iron in cancer defense can be described as a &quot;double-edged sword&quot; because of its pervasive presence in non-pathological processes. People having chemotherapy may develop iron deficiency and anemia, for which intravenous iron therapy is used to restore iron levels. Iron overload, which may occur from high consumption of red meat, may initiate tumor growth and increase susceptibility to cancer onset, particularly for colorectal cancer.
===Marine systems===
Iron plays an essential role in marine systems and can act as a limiting nutrient for planktonic activity. Because of this, too much of a decrease in iron may lead to a decrease in growth rates in phytoplanktonic organisms such as diatoms. Iron can also be oxidized by marine microbes under conditions that are high in iron and low in oxygen.

Iron can enter marine systems through adjoining rivers and directly from the atmosphere. Once iron enters the ocean, it can be distributed throughout the water column through ocean mixing and through recycling on the cellular level. In the arctic, sea ice plays a major role in the store and distribution of iron in the ocean, depleting oceanic iron as it freezes in the winter and releasing it back into the water when thawing occurs in the summer. The iron cycle can fluctuate the forms of iron from aqueous to particle forms altering the availability of iron to primary producers. Increased light and warmth increases the amount of iron that is in forms that are usable by primary producers.

==See also==
* Economically important iron deposits include:
** Carajás Mine in the state of Pará, Brazil, is thought to be the largest iron deposit in the world.
** El Mutún in Bolivia, where 10% of the world&#x27;s accessible iron ore is located.
** Hamersley Basin is the largest iron ore deposit in Australia.
** Kiirunavaara in Sweden, where one of the world&#x27;s largest deposits of iron ore is located
** The Mesabi Iron Range is the chief iron ore mining district in the United States.
* Iron and steel industry
* Iron cycle
* Iron nanoparticle
* Iron–platinum nanoparticle
* Iron fertilization – proposed fertilization of oceans to stimulate phytoplankton growth
* Iron-oxidizing bacteria
* List of countries by iron production
* Pelletising – process of creation of iron ore pellets
* Rustproof iron
* Steel

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
==Further reading==

* H.R. Schubert, &quot;History of the British Iron and Steel Industry ... to 1775 AD&quot; (Routledge, London, 1957)
* R.F. Tylecote, &quot;History of Metallurgy&quot; (Institute of Materials, London 1992).
* R.F. Tylecote, &quot;Iron in the Industrial Revolution&quot; in J. Day and R.F. Tylecote, &quot;The Industrial Revolution in Metals&quot; (Institute of Materials 1991), 200–60.
==External links==


* It&#x27;s Elemental – Iron
* Iron at &quot;The Periodic Table of Videos&quot; (University of Nottingham)
* Metallurgy for the non-Metallurgist
* Iron by J. B. Calvert</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="0" end="4" title="Iron" label="Iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="10" end="26" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q102500" start="39" end="45" title="chemical symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="46" end="48" title="Iron" label="Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="56" end="69" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="82" end="87" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19588" start="108" end="131" title="first transition series" label="first transition series"/>
<link wikidata="Q202224" start="136" end="143" title="group 8 element" label="group 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="151" end="165" title="periodic table" label="periodic table"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="187" end="206" title="abundance of the chemical elements#Earth" label="most common element"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="210" end="215" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q857867" start="246" end="251" title="outer core" label="outer"/>
<link wikidata="Q394352" start="256" end="266" title="inner core" label="inner core"/>
<link wikidata="Q24580" start="290" end="306" title="abundance of elements in Earth&amp;#x27;s crust" label="abundant element"/>
<link wikidata="Q15316" start="314" end="332" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="360" end="369" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="424" end="432" title="iron ore" label="iron ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724341" start="443" end="447" title="kiln" label="kiln"/>
<link wikidata="Q96384666" start="452" end="459" title="Metallurgical furnace" label="furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748405" start="518" end="523" title="smelting" label="smelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="524" end="530" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="573" end="580" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26257" start="592" end="609" title="2nd millennium BC" label="2nd millennium BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q39546" start="630" end="634" title="tool" label="tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q728" start="640" end="646" title="weapon" label="weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q518350" start="666" end="679" title="list of copper alloys" label="copper alloys"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="769" end="779" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="787" end="795" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281534" start="804" end="816" title="modern world" label="modern world"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="839" end="844" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="846" end="861" title="stainless steel" label="stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="863" end="872" title="cast iron" label="cast iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070521" start="877" end="891" title="alloy steel" label="special steels"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870931" start="992" end="1015" title="iron and steel industry" label="iron and steel industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="1246" end="1251" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q462174" start="1278" end="1285" title="hydrate" label="hydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q721849" start="1287" end="1297" title="iron oxide" label="iron oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q184197" start="1318" end="1322" title="rust" label="rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q917260" start="1373" end="1384" title="passivation (chemistry)" label="passivating"/>
<link wikidata="Q428946" start="1556" end="1564" title="iron(II)" label="iron(II)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233795" start="1569" end="1578" title="iron(III)" label="iron(III)"/>
<link wikidata="Q202224" start="1656" end="1671" title="group 8 element" label="group 8 element"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086" start="1674" end="1683" title="ruthenium" label="ruthenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q751" start="1688" end="1694" title="osmium" label="osmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q484152" start="1736" end="1751" title="oxidation state" label="oxidation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="1785" end="1805" title="coordination complex" label="coordination complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q211972" start="1831" end="1840" title="ferrocene" label="ferrocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479795" start="1842" end="1854" title="potassium ferrioxalate" label="ferrioxalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q421894" start="1860" end="1873" title="Prussian blue" label="Prussian blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q43041" start="2029" end="2039" title="hemoglobin" label="hemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192642" start="2044" end="2053" title="myoglobin" label="myoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="2065" end="2072" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873" start="2098" end="2114" title="oxygen transport" label="oxygen transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873" start="2118" end="2123" title="blood" label="blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365" start="2146" end="2152" title="muscle" label="muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925744" start="2189" end="2210" title="human iron metabolism" label="human iron metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="2311" end="2316" title="redox" label="redox"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="2317" end="2324" title="enzymes" label="enzymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q912751" start="2338" end="2358" title="cellular respiration" label="cellular respiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="2363" end="2386" title="oxidation and reduction" label="oxidation and reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q9887" start="2559" end="2560" title="α" label="α"/>
<link wikidata="Q14387" start="2562" end="2563" title="Gamma" label="γ"/>
<link wikidata="Q14390" start="2565" end="2566" title="Delta (letter)" label="δ"/>
<link wikidata="Q14392" start="2572" end="2573" title="Epsilon" label="ε"/>
<link wikidata="Q473227" start="2741" end="2760" title="body-centered cubic" label="body-centered cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="2767" end="2784" title="crystal structure" label="crystal structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q473227" start="2856" end="2875" title="face-centered cubic" label="face-centered cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q487286" start="2904" end="2913" title="austenite" label="austenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037840" start="3299" end="3321" title="hexagonal close-packed" label="hexagonal close-packed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5748724" start="3362" end="3368" title="hexaferrum" label="ε-iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q14382" start="3521" end="3522" title="Beta" label="β"/>
<link wikidata="Q648961" start="3618" end="3630" title="orthorhombic" label="orthorhombic"/>
<link wikidata="Q394352" start="3880" end="3903" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s inner core" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s inner core"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="3948" end="3954" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="3955" end="3960" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4531954" start="4076" end="4099" title="enthalpy of atomization" label="enthalpy of atomization"/>
<link wikidata="Q713" start="4154" end="4162" title="scandium" label="scandium"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="4166" end="4174" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="4388" end="4397" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086" start="4539" end="4548" title="ruthenium" label="ruthenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q751" start="4557" end="4563" title="osmium" label="osmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q191073" start="4808" end="4819" title="Curie point" label="Curie point"/>
<link wikidata="Q188479" start="4845" end="4857" title="paramagnetic" label="paramagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q184207" start="4861" end="4874" title="ferromagnetic" label="ferromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="4880" end="4885" title="Spin (physics)" label="spins"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="4998" end="5012" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069637" start="5334" end="5349" title="magnetic domain" label="magnetic domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11658" start="5885" end="5907" title="electrical transformer" label="electrical transformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364527" start="5910" end="5928" title="magnetic recording" label="magnetic recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q72313" start="5940" end="5954" title="electric motor" label="electric motor"/>
<link wikidata="Q898226" start="5969" end="5983" title="lattice defect" label="lattice defect"/>
<link wikidata="Q11421" start="6192" end="6198" title="magnet" label="magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105088" start="6267" end="6275" title="Ferrite (magnet)" label="ferrites"/>
<link wikidata="Q181395" start="6298" end="6307" title="magnetite" label="magnetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q217121" start="6398" end="6412" title="ferrimagnetism" label="ferrimagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480938" start="6496" end="6505" title="lodestone" label="lodestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="6530" end="6537" title="compass" label="compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830907" start="6637" end="6650" title="computer memory" label="core memories"/>
<link wikidata="Q193663" start="6652" end="6665" title="magnetic tape" label="magnetic tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="6668" end="6676" title="floppy disk" label="floppies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="6682" end="6686" title="hard disk drive" label="disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q740" start="6717" end="6723" title="cobalt" label="cobalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="6779" end="6786" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052454" start="6820" end="6824" title="iron-56" label="56Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879445" start="6967" end="6979" title="nuclear spin" label="nuclear spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q108149" start="6989" end="6996" title="nuclide" label="nuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q901747" start="7028" end="7051" title="double beta decay" label="double electron capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422075" start="7193" end="7213" title="extinct radionuclide" label="extinct radionuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="7222" end="7231" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q727373" start="7351" end="7355" title="nickel-60" label="60Ni"/>
<link wikidata="Q471702" start="7430" end="7445" title="nucleosynthesis" label="nucleosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="7473" end="7482" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q180809" start="7535" end="7552" title="mass spectrometry" label="mass spectrometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q878130" start="7662" end="7676" title="stable isotope" label="stable isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008" start="7722" end="7727" title="Earth science" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q104499" start="7732" end="7749" title="planetary science" label="planetary science"/>
<link wikidata="Q191637" start="7970" end="7983" title="daughter product" label="granddaughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535" start="8098" end="8127" title="Formation and evolution of the Solar System" label="formation of the Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985521" start="8208" end="8212" title="aluminium-26" label="26Al"/>
<link wikidata="Q910022" start="8247" end="8262" title="planetary differentiation" label="differentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="8266" end="8274" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="8430" end="8442" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q471702" start="8579" end="8594" title="nucleosynthesis" label="nucleosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q103517" start="8611" end="8625" title="alpha particle" label="alpha particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143386" start="8674" end="8687" title="alpha process" label="alpha process"/>
<link wikidata="Q238323" start="8691" end="8707" title="nuclear reaction" label="nuclear reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q258580" start="8728" end="8751" title="silicon burning process" label="silicon burning process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436016" start="8797" end="8820" title="Population III stars" label="extremely massive stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394769" start="9000" end="9019" title="photodisintegration" label="photodisintegration"/>
<link wikidata="Q207436" start="9265" end="9282" title="supernova remnant" label="supernova remnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q50081" start="9404" end="9413" title="red giant" label="red giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q827989" start="9450" end="9464" title="iron meteorite" label="iron meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q742129" start="9489" end="9505" title="Planetary core" label="cores of planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="9514" end="9519" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q217030" start="9586" end="9592" title="Metallicity" label="metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3840065" start="9619" end="9632" title="Atomic mass" label="atomic weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q428867" start="9657" end="9673" title="Abundance of the chemical elements" label="abundant element"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="9681" end="9689" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123417" start="9711" end="9721" title="refractory" label="refractory"/>
<link wikidata="Q284149" start="9803" end="9807" title="nickel-62" label="62Ni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="10141" end="10150" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q285033" start="10182" end="10203" title="r-process" label="rapid neutron capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q472374" start="10237" end="10247" title="timeline of the far future" label="far future"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065997" start="10279" end="10291" title="proton decay" label="proton decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="10313" end="10319" title="nuclear fusion" label="fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q175751" start="10334" end="10352" title="quantum tunnelling" label="quantum tunnelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q179856" start="10439" end="10462" title="Alpha decay" label="alpha-particle emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q128207" start="10656" end="10669" title="Terrestrial planet" label="rocky planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q582000" start="10763" end="10776" title="Type Ia supernova" label="Ia supernovae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248028" start="10848" end="10859" title="native iron" label="native iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q394352" start="10964" end="10969" title="inner core" label="inner"/>
<link wikidata="Q857867" start="10974" end="10984" title="outer core" label="outer core"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="11113" end="11119" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500960" start="11201" end="11228" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q128207" start="11240" end="11258" title="terrestrial planet" label="terrestrial planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q308" start="11261" end="11268" title="Mercury (planet)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="11270" end="11275" title="Venus (planet)" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="11281" end="11285" title="Mars (planet)" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="11302" end="11306" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q847310" start="11375" end="11390" title="M-type asteroid" label="M-type asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q827989" start="11472" end="11486" title="iron meteorite" label="iron meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q193057" start="11574" end="11585" title="cold forging" label="cold-worked"/>
<link wikidata="Q189975" start="11724" end="11729" title="Inuit people" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="11733" end="11742" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034516" start="11783" end="11802" title="Cape York meteorite" label="Cape York meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="11848" end="11857" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q420547" start="11902" end="11909" title="taenite" label="taenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q430026" start="11928" end="11936" title="kamacite" label="kamacite"/>
<link wikidata="Q898412" start="12119" end="12127" title="fugacity" label="fugacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248028" start="12183" end="12196" title="telluric iron" label="telluric iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228827" start="12245" end="12257" title="Disko Island" label="Disko Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605" start="12277" end="12284" title="Sakha Republic" label="Yakutia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="12288" end="12294" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q505534" start="12299" end="12303" title="Bühl (Baden)" label="Bühl"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="12307" end="12314" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069735" start="12339" end="12353" title="Ferropericlase" label="Ferropericlase"/>
<link wikidata="Q426635" start="12376" end="12385" title="periclase" label="periclase"/>
<link wikidata="Q415889" start="12396" end="12403" title="wüstite" label="wüstite"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091649" start="12451" end="12463" title="lower mantle" label="lower mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q22998485" start="12553" end="12572" title="silicate perovskite" label="silicate perovskite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638707" start="12652" end="12667" title="Transition zone (Earth)" label="transition zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936046" start="12710" end="12719" title="ringwoodite" label="γ-olivine"/>
<link wikidata="Q22998485" start="12889" end="12908" title="Silicate perovskite" label="Silicate perovskite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="13018" end="13025" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q394352" start="13186" end="13191" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s inner core" label="inner"/>
<link wikidata="Q857867" start="13196" end="13201" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s outer core" label="outer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4232578" start="13241" end="13259" title="Crust (geology)" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="13389" end="13395" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="13397" end="13404" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="13410" end="13419" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="13506" end="13519" title="Iron ore" label="iron minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q721849" start="13547" end="13557" title="iron oxide" label="iron oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q103223" start="13575" end="13583" title="hematite" label="hematite"/>
<link wikidata="Q181395" start="13593" end="13602" title="magnetite" label="magnetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q192669" start="13616" end="13624" title="siderite" label="siderite"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="13654" end="13666" title="iron ore" label="ores of iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="13673" end="13685" title="igneous rock" label="igneous rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q421944" start="13721" end="13731" title="pyrrhotite" label="pyrrhotite"/>
<link wikidata="Q410101" start="13736" end="13747" title="pentlandite" label="pentlandite"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="13756" end="13766" title="weathering" label="weathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q419170" start="13965" end="13980" title="iron(III) oxide" label="iron(III) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q304213" start="14009" end="14031" title="banded iron formations" label="banded iron formations"/>
<link wikidata="Q751300" start="14134" end="14139" title="shale" label="shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070438" start="14144" end="14149" title="chert" label="chert"/>
<link wikidata="Q194191" start="14301" end="14306" title="ochre" label="ochre"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="14349" end="14356" title="pigment" label="pigment"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="14444" end="14448" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978455" start="14499" end="14512" title="Painted Hills" label="Painted Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="14516" end="14522" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875445" start="14531" end="14544" title="Buntsandstein" label="Buntsandstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997927" start="14585" end="14591" title="Bunter (geology)" label="Bunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q901029" start="14632" end="14640" title="Brown Jurassic" label="jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80874" start="14679" end="14687" title="Donzdorf" label="Donzdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q810781" start="14704" end="14714" title="Bath stone" label="Bath stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773194" start="14841" end="14873" title="Mars surface color" label="red color of the surface of Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q106551" start="14909" end="14917" title="regolith" label="regolith"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="14982" end="14988" title="pyrite" label="pyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052735" start="15201" end="15229" title="International Resource Panel" label="International Resource Panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822707" start="15237" end="15267" title="Metal Stocks in Society report" label="Metal Stocks in Society report"/>
<link wikidata="Q19588" start="15657" end="15673" title="transition metal" label="transition metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q237200" start="15789" end="15813" title="organometallic chemistry" label="organometallic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q211972" start="15865" end="15874" title="ferrocene" label="ferrocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q53859" start="16152" end="16165" title="electron configuration" label="configuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q484152" start="16326" end="16341" title="oxidation state" label="oxidation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q428946" start="16347" end="16355" title="iron(II)" label="iron(II)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233795" start="16386" end="16395" title="iron(III)" label="iron(III)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029771" start="16438" end="16461" title="high-valent iron" label="higher oxidation states"/>
<link wikidata="Q418315" start="16480" end="16497" title="potassium ferrate" label="potassium ferrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139938" start="16853" end="16863" title="organoiron chemistry" label="organoiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q899927" start="17024" end="17046" title="Mössbauer spectroscopy" label="Mössbauer spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104902663" start="17053" end="17075" title="mixed valence compound" label="mixed valence compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q181395" start="17130" end="17139" title="magnetite" label="magnetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q421894" start="17144" end="17157" title="Prussian blue" label="Prussian blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q422321" start="17220" end="17229" title="blueprint" label="blueprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q740" start="17780" end="17786" title="cobalt" label="cobalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="17791" end="17797" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q111092" start="17853" end="17869" title="room temperature" label="room temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072968" start="17971" end="17981" title="iron triad" label="iron triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="18043" end="18050" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q912400" start="18199" end="18209" title="pyrophoricity" label="pyrophoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="18326" end="18337" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="18449" end="18466" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q85884419" start="18493" end="18510" title="electrolytic iron" label="electrolytic iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q721849" start="18647" end="18676" title="iron oxide" label="oxide and hydroxide compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q411235" start="18698" end="18716" title="iron(II,III) oxide" label="iron(II,III) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q419170" start="18730" end="18745" title="iron(III) oxide" label="iron(III) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q196680" start="18755" end="18769" title="Iron(II) oxide" label="Iron(II) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q899734" start="18869" end="18896" title="non-stoichiometric compound" label="non-stoichiometric compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q964257" start="18995" end="19003" title="bloomery" label="bloomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105088" start="19064" end="19072" title="Ferrite (magnet)" label="ferrites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364527" start="19081" end="19097" title="magnetic storage" label="magnetic storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="19158" end="19169" title="iron pyrite" label="iron pyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q81043" start="19297" end="19308" title="polysulfide" label="polysulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314" start="19349" end="19364" title="sodium chloride" label="sodium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q193086" start="19424" end="19430" title="halide" label="halide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572088" start="19532" end="19547" title="hydrohalic acid" label="hydrohalic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q399771" start="19723" end="19738" title="ferric chloride" label="ferric chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q18235375" start="19800" end="19813" title="Ferric iodide" label="Ferric iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q412278" start="20091" end="20109" title="iron pentacarbonyl" label="iron pentacarbonyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103" start="20115" end="20121" title="iodine" label="iodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="20126" end="20141" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q150440" start="20161" end="20167" title="hexane" label="hexane"/>
<link wikidata="Q186487" start="20353" end="20381" title="standard reduction potential" label="standard reduction potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q958387" start="20481" end="20488" title="ferrate" label="ferrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q623024" start="20639" end="20651" title="aquo complex" label="aquo complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q419170" start="20819" end="20834" title="iron(III) oxide" label="iron(III) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q424085" start="21100" end="21115" title="charge-transfer complex" label="charge transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q181699" start="21456" end="21465" title="carbonate" label="carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4214595" start="21515" end="21533" title="iron(II) carbonate" label="iron(II) carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q419170" start="21705" end="21720" title="iron(III) oxide" label="iron(III) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="22063" end="22067" title="salt (chemistry)" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7706569" start="22068" end="22124" title="tetrakis(methylammonium) hexachloroferrate(III) chloride" label="tetrakis(methylammonium) hexachloroferrate(III) chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q283611" start="22173" end="22189" title="geometric isomer" label="geometric isomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15634153" start="22227" end="22286" title="chlorohydridobis(bis-1,2-(diphenylphosphino)ethane)iron(II)" label="chlorohydridobis(bis-1,2-(diphenylphosphino)ethane)iron(II)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23005640" start="22349" end="22355" title="moiety (chemistry)" label="moiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q417351" start="22389" end="22396" title="oxalate" label="oxalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q752152" start="22414" end="22431" title="helical chirality" label="helical chirality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479795" start="22627" end="22649" title="Potassium ferrioxalate" label="Potassium ferrioxalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q403898" start="22670" end="22681" title="actinometry" label="actinometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553321" start="22701" end="22712" title="sodium ferrioxalate" label="sodium salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q862876" start="22723" end="22737" title="photoreduction" label="photoreduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q462174" start="22787" end="22796" title="hydrate" label="dihydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990904" start="22800" end="22816" title="iron(II) oxalate" label="iron(II) oxalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="22823" end="22830" title="polymer" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="23053" end="23061" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q130336" start="23345" end="23351" title="phenol" label="phenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q408053" start="23356" end="23360" title="enol" label="enol"/>
<link wikidata="Q898683" start="23383" end="23403" title="ferric chloride test" label="ferric chloride test"/>
<link wikidata="Q399771" start="23448" end="23466" title="iron(III) chloride" label="iron(III) chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q718074" start="23560" end="23564" title="aryl" label="aryl"/>
<link wikidata="Q77747995" start="23876" end="23887" title="Thiocyanate" label="Thiocyanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q899789" start="24101" end="24123" title="spectrochemical series" label="spectrochemical series"/>
<link wikidata="Q55076544" start="24132" end="24139" title="cyanide" label="cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577416" start="24241" end="24252" title="spin states (d electrons)" label="spin states"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139938" start="24879" end="24899" title="Organoiron chemistry" label="Organoiron chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q237200" start="24916" end="24939" title="organometallic compound" label="organometallic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197471" start="25045" end="25062" title="cyanometallate" label="cyanide complexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q416523" start="25064" end="25080" title="carbonyl complex" label="carbonyl complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q416937" start="25084" end="25092" title="sandwich compound" label="sandwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570545" start="25097" end="25119" title="half-sandwich compound" label="half-sandwich compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q421894" start="25122" end="25135" title="Prussian blue" label="Prussian blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q408810" start="25446" end="25468" title="potassium ferricyanide" label="potassium ferricyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q422017" start="25473" end="25495" title="potassium ferrocyanide" label="potassium ferrocyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q412278" start="25569" end="25587" title="iron pentacarbonyl" label="iron pentacarbonyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="25664" end="25679" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035551" start="25724" end="25737" title="carbonyl iron" label="carbonyl iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611095" start="25787" end="25798" title="Thermal decomposition" label="Thermolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q382703" start="25827" end="25849" title="triiron dodecacarbonyl" label="triiron dodecacarbonyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271014" start="25935" end="25964" title="disodium tetracarbonylferrate" label="disodium tetracarbonylferrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985284" start="26053" end="26090" title="Cyclopentadienyliron dicarbonyl dimer" label="Cyclopentadienyliron dicarbonyl dimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q416937" start="26213" end="26230" title="sandwich compound" label="sandwich compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q211972" start="26231" end="26240" title="ferrocene" label="ferrocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q232316" start="26380" end="26388" title="Robert Burns Woodward" label="Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q274128" start="26393" end="26402" title="Geoffrey Wilkinson" label="Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q44594" start="26407" end="26414" title="Ernst Otto Fischer" label="Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="26543" end="26551" title="catalyst" label="catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q6424091" start="26558" end="26573" title="Knölker complex" label="Knölker complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143742" start="26593" end="26615" title="transfer hydrogenation" label="transfer hydrogenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170744" start="26629" end="26635" title="ketone" label="ketone"/>
<link wikidata="Q214863" start="26726" end="26742" title="iron(II) sulfate" label="iron(II) sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q504492" start="26751" end="26754" title="Water of crystallization" label="H2O"/>
<link wikidata="Q399771" start="26760" end="26778" title="iron(III) chloride" label="iron(III) chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q373365" start="26901" end="26917" title="Mohr&amp;#x27;s salt" label="Mohr&amp;#x27;s salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q860451" start="27137" end="27144" title="wrought iron" label="wrought"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823449" start="27503" end="27516" title="meteoric iron" label="meteoric iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q906822" start="27553" end="27559" title="Gerzeh culture" label="Gerzeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3103845" start="27570" end="27586" title="G. A. Wainwright" label="G. A. Wainwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962483" start="27880" end="27886" title="Tutankhamun&amp;#x27;s iron dagger blade" label="dagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q12154" start="27934" end="27945" title="Tutankhamun" label="Tutankhamun"/>
<link wikidata="Q193057" start="28219" end="28230" title="cold forging" label="cold forged"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="28278" end="28284" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="28360" end="28377" title="Middle Bronze Age" label="Middle Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748405" start="28450" end="28457" title="smelting" label="smelted"/>
<link wikidata="Q21765090" start="28468" end="28473" title="Asmar" label="Asmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="28577" end="28585" title="Hittites" label="Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="28625" end="28633" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="28772" end="28780" title="Hittites" label="Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="28951" end="28959" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630441" start="29001" end="29006" title="History of metallurgy in the Indian subcontinent" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="29047" end="29053" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="29097" end="29105" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="29113" end="29121" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630441" start="29152" end="29187" title="history of metallurgy in South Asia" label="history of metallurgy in South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="29211" end="29216" title="Vedas" label="Vedas"/>
<link wikidata="Q727413" start="29326" end="29333" title="rigveda" label="rigveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q236092" start="29512" end="29523" title="Atharvaveda" label="Atharvaveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="29584" end="29592" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="29680" end="29686" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="29839" end="29845" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="29870" end="29885" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="29914" end="29919" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="29964" end="29969" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q181485" start="30120" end="30133" title="blast furnace" label="blast furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="30218" end="30239" title="Warring States period" label="Warring States period"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="30323" end="30327" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="30332" end="30336" title="Song dynasty" label="Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q373022" start="30394" end="30404" title="Henry Cort" label="Henry Cort"/>
<link wikidata="Q901785" start="30430" end="30438" title="pig iron" label="pig iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q860451" start="30442" end="30454" title="wrought iron" label="wrought iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q734243" start="30530" end="30546" title="Puddling (metallurgy)" label="puddling process"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185061" start="30613" end="30624" title="Joseph Hall (metallurgist)" label="Joseph Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="30646" end="30655" title="Cast iron" label="Cast iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356042" start="30848" end="30859" title="Luhe County" label="Luhe County"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963" start="30861" end="30868" title="Jiangsu" label="Jiangsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="30901" end="30914" title="ancient China" label="ancient China"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="30970" end="30978" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q901785" start="31081" end="31089" title="pig iron" label="pig iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823342" start="31097" end="31109" title="finery forge" label="finery forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q177463" start="31137" end="31145" title="charcoal" label="charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q181485" start="31178" end="31192" title="blast furnaces" label="blast furnaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q329924" start="31536" end="31551" title="Abraham Darby I" label="Abraham Darby I"/>
<link wikidata="Q192795" start="31566" end="31570" title="Coke (fuel)" label="coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="31759" end="31780" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q99200" start="32193" end="32210" title="The Iron Bridge" label="first iron bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q12760" start="32431" end="32443" title="steam engine" label="steam engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q53764732" start="32634" end="32663" title="CJK" label="Chinese, Japanese, and Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q964257" start="32823" end="32831" title="bloomery" label="bloomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131727" start="32848" end="32856" title="Luristan" label="Luristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144683" start="32934" end="32945" title="Wootz steel" label="Wootz steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q475736" start="32959" end="32973" title="Damascus steel" label="Damascus steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q759800" start="33155" end="33166" title="carburizing" label="carburizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823339" start="33187" end="33206" title="cementation process" label="cementation process"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="33248" end="33269" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q310201" start="33401" end="33415" title="Henry Bessemer" label="Henry Bessemer"/>
<link wikidata="Q39607" start="33686" end="33703" title="Antoine Lavoisier" label="Antoine Lavoisier"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="33800" end="33808" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q483948" start="33864" end="33884" title="conservation of mass" label="conservation of mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072288" start="34067" end="34080" title="Iron (metaphor)" label="as a metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072973" start="34088" end="34096" title="Iron in folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="34102" end="34107" title="Greeks" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="34113" end="34119" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q667285" start="34133" end="34147" title="Works and Days" label="Works and Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525748" start="34186" end="34197" title="ages of man" label="ages of man"/>
<link wikidata="Q814235" start="34464" end="34487" title="German Campaign of 1813" label="German Campaign of 1813"/>
<link wikidata="Q37134" start="34489" end="34510" title="Frederick William III" label="Frederick William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q154554" start="34539" end="34549" title="Iron Cross" label="Iron Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313201" start="34574" end="34595" title="Berlin iron jewellery" label="Berlin iron jewellery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006518" start="34665" end="34677" title="royal family" label="royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="35370" end="35377" title="redox" label="reduced"/>
<link wikidata="Q192795" start="35383" end="35387" title="coke (fuel)" label="coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q181485" start="35393" end="35406" title="blast furnace" label="blast furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q178977" start="35472" end="35488" title="silicate mineral" label="silicate mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q901785" start="35520" end="35528" title="pig iron" label="pig iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070521" start="35755" end="35766" title="alloy steel" label="alloy steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q103223" start="35856" end="35864" title="hematite" label="hematite"/>
<link wikidata="Q181395" start="35868" end="35877" title="magnetite" label="magnetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="35897" end="35901" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134475" start="35968" end="35972" title="Flux (metallurgy)" label="flux"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="35974" end="35983" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283" start="35987" end="35995" title="Dolomites" label="dolomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="36155" end="36170" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q185006" start="36525" end="36538" title="calcium oxide" label="calcium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="36569" end="36575" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q271768" start="36586" end="36590" title="slag" label="slag"/>
<link wikidata="Q416365" start="36603" end="36619" title="calcium silicate" label="calcium silicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q34442" start="36867" end="36871" title="road" label="road"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="36922" end="36933" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="37352" end="37357" title="steel" label="steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q668400" start="37466" end="37478" title="cold working" label="cold working"/>
<link wikidata="Q452648" start="37480" end="37491" title="hot rolling" label="hot rolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q193057" start="37493" end="37500" title="forging" label="forging"/>
<link wikidata="Q192047" start="37502" end="37511" title="machining" label="machining"/>
<link wikidata="Q483269" start="37593" end="37602" title="cast iron" label="cast iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q13883136" start="37621" end="37630" title="foundry" label="foundries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458918" start="37740" end="37754" title="heat treatment" label="heat treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q187360" start="37788" end="37797" title="annealing (metallurgy)" label="Annealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313218" start="38054" end="38075" title="Direct reduced iron" label="Direct iron reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578996" start="38082" end="38098" title="Sponge iron reaction" label="reduces iron ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313218" start="38124" end="38147" title="sponge iron" label="&amp;quot;sponge&amp;quot; iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="38417" end="38423" title="Silica" label="Silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="38447" end="38456" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q337192" start="38593" end="38610" title="thermite reaction" label="thermite reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823342" start="38783" end="38795" title="finery forge" label="finery forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q734243" start="38798" end="38806" title="Puddling (metallurgy)" label="puddling"/>
<link wikidata="Q334055" start="38817" end="38835" title="Bessemer converter" label="Bessemer converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q45728" start="38838" end="38857" title="open hearth furnace" label="open hearth furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501437" start="38860" end="38880" title="basic oxygen furnace" label="basic oxygen furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q650993" start="38887" end="38907" title="electric arc furnace" label="electric arc furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q64403" start="39150" end="39162" title="electrolysis" label="electrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="39713" end="39724" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19768" start="40082" end="40094" title="machine tool" label="machine tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q160342" start="40097" end="40102" title="track (rail transport)" label="rails"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="40104" end="40114" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750281" start="40117" end="40127" title="hull (ship)" label="ship hulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q150425" start="40129" end="40154" title="rebar" label="concrete reinforcing bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q714750" start="40502" end="40514" title="Brinell scale" label="Brinell test"/>
<link wikidata="Q502723" start="40520" end="40533" title="Rockwell scale" label="Rockwell test"/>
<link wikidata="Q223404" start="40542" end="40563" title="Vickers hardness test" label="Vickers hardness test"/>
<link wikidata="Q85884419" start="40954" end="40971" title="electrolytic iron" label="electrolytic iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358064" start="41001" end="41022" title="Electrolytic process" label="electrolytic refining"/>
<link wikidata="Q502723" start="41159" end="41164" title="Rockwell scale" label="65 Rc"/>
<link wikidata="Q900891" start="41331" end="41340" title="Congener (chemistry)" label="congeners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086" start="41341" end="41350" title="ruthenium" label="ruthenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q751" start="41355" end="41361" title="osmium" label="osmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q487286" start="41525" end="41534" title="Austenite" label="Austenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="41697" end="41712" title="stainless steel" label="stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q901785" start="41870" end="41878" title="Pig iron" label="Pig iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="41952" end="41958" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="41972" end="41982" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="42287" end="42296" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="42313" end="42326" title="melting point" label="melting point"/>
<link wikidata="Q189335" start="42656" end="42665" title="cementite" label="cementite"/>
<link wikidata="Q387723" start="43165" end="43173" title="pearlite" label="pearlite"/>
<link wikidata="Q488950" start="43297" end="43307" title="martensite" label="martensite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055770" start="43576" end="43585" title="gray iron" label="gray iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309" start="43632" end="43640" title="graphite" label="graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q542690" start="43735" end="43755" title="stress concentration" label="stress concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q122490" start="43828" end="43840" title="ductile iron" label="ductile iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="43885" end="43894" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q860451" start="44054" end="44066" title="Wrought iron" label="Wrought iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q271768" start="44120" end="44124" title="slag" label="slag"/>
<link wikidata="Q967996" start="44259" end="44269" title="mild steel" label="mild steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q967996" start="44360" end="44372" title="Carbon steel" label="Carbon steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="44425" end="44434" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="44436" end="44442" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="44444" end="44454" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070521" start="44469" end="44480" title="Alloy steel" label="Alloy steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="44549" end="44557" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q722" start="44559" end="44567" title="vanadium" label="vanadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="44569" end="44579" title="molybdenum" label="molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="44589" end="44597" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="44737" end="44752" title="stainless steel" label="stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268600" start="44868" end="44872" title="HSLA steel" label="HSLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q85884419" start="45078" end="45095" title="electrolytic iron" label="electrolytic iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q211702" start="45143" end="45152" title="ductility" label="ductility"/>
<link wikidata="Q76005" start="45154" end="45170" title="tensile strength" label="tensile strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q486802" start="45172" end="45181" title="toughness" label="toughness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172868" start="45183" end="45199" title="fatigue limit" label="fatigue strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="45409" end="45413" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q184197" start="45551" end="45555" title="rust" label="rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q174219" start="45643" end="45648" title="Paint" label="Paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q690418" start="45653" end="45666" title="galvanization" label="galvanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q917260" start="45668" end="45679" title="Passivation (chemistry)" label="passivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q548465" start="45701" end="45707" title="bluing (steel)" label="bluing"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="45760" end="45765" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q15152527" start="45783" end="45802" title="cathodic protection" label="cathodic protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q214863" start="46059" end="46075" title="iron(II) sulfate" label="iron(II) sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="46116" end="46130" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356542" start="46345" end="46352" title="reagent" label="reagent"/>
<link wikidata="Q213669" start="46544" end="46563" title="Haber–Bosch process" label="Haber–Bosch process"/>
<link wikidata="Q654400" start="46602" end="46625" title="Fischer–Tropsch process" label="Fischer–Tropsch process"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="46663" end="46674" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q906075" start="46751" end="46768" title="Bechamp reduction" label="Bechamp reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q407290" start="46788" end="46800" title="nitrobenzene" label="nitrobenzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q186414" start="46804" end="46811" title="aniline" label="aniline"/>
<link wikidata="Q419170" start="46835" end="46850" title="Iron(III) oxide" label="Iron(III) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="46862" end="46871" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q337192" start="46906" end="46923" title="thermite" label="thermite reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="46964" end="46968" title="railroad" label="rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q412739" start="47011" end="47023" title="Iron(III) oxyhydroxide" label="oxyhydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="47054" end="47061" title="pigment" label="pigment"/>
<link wikidata="Q399771" start="47065" end="47083" title="Iron(III) chloride" label="Iron(III) chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q221275" start="47120" end="47136" title="sewage treatment" label="sewage treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q221425" start="47234" end="47241" title="industrial etching" label="etchant"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="47246" end="47252" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q173350" start="47275" end="47296" title="printed circuit board" label="printed circuit board"/>
<link wikidata="Q253941" start="47409" end="47417" title="Domestic canary" label="canaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q214863" start="47420" end="47436" title="Iron(II) sulfate" label="Iron(II) sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="47504" end="47510" title="redox" label="reduce"/>
<link wikidata="Q954674" start="47569" end="47591" title="iron deficiency anemia" label="iron deficiency anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q409021" start="47593" end="47610" title="Iron(III) sulfate" label="Iron(III) sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q407867" start="47670" end="47687" title="Iron(II) chloride" label="Iron(II) chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q27108300" start="47838" end="47858" title="Sodium nitroprusside" label="Sodium nitroprusside"/>
<link wikidata="Q14859627" start="47879" end="47890" title="vasodilator" label="vasodilator"/>
<link wikidata="Q37155" start="47905" end="47965" title="WHO Model List of Essential Medicines" label="World Health Organization&amp;#x27;s List of Essential Medicines"/>
<link wikidata="Q312085" start="48036" end="48055" title="iron–sulfur cluster" label="iron–sulfur cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q410381" start="48083" end="48094" title="nitrogenase" label="nitrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q272467" start="48135" end="48152" title="nitrogen fixation" label="nitrogen fixation"/>
<link wikidata="Q902898" start="48262" end="48279" title="electron transfer" label="electron transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q408068" start="48358" end="48368" title="cytochrome" label="cytochrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029771" start="48374" end="48390" title="high-valent iron" label="high-valent iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q12824566" start="48397" end="48405" title="catalase" label="catalase"/>
<link wikidata="Q424747" start="49136" end="49147" title="siderophore" label="siderophore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="49173" end="49178" title="cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q410473" start="49269" end="49280" title="transferrin" label="transferrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q134955" start="49322" end="49330" title="duodenum" label="duodenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="49353" end="49358" title="bloodstream" label="blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q181699" start="49490" end="49499" title="carbonate" label="carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551818" start="49550" end="49568" title="Stability constants of complexes" label="stability constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q22327449" start="49730" end="49738" title="ferritin" label="ferritin"/>
<link wikidata="Q803925" start="49813" end="49825" title="bioinorganic chemistry" label="bioinorganic"/>
<link wikidata="Q902628" start="49877" end="49890" title="heme proteins" label="heme proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q43041" start="49905" end="49915" title="hemoglobin" label="hemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192642" start="49917" end="49926" title="myoglobin" label="myoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q407693" start="49932" end="49947" title="cytochrome P450" label="cytochrome P450"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="50009" end="50016" title="enzymes" label="enzymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="50035" end="50043" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q423350" start="50046" end="50061" title="Metalloproteins" label="Metalloproteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q407280" start="50101" end="50110" title="cofactor (biochemistry)" label="cofactors"/>
<link wikidata="Q22327449" start="50154" end="50162" title="ferritin" label="ferritin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062554" start="50167" end="50177" title="rubredoxin" label="rubredoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12824566" start="50228" end="50236" title="catalase" label="catalase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827455" start="50238" end="50251" title="lipoxygenases" label="lipoxygenases"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408230" start="50257" end="50263" title="IRE-BP" label="IRE-BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q37187" start="50313" end="50327" title="red blood cell" label="red blood cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q192642" start="50451" end="50460" title="myoglobin" label="myoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="50528" end="50535" title="glucose" label="glucose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="50585" end="50599" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q409202" start="50707" end="50718" title="bicarbonate" label="bicarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189621" start="50808" end="50812" title="heme" label="heme"/>
<link wikidata="Q422926" start="50902" end="50911" title="porphyrin" label="porphyrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q328692" start="50934" end="50943" title="imidazole" label="imidazole"/>
<link wikidata="Q485277" start="50958" end="50967" title="histidine" label="histidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q189621" start="51224" end="51228" title="heme" label="heme"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51281" end="51304" title="Spin states (d electrons)#High-spin and low-spin systems" label="high-spin configuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q169324" start="51701" end="51714" title="hydrogen bond" label="hydrogen bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q890877" start="52837" end="52848" title="Bohr effect" label="Bohr effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q135503" start="52862" end="52876" title="Christian Bohr" label="Christian Bohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085" start="52892" end="52902" title="Niels Bohr" label="Niels Bohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="52985" end="53000" title="Carbon monoxide" label="Carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q423581" start="53005" end="53027" title="phosphorus trifluoride" label="phosphorus trifluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259181" start="53247" end="53264" title="carboxyhemoglobin" label="carboxyhemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q55076544" start="53321" end="53328" title="cyanide" label="cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q408068" start="53446" end="53458" title="cytochrome a" label="cytochrome a"/>
<link wikidata="Q180341" start="53662" end="53672" title="methionine" label="methionine"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="54116" end="54138" title="adenosine triphosphate" label="adenosine triphosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115841" start="54437" end="54456" title="iron–sulfur protein" label="iron–sulfur protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062554" start="54839" end="54849" title="rubredoxin" label="rubredoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q186474" start="54918" end="54926" title="cysteine" label="cysteine"/>
<link wikidata="Q415215" start="55026" end="55036" title="ferredoxin" label="ferredoxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13042834" start="55147" end="55153" title="mussel" label="mussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q237200" start="55231" end="55245" title="organometallic chemistry" label="organometallic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403158" start="55285" end="55292" title="cuticle" label="cuticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q192005" start="55375" end="55390" title="elastic modulus" label="elastic modulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q76005" start="55402" end="55418" title="tensile strength" label="tensile strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q486802" start="55433" end="55442" title="toughness" label="toughness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243069" start="55634" end="55642" title="red meat" label="red meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q107411" start="55644" end="55650" title="oyster" label="oyster"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="55653" end="55657" title="bean" label="bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q178559" start="55660" end="55667" title="poultry" label="poultry"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="55669" end="55673" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q20134" start="55675" end="55689" title="leaf vegetable" label="leaf vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q150452" start="55692" end="55702" title="watercress" label="watercress"/>
<link wikidata="Q177378" start="55704" end="55708" title="tofu" label="tofu"/>
<link wikidata="Q154389" start="55714" end="55733" title="blackstrap molasses" label="blackstrap molasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802" start="55735" end="55740" title="Bread" label="Bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q768267" start="55745" end="55761" title="breakfast cereal" label="breakfast cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q645858" start="55829" end="55847" title="dietary supplement" label="dietary supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q416370" start="55867" end="55884" title="iron(II) fumarate" label="iron(II) fumarate"/>
<link wikidata="Q214863" start="55895" end="55911" title="iron(II) sulfate" label="iron(II) sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q319827" start="56199" end="56207" title="Chelation" label="chelated"/>
<link wikidata="Q769796" start="56265" end="56280" title="iron supplement" label="iron supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q620730" start="56282" end="56289" title="Glycine" label="Glycine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412867" start="57168" end="57196" title="Tolerable upper intake level" label="Tolerable upper intake level"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412867" start="57363" end="57387" title="Dietary Reference Intake" label="Dietary Reference Intake"/>
<link wikidata="Q516521" start="57395" end="57425" title="European Food Safety Authority" label="European Food Safety Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="57642" end="57655" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q53467" start="58173" end="58185" title="Blood donation" label="blood donors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366307" start="58558" end="58580" title="Reference Daily Intake" label="Reference Daily Intake"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="58635" end="58657" title="nutritional deficiency" label="nutritional deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008739" start="58764" end="58786" title="latent iron deficiency" label="latent iron deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q954674" start="58820" end="58842" title="iron-deficiency anemia" label="iron-deficiency anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q177708" start="58982" end="58996" title="pre-menopausal" label="pre-menopausal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925744" start="60051" end="60062" title="Human iron metabolism" label="Iron uptake"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="60402" end="60416" title="Genetic disorder" label="genetic defect"/>
<link wikidata="Q540857" start="60455" end="60467" title="chromosome 6" label="chromosome 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q14882371" start="60506" end="60514" title="hepcidin" label="hepcidin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025687" start="60646" end="60668" title="iron overload disorder" label="iron overload disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025687" start="60690" end="60705" title="hemochromatosis" label="hemochromatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313081" start="60915" end="60930" title="iron deficiency (medicine)" label="iron deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q107429" start="61191" end="61199" title="peroxide" label="peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q185056" start="61228" end="61240" title="free radical" label="free radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="61258" end="61261" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="61263" end="61271" title="proteins" label="proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q11367" start="61273" end="61279" title="lipids" label="lipids"/>
<link wikidata="Q410473" start="61434" end="61445" title="transferrin" label="transferrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="61491" end="61513" title="Human gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072" start="61651" end="61656" title="heart" label="heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="61658" end="61663" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q159557" start="61716" end="61720" title="coma" label="coma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598200" start="61722" end="61740" title="metabolic acidosis" label="metabolic acidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q178061" start="61742" end="61747" title="Shock (circulatory)" label="shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q970208" start="61749" end="61762" title="liver failure" label="liver failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q890200" start="61764" end="61776" title="coagulopathy" label="coagulopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21136" start="61962" end="61973" title="lethal dose" label="lethal dose"/>
<link wikidata="Q214863" start="62056" end="62071" title="ferrous sulfate" label="ferrous sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412867" start="62195" end="62219" title="Dietary Reference Intake" label="Dietary Reference Intake"/>
<link wikidata="Q319827" start="62444" end="62453" title="chelation" label="chelating"/>
<link wikidata="Q419618" start="62467" end="62479" title="deferoxamine" label="deferoxamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184215" start="62574" end="62582" title="Thalamus" label="thalamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="62637" end="62641" title="Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder" label="ADHD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993146" start="62732" end="62751" title="Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder predominantly inattentive" label="inattentive subtype"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="63088" end="63100" title="chemotherapy" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445" start="63133" end="63139" title="anemia" label="anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q85769797" start="63151" end="63175" title="Intravenous iron infusion" label="intravenous iron therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="63287" end="63292" title="tumor" label="tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q188874" start="63362" end="63379" title="colorectal cancer" label="colorectal cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037639" start="64506" end="64518" title="Carajás Mine" label="Carajás Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="64541" end="64547" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324386" start="64608" end="64616" title="El Mutún" label="El Mutún"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573394" start="64694" end="64709" title="Hamersley Basin" label="Hamersley Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="64745" end="64754" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741182" start="64759" end="64771" title="Kiirunavaara" label="Kiirunavaara"/>
<link wikidata="Q909225" start="64860" end="64877" title="Mesabi Range" label="Mesabi Iron Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870931" start="64940" end="64963" title="Iron and steel industry" label="Iron and steel industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630267" start="64966" end="64976" title="Iron cycle" label="Iron cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3870160" start="64979" end="64996" title="Iron nanoparticle" label="Iron nanoparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25111306" start="64999" end="65025" title="Iron–platinum nanoparticle" label="Iron–platinum nanoparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312789" start="65028" end="65046" title="Iron fertilization" label="Iron fertilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q184755" start="65095" end="65108" title="phytoplankton" label="phytoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082553" start="65118" end="65141" title="Iron-oxidizing bacteria" label="Iron-oxidizing bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310892" start="65144" end="65180" title="List of countries by iron production" label="List of countries by iron production"/>
<link wikidata="Q934258" start="65183" end="65194" title="Pelletizing" label="Pelletising"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="65239" end="65253" title="Rustproof iron" label="Rustproof iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11427" start="65256" end="65261" title="Steel" label="Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988689" start="65771" end="65799" title="The Periodic Table of Videos" label="The Periodic Table of Videos"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14735" wikidata="Q3267095" url="?curid=14735" title="IEEE 802.15">
<text>IEEE 802.15 is a working group of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) IEEE 802 standards committee which specifies Wireless Specialty Networks (WSN) standards. The working group was formerly known as Working Group for Wireless Personal Area Networks.

The number of Task Groups in IEEE 802.15 varies based on the number of active projects. The current list of active projects can be found on the IEEE 802.15 website.

==IEEE 802.15.1: WPAN / Bluetooth==
Task group one is based on Bluetooth technology. It defines physical layer (PHY) and medium access control (MAC) specification for wireless connectivity with fixed, portable and moving devices within or entering personal operating space. Standards were issued in 2002 and 2005.

==IEEE 802.15.2: Coexistence==
Task group two addresses the coexistence of wireless personal area networks (WPAN) with other wireless devices operating in unlicensed frequency bands such as wireless local area networks (WLAN). The IEEE 802.15.2-2003 standard was published in 2003 and task group two went into &quot;hibernation&quot;.

==IEEE 802.15.3: High Rate WPAN==

===IEEE 802.15.3-2003===
IEEE 802.15.3-2003 is a MAC and PHY standard for high-rate (11 to 55 Mbit/s) WPANs. The standard can be downloaded via the IEEE Get program, which is funded by IEEE 802 volunteers.

===IEEE 802.15.3a===
IEEE P802.15.3a was an attempt to provide a higher speed ultra-wideband PHY enhancement amendment to IEEE 802.15.3 for applications that involve imaging and multimedia. The members of the task group were not able to come to an agreement choosing between two technology proposals, Multi-band Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (MB-OFDM) and Direct Sequence UWB (DS-UWB), backed by two different industry alliances and was withdrawn in January 2006. Documents related to the development of IEEE 802.15.3a are archived on the IEEE document server.

===IEEE 802.15.3b-2006===
IEEE 802.15.3b-2005 amendment was released on May 5, 2006. It enhanced 802.15.3 to improve implementation and interoperability of the MAC. This amendment includes many optimizations, corrected errors, clarified ambiguities, and added editorial clarifications while preserving backward compatibility. Among other changes, the amendment defined the following new features:
* a new MAC layer management entity (MLME) service access point (SAP)
* implied acknowledgment policy that allow polling
* logical link control/subnetwork access protocol (LLC/SNAP) headers
* multicast address assignment
* multiple contention periods in a superfame
* a method for relinquishing channel time to another device in the PAN
* faster network recover in the case when the piconet coordinator (PNC) abruptly disconnects
* a method for a device to return information about signal quality of a received packet.

===IEEE 802.15.3c-2009===
IEEE 802.15.3c-2009 was published on September 11, 2009. The task group TG3c developed a millimeter-wave-based alternative physical layer (PHY) for the existing 802.15.3 Wireless Personal Area Network (WPAN) Standard 802.15.3-2003. The IEEE 802.15.3 Task Group 3c (TG3c) was formed in March 2005. This mmWave WPAN is defined to operate in the 57–66 GHz range. Depending on the geographical region, anywhere from 2 to 9 GHz of bandwidth is available (for example, 57–64 GHz is available as unlicensed band defined by FCC 47 CFR 15.255 in North America). The millimeter-wave WPAN allows very high data rate, short range (10 m) for applications including high-speed internet access, streaming content download (video on demand, HDTV, home theater, etc.), real-time streaming and wireless data bus for cable replacement. A total of three PHY modes were defined in the standard:
* Single carrier (SC) mode (up to 5.3 Gbit/s)
* High speed interface (HSI) mode (single carrier, up to 5 Gbit/s)
* Audio/visual (AV) mode (OFDM, up to 3.8 Gbit/s).

===IEEE 802.15.3d-2017===
IEEE Std 802.15.3d-2017 defines an alternative physical layer (PHY) at the lower THz frequency range between 252 GHz and 325 GHz for switched point-to-point links is defined in this amendment. Two PHY modes are defined that enable data rates of up to 100 Gb/s using eight different bandwidths between 2.16 GHz and 69.12 GHz.

===IEEE 802.15.3e-2017===
IEEE Std 802.15.3e-2017 provides an alternative physical layer (PHY) and a modified medium access control (MAC) layer is defined in this amendment. Two PHY modes have been defined that enable data rates up to 100 Gb/s using the 60 GHz band. MIMO and aggregation methods have been defined to increase the maximum achievable communication speeds. Stack acknowledgment has been defined to improve the medium access control (MAC) efficiency when used in a point-to-point (P2P) topology between two devices.

===IEEE 802.15.3f-2017===
IEEE Std 802.15.3f-2017 extends the RF channelization of the millimeter wave PHYs to allow for use of the spectrum up to 71 GHz. 802.15.3f was initiated because several regulatory domains extended the licensed exempt 60 GHz bands up to 71 GHz. 

==IEEE 802.15.4: Low Rate WPAN==
IEEE 802.15.4-2003 (Low Rate WPAN) deals with low data rate but very long battery life (months or even years) and very low complexity. The standard defines both the physical (Layer 1) and data-link (Layer 2) layers of the OSI model. The first edition of the 802.15.4 standard was released in May 2003. Several standardized and proprietary networks (or mesh) layer protocols run over 802.15.4-based networks, including IEEE 802.15.5, Zigbee, Thread, 6LoWPAN, WirelessHART, and ISA100.11a.

===WPAN Low Rate Alternative PHY (4a)===

IEEE 802.15.4a (formally called IEEE 802.15.4a-2007) is an amendment to IEEE 802.15.4 specifying additional physical layers (PHYs) to the original standard. The principal interest was in providing higher precision ranging and localization capability (1 meter accuracy and better), higher aggregate throughput, adding scalability to data rates, longer range, and lower power consumption and cost. The selected baselines are two optional PHYs consisting of a UWB Pulse Radio (operating in unlicensed UWB spectrum) and a Chirp Spread Spectrum (operating in unlicensed 2.4 GHz spectrum). The Pulsed UWB Radio is based on Continuous Pulsed UWB technology (see C-UWB) and will be able to deliver communications and high precision ranging.

===Revision and Enhancement (4b)===
IEEE 802.15.4b was approved in June 2006 and was published in September 2006 as IEEE 802.15.4-2006. The IEEE 802.15 task group 4b was chartered to create a project for specific enhancements and clarifications to the IEEE 802.15.4-2003 standard, such as resolving ambiguities, reducing unnecessary complexity, increasing flexibility in security key usage, considerations for newly available frequency allocations, and others.

===PHY Amendment for China (4c)===
IEEE 802.15.4c was approved in 2008 and was published in January 2009. This defines a PHY amendment that adds new RF spectrum specifications to address the Chinese regulatory changes which have opened the 314-316 MHz, 430-434 MHz, and 779-787 MHz bands for Wireless PAN use within China.

===PHY and MAC Amendment for Japan (4d)===
The IEEE 802.15 Task Group 4d was chartered to define an amendment to the 802.15.4-2006 standard. The amendment defines a new PHY and such changes to the MAC as are necessary to support a new frequency allocation (950 MHz -956 MHz) in Japan while coexisting with passive tag systems in the band.

===MAC Amendment for Industrial Applications (4e)===
The IEEE 802.15 Task Group 4e is chartered to define a MAC amendment to the existing standard 802.15.4-2006. The intent of this amendment is to enhance and add functionality to the 802.15.4-2006 MAC to a) better support the industrial markets and b) permit compatibility with modifications being proposed within the Chinese WPAN. Specific enhancements were made to add channel hopping and a variable time slot option compatible with ISA100.11a. These changes were approved in 2011.

===PHY and MAC Amendment for Active RFID (4f)===
The IEEE 802.15.4f Active RFID System Task Group is chartered to define new wireless Physical (PHY) layer(s) and enhancements to the 802.15.4-2006 standard MAC layer which are required to support new PHY(s) for active RFID system bi-directional and location determination applications.

===PHY Amendment for Smart Utility Networks (4g)===
IEEE 802.15.4g Smart Utility Networks (SUN) Task Group is chartered to create a PHY amendment to 802.15.4 to provide a standard that facilitates very large-scale process control applications such as the utility smart grid network capable of supporting large, geographically diverse networks with minimal infrastructure, with potentially millions of fixed endpoints. In 2012 they released the 802.15.4g radio standard.
The Telecommunications Industry Association TR-51 committee develops standards for similar applications.

=== Enhanced Ultra Wideband (UWB) Physical Layers (PHYs) and Associated Ranging Techniques (4z) ===
Approved in 2020, amendment to the UWB PHYs (e.g. with coding options) to increase accuracy and exchange ranging related information between the participating devices.

==IEEE 802.15.5: Mesh Networking==
IEEE 802.15.5 provides the architectural framework enabling WPAN devices to promote interoperable, stable, and scalable wireless mesh networking. This standard is composed of two parts: low-rate WPAN mesh and high-rate WPAN mesh networks. The low-rate mesh is built on IEEE 802.15.4-2006 MAC, while the high rate mesh utilizes IEEE 802.15.3/3b MAC. The common features of both meshes include network initialization, addressing, and multi-hop unicasting. In addition, the low-rate mesh supports multicasting, reliable broadcasting, portability support, trace route and energy saving function, and the high-rate mesh supports multihop time-guaranteed service.

Mesh networking for IEEE 802.15.1 networks is beyond the scope of IEEE 802.15.5, and is instead carried out within the Bluetooth mesh working group.

==IEEE 802.15.6: Body Area Networks==

In December 2011, the IEEE 802.15.6 task group approved a draft of a standard for Body Area Network (BAN) technologies. The draft was approved on 22 July 2011 by Letter Ballot to start the Sponsor Ballot process. Task Group 6 was formed in November 2007 to focus on a low-power and short-range wireless standard to be optimized for devices and operation on, in, or around the human body (but not limited to humans) to serve a variety of applications including medical, consumer electronics, and personal entertainment.

== IEEE 802.15.7: Visible Light Communication ==
The inaugural meeting for Task Group 7 was held during January 2009, where it was chartered to write standards for free-space optical communication using visible light. The 802.15.7-2011 Standard was published in September 2011. In 2015, a new task group was launched to revise the 802.15.7 standard, with several new PHY layers and MAC routines to support optical camera communications (OCC) and light fidelity (LiFi). As the new draft became too large, in March 2017, the 802.15 Working Group decided to continue 802.15.7 with OCC only, which is broadcast only, and to create a new task group 802.15.13 to work on a new standard for LiFi, which obviously needed a significantly revised MAC layer, besides new PHYs. The revision of 802.15.7-2018 was published in April 2019. In September 2020, a new PAR was approved, and a new task group started to work on a first amendment P802.15.7a aiming at increased data rate and longer range for OCC. 

==IEEE P802.15.8: Peer Aware Communications==
IEEE P802.15.8 received IEEE Standards Board approval on 29 March 2012 to form a Task Group to develop a standard for Peer Aware Communications (PAC) optimized for peer-to-peer and infrastructure-less communications with fully distributed coordination operating in bands below 11 GHz. The proposed standard is targeting data rates greater than 100 kbit/s with scalable data rates up to 10 Mbit/s. Features of the proposed include:
* discovery for peer information without association
* discovery of the number of devices in the network
* group communications with simultaneous membership in multiple groups (typically up to 10)
* relative positioning
* multi-hop relay
* security

The draft standard is under development, more information can be found on the IEEE 802.15 Task Group 8 web page.

==IEEE P802.15.9: Key Management Protocol==
IEEE P802.15.9 received IEEE Standards Board approval on 7 December 2011 to form a Task Group to develop a recommended practice for the transport of Key Management Protocol (KMP) datagrams. The recommended practice will define a message framework based on Information Elements as a transport method for key management protocol (KMP) datagrams and guidelines for the use of some existing KMPs with IEEE Std 802.15.4. The recommended practice will not create a new KMP.

While IEEE Std 802.15.4 has always supported datagram security, it has not provided a mechanism for establishing the keys used by this feature. Lack of key management support in IEEE Std 802.15.4 can result in weak keys, which is a common avenue for attacking the security system. Adding KMP support is critical to a proper security framework. Some of the existing KMPs that it may address are IETF&#x27;s PANA, HIP, IKEv2, IEEE Std 802.1X, and 4-Way-Handshake.

The draft recommended practice is under development, more information can be found on the IEEE 802.15 web page.

==IEEE P802.15.10: Layer 2 Routing==
IEEE P802.15.10 received IEEE Standards Board approval on 23 August 2013 to form a Task Group to develop a recommended practice for routing packets in dynamically changing 802.15.4 wireless networks (changes on the order of a minute time frame), with minimal impact to route handling. The goal is to extend the coverage area as the number of nodes
increase. The route related capabilities that the recommended practice will provide include the following:
* Route establishment
* Dynamic route reconfiguration
* Discovery and addition of new nodes
* Breaking of established routes
* Loss and recurrence of routes
* Real time gathering of link status
* Allowing for single hop appearance at the networking layer (not breaking standard L3 mechanisms)
* Support for broadcast
* Support for multicast
* Effective frame forwarding

The draft recommended practice is under development; more information can be found on the IEEE 802.15.10 web page.

== IEEE 802.15.13: Multi-Gigabit/s Optical Wireless Communications ==
The first meeting of Task Group 13 was held during March 2017, aiming at a new standard on light fidelity (LiFi), i.e. mobile communications by using the light. The aim is to address industrial applications, i.e. ultra-reliable, low-latency connectivity with negligible jitter for next-generation IoT. Compared to 802.15.7, the group decided to rewrite the standard entirely, based on existing and new contributions, to meet those targets. The group first worked on a low-power pulsed modulation PHY (PM-PHY) using On-Off-Keying (OOK) with frequency-domain equalization (FDE) and also a high-bandwidth PHY (HB-PHY) based on orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) adopted from ITU-T G.9991. The group also decided to implement mobility by considering access points in the infrastructure and mobile users in the service area as inputs and outputs of a distributed multiple-input multiple-output (D-MIMO) link. 802.15.13 supports D-MIMO natively with a minimalistic design, suitable for specialty applications. It is implementable on low-cost FPGAs and off-the-shelf computing hardware. The Working Group letter ballot and the IEEE SA Ballot were started in November 2019 and November 2020, respectively. Publication is expected mid of 2022.

==Wireless Next Generation Standing Committee==
The IEEE P802.15 Wireless Next Generation Standing Committee (SCwng) is chartered to facilitate and stimulate presentations and discussions on new wireless related technologies that may be subject for new 802.15 standardization projects or to address the whole 802.15 work group with issues or concerns with techniques or technologies.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* (UWB)
* 
* 
* 

==References==
==External links==

*Official web site
*Get IEEE 802 (IEEE 802.15)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3267095" start="0" end="11" title="IEEE 802.15" label="IEEE 802.15"/>
<link wikidata="Q27493" start="17" end="30" title="working group" label="working group"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="38" end="87" title="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers" label="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q616245" start="95" end="103" title="IEEE 802" label="IEEE 802"/>
<link wikidata="Q39531" start="506" end="515" title="Bluetooth" label="Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295108" start="564" end="585" title="medium access control" label="medium access control"/>
<link wikidata="Q202271" start="866" end="870" title="Personal area network" label="WPAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q212607" start="978" end="982" title="Wireless LAN" label="WLAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q851424" start="1414" end="1428" title="ultra-wideband" label="ultra-wideband"/>
<link wikidata="Q177200" start="2351" end="2371" title="service access point" label="service access point"/>
<link wikidata="Q126998" start="2431" end="2451" title="logical link control" label="logical link control"/>
<link wikidata="Q556402" start="2452" end="2478" title="subnetwork access protocol" label="subnetwork access protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q899288" start="2500" end="2509" title="multicast" label="multicast"/>
<link wikidata="Q93312" start="5302" end="5311" title="OSI model" label="OSI model"/>
<link wikidata="Q199324" start="5513" end="5519" title="Zigbee" label="Zigbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394272" start="5521" end="5527" title="Thread (network protocol)" label="Thread"/>
<link wikidata="Q109775" start="5529" end="5536" title="6LoWPAN" label="6LoWPAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026813" start="5538" end="5550" title="WirelessHART" label="WirelessHART"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973709" start="5556" end="5566" title="ISA100.11a" label="ISA100.11a"/>
<link wikidata="Q851424" start="6068" end="6071" title="Ultra wideband" label="UWB"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850065" start="6266" end="6271" title="C-UWB" label="C-UWB"/>
<link wikidata="Q104954" start="8274" end="8278" title="RFID" label="RFID"/>
<link wikidata="Q689855" start="8606" end="8616" title="smart grid" label="smart grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752554" start="8817" end="8856" title="Telecommunications Industry Association" label="Telecommunications Industry Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q25552104" start="9352" end="9367" title="mesh networking" label="mesh networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q242039" start="9492" end="9510" title="IEEE 802.15.4-2006" label="IEEE 802.15.4-2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q39055607" start="10001" end="10015" title="Bluetooth mesh" label="Bluetooth mesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q24534424" start="10093" end="10106" title="IEEE 802.15.6" label="IEEE 802.15.6"/>
<link wikidata="Q890056" start="10153" end="10170" title="Body Area Network" label="Body Area Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027432" start="10755" end="10787" title="free-space optical communication" label="free-space optical communication"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14736" wikidata="Q616245" url="?curid=14736" title="IEEE 802">
<text>IEEE 802 is a family of Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) standards for local area networks (LANs), personal area networks (PANs), and metropolitan area networks (MANs). The IEEE 802 LAN/MAN Standards Committee (LMSC) maintains these standards. The IEEE 802 family of standards has had twenty-four members, numbered 802.1 through 802.24, with a working group of the LMSC devoted to each. However, not all of these working groups are currently active.

The IEEE 802 standards are restricted to computer networks carrying variable-size packets, unlike cell relay networks, for example, in which data is transmitted in short, uniformly sized units called cells. Isochronous signal networks, in which data is transmitted as a steady stream of octets, or groups of octets, at regular time intervals, are also outside the scope of the IEEE 802 standards.

The number 802 has no significance: it was simply the next number in the sequence that the IEEE used for standards projects.
The services and protocols specified in IEEE 802 map to the lower two layers (data link and physical) of the seven-layer Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) networking reference model. IEEE 802 divides the OSI data link layer into two sub-layers: logical link control (LLC) and medium access control (MAC), as follows: 
*Data link layer
**LLC sublayer
**MAC sublayer
*Physical layer
Everything above LLC is explicitly out of scope for IEEE 802 (as &quot;upper layer protocols&quot;, presumed to be parts of equally non-OSI Internet reference model).

The most widely used standards are for Ethernet, Bridging and Virtual Bridged LANs, Wireless LAN, Wireless PAN, Wireless MAN, Wireless Coexistence, Media Independent Handover Services, and Wireless RAN. 

==Working groups==
==References==
== Sources ==

==External links==
*802 Committee website
*IEEE 802 Standards available via IEEE Get Program
*Entrepreneurial Capitalism and Innovation: A History of Computer Communications 1968-1988 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q616245" start="0" end="8" title="IEEE 802" label="IEEE 802"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="24" end="73" title="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers" label="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11381" start="95" end="113" title="local area network" label="local area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q202271" start="123" end="144" title="personal area network" label="personal area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q182129" start="158" end="183" title="metropolitan area network" label="metropolitan area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q27493" start="368" end="381" title="working group" label="working group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="516" end="532" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832972" start="573" end="583" title="cell relay" label="cell relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q42848" start="616" end="620" title="data" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q6085479" start="682" end="700" title="Isochronous signal" label="Isochronous signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q851872" start="762" end="767" title="octet (computing)" label="octet"/>
<link wikidata="Q93312" start="1119" end="1153" title="OSI model" label="Open Systems Interconnection (OSI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q126998" start="1244" end="1264" title="logical link control" label="logical link control"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295108" start="1275" end="1296" title="medium access control" label="medium access control"/>
<link wikidata="Q194134" start="1318" end="1333" title="Data link layer" label="Data link layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q126998" start="1336" end="1348" title="Logical link control" label="LLC sublayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295108" start="1351" end="1363" title="Medium access control" label="MAC sublayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q192727" start="1365" end="1379" title="Physical layer" label="Physical layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="1520" end="1544" title="Internet reference model" label="Internet reference model"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="1587" end="1595" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q212607" start="1632" end="1644" title="Wireless LAN" label="Wireless LAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q202271" start="1646" end="1658" title="Wireless PAN" label="Wireless PAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q182129" start="1660" end="1672" title="Wireless MAN" label="Wireless MAN"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1674" end="1694" title="Wireless Coexistence" label="Wireless Coexistence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1737" end="1749" title="Wireless RAN" label="Wireless RAN"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14739" wikidata="Q193228" url="?curid=14739" title="IEEE 802.11">
<text>IEEE 802.11 is part of the IEEE 802 set of local area network (LAN) technical standards, and specifies the set of medium access control (MAC) and physical layer (PHY) protocols for implementing wireless local area network (WLAN) computer communication. The standard and amendments provide the basis for wireless network products using the Wi-Fi brand and are the world&#x27;s most widely used wireless computer networking standards. IEEE 802.11 is used in most home and office networks to allow laptops, printers, smartphones, and other devices to communicate with each other and access the Internet without connecting wires. IEEE 802.11 is also a basis for vehicle-based communication networks with IEEE 802.11p.

The standards are created and maintained by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) LAN/MAN Standards Committee (IEEE 802). The base version of the standard was released in 1997 and has had subsequent amendments. While each amendment is officially revoked when it is incorporated in the latest version of the standard, the corporate world tends to market to the revisions because they concisely denote the capabilities of their products. As a result, in the marketplace, each revision tends to become its own standard. 802.11x is a shorthand for &quot;any version of 802.11&quot;, to avoid confusion with &quot;802.11&quot; used specifically for the original 1997 version.

IEEE 802.11 uses various frequencies including, but not limited to, 2.4 GHz, 5 GHz, 6 GHz, and 60 GHz frequency bands. Although IEEE 802.11 specifications list channels that might be used, the allowed radio frequency spectrum availability varies significantly by regulatory domain.

The protocols are typically used in conjunction with IEEE 802.2, and are designed to interwork seamlessly with Ethernet, and are very often used to carry Internet Protocol traffic.

==General description==
The 802.11 family consists of a series of half-duplex over-the-air modulation techniques that use the same basic protocol. The 802.11 protocol family employs carrier-sense multiple access with collision avoidance (CSMA/CA) whereby equipment listens to a channel for other users (including non 802.11 users) before transmitting each frame (some use the term &quot;packet&quot;, which may be ambiguous: &quot;frame&quot; is more technically correct).

802.11-1997 was the first wireless networking standard in the family, but 802.11b was the first widely accepted one, followed by 802.11a, 802.11g, 802.11n, 802.11ac, and 802.11ax. Other standards in the family (c–f, h, j) are service amendments that are used to extend the current scope of the existing standard, which amendments may also include corrections to a previous specification.

802.11b and 802.11g use the 2.4-GHz ISM band, operating in the United States under Part 15 of the U.S. Federal Communications Commission Rules and Regulations. 802.11n can also use that 2.4-GHz band. Because of this choice of frequency band, 802.11b/g/n equipment may occasionally suffer interference in the 2.4-GHz band from microwave ovens, cordless telephones, and Bluetooth devices. 802.11b and 802.11g control their interference and susceptibility to interference by using direct-sequence spread spectrum (DSSS) and orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) signaling methods, respectively.

802.11a uses the 5 GHz U-NII band which, for much of the world, offers at least 23 non-overlapping, 20-MHz-wide channels. This is an advantage over the 2.4-GHz, ISM-frequency band, which offers only three non-overlapping, 20-MHz-wide channels where other adjacent channels overlap (see: list of WLAN channels). Better or worse performance with higher or lower frequencies (channels) may be realized, depending on the environment. 802.11n and 802.11ax can use either the 2.4 GHz or 5 GHz band; 802.11ac uses only the 5 GHz band.

The segment of the radio frequency spectrum used by 802.11 varies between countries. In the US, 802.11a and 802.11g devices may be operated without a license, as allowed in Part 15 of the FCC Rules and Regulations. Frequencies used by channels one through six of 802.11b and 802.11g fall within the 2.4 GHz amateur radio band. Licensed amateur radio operators may operate 802.11b/g devices under Part 97 of the FCC Rules and Regulations, allowing increased power output but not commercial content or encryption.

==Generations==
In 2018, the Wi-Fi Alliance began using a consumer-friendly generation numbering scheme for the publicly used 802.11 protocols. Wi-Fi generations 1–8 use the 802.11b, 802.11a, 802.11g, 802.11n, 802.11ac, 802.11ax, 802.11be and 802.11bn protocols, in that order.

==History==
802.11 technology has its origins in a 1985 ruling by the U.S. Federal Communications Commission that released the ISM band for unlicensed use.

In 1991 NCR Corporation/AT&amp;T (now Nokia Labs and LSI Corporation) invented a precursor to 802.11 in Nieuwegein, the Netherlands. The inventors initially intended to use the technology for cashier systems. The first wireless products were brought to the market under the name WaveLAN with raw data rates of 1 Mbit/s and 2 Mbit/s.

Vic Hayes, who held the chair of IEEE 802.11 for 10 years, and has been called the &quot;father of Wi-Fi&quot;, was involved in designing the initial 802.11b and 802.11a standards within the IEEE. He, along with Bell Labs Engineer Bruce Tuch, approached IEEE to create a standard.

In 1999, the Wi-Fi Alliance was formed as a trade association to hold the Wi-Fi trademark under which most products are sold.

The major commercial breakthrough came with Apple&#x27;s adoption of Wi-Fi for their iBook series of laptops in 1999. It was the first mass consumer product to offer Wi-Fi network connectivity, which was then branded by Apple as AirPort. One year later IBM followed with its ThinkPad 1300 series in 2000.

==Protocol==
===802.11-1997 (802.11 legacy)===
The original version of the standard IEEE 802.11 was released in 1997 and clarified in 1999, but is now obsolete. It specified two net bit rates of 1 or 2 megabits per second (Mbit/s), plus forward error correction code. It specified three alternative physical layer technologies: diffuse infrared operating at 1 Mbit/s; frequency-hopping spread spectrum operating at 1 Mbit/s or 2 Mbit/s; and direct-sequence spread spectrum operating at 1 Mbit/s or 2 Mbit/s. The latter two radio technologies used microwave transmission over the Industrial Scientific Medical frequency band at 2.4 GHz. Some earlier WLAN technologies used lower frequencies, such as the U.S. 900 MHz ISM band.

Legacy 802.11 with direct-sequence spread spectrum was rapidly supplanted and popularized by 802.11b.

===802.11a (OFDM waveform)===
802.11a, published in 1999, uses the same data link layer protocol and frame format as the original standard, but an OFDM based air interface (physical layer) was added.

It operates in the 5 GHz band with a maximum net data rate of 54 Mbit/s, plus error correction code, which yields realistic net achievable throughput in the mid-20 Mbit/s. It has seen widespread worldwide implementation, particularly within the corporate workspace.

Since the 2.4 GHz band is heavily used to the point of being crowded, using the relatively unused 5 GHz band gives 802.11a a significant advantage. However, this high carrier frequency also brings a disadvantage: the effective overall range of 802.11a is less than that of 802.11b/g. In theory, 802.11a signals are absorbed more readily by walls and other solid objects in their path due to their smaller wavelength, and, as a result, cannot penetrate as far as those of 802.11b. In practice, 802.11b typically has a higher range at low speeds (802.11b will reduce speed to 5.5 Mbit/s or even 1 Mbit/s at low signal strengths). 802.11a also suffers from interference, but locally there may be fewer signals to interfere with, resulting in less interference and better throughput.

===802.11b===
The 802.11b standard has a maximum raw data rate of 11 Mbit/s (Megabits per second) and uses the same media access method defined in the original standard. 802.11b products appeared on the market in early 2000, since 802.11b is a direct extension of the modulation technique defined in the original standard. The dramatic increase in throughput of 802.11b (compared to the original standard) along with simultaneous substantial price reductions led to the rapid acceptance of 802.11b as the definitive wireless LAN technology.

Devices using 802.11b experience interference from other products operating in the 2.4 GHz band. Devices operating in the 2.4 GHz range include microwave ovens, Bluetooth devices, baby monitors, cordless telephones, and some amateur radio equipment. As unlicensed intentional radiators in this ISM band, they must not interfere with and must tolerate interference from primary or secondary allocations (users) of this band, such as amateur radio.

===802.11g===
In June 2003, a third modulation standard was ratified: 802.11g. This works in the 2.4 GHz band (like 802.11b), but uses the same OFDM based transmission scheme as 802.11a. It operates at a maximum physical layer bit rate of 54 Mbit/s exclusive of forward error correction codes, or about 22 Mbit/s average throughput. 802.11g hardware is fully backward compatible with 802.11b hardware, and therefore is encumbered with legacy issues that reduce throughput by ~21% when compared to 802.11a.

The then-proposed 802.11g standard was rapidly adopted in the market starting in January 2003, well before ratification, due to the desire for higher data rates as well as reductions in manufacturing costs. By summer 2003, most dual-band 802.11a/b products became dual-band/tri-mode, supporting a and b/g in a single mobile adapter card or access point. Details of making b and g work well together occupied much of the lingering technical process; in an 802.11g network, however, the activity of an 802.11b participant will reduce the data rate of the overall 802.11g network.

Like 802.11b, 802.11g devices also suffer interference from other products operating in the 2.4 GHz band, for example, wireless keyboards.

===802.11-2007===
In 2003, task group TGma was authorized to &quot;roll up&quot; many of the amendments to the 1999 version of the 802.11 standard. REVma or 802.11ma, as it was called, created a single document that merged 8 amendments (802.11a, b, d, e, g, h, i, j) with the base standard. Upon approval on 8 March 2007, 802.11REVma was renamed to the then-current base standard IEEE 802.11-2007.

===802.11n===
802.11n is an amendment that improves upon the previous 802.11 standards; its first draft of certification was published in 2006. The 802.11n standard was retroactively labelled as Wi-Fi 4 by the Wi-Fi Alliance. The standard added support for multiple-input multiple-output antennas (MIMO). 802.11n operates on both the 2.4 GHz and the 5 GHz bands. Support for 5 GHz bands is optional. Its net data rate ranges from 54 Mbit/s to 600 Mbit/s. The IEEE has approved the amendment, and it was published in October 2009. 

Prior to the final ratification, enterprises were already migrating to 802.11n networks based on the Wi-Fi Alliance&#x27;s certification of products conforming to a 2007 draft of the 802.11n proposal. Early Intel WiFi cards were not compatible with the final standard. Many rival access points and cards also did not support 5 GHz at all.

===802.11-2012===
In May 2007, task group TGmb was authorized to &quot;roll up&quot; many of the amendments to the 2007 version of the 802.11 standard. REVmb or 802.11mb, as it was called, created a single document that merged ten amendments (802.11k, r, y, n, w, p, z, v, u, s) with the 2007 base standard. In addition much cleanup was done, including a reordering of many of the clauses. Upon publication on 29 March 2012, the new standard was referred to as IEEE 802.11-2012.

===802.11ac===

IEEE 802.11ac-2013 is an amendment to IEEE 802.11, published in December 2013, that builds on 802.11n. The 802.11ac standard was retroactively labelled as Wi-Fi 5 by the Wi-Fi Alliance. Changes compared to 802.11n include wider channels (80 or 160 MHz versus 40 MHz) in the 5 GHz band, more spatial streams (up to eight versus four), higher-order modulation (up to 256-QAM vs. 64-QAM), and the addition of Multi-user MIMO (MU-MIMO). The Wi-Fi Alliance separated the introduction of ac wireless products into two phases (&quot;waves&quot;), named &quot;Wave 1&quot; and &quot;Wave 2&quot;. From mid-2013, the alliance started certifying Wave 1 802.11ac products shipped by manufacturers, based on the IEEE 802.11ac Draft 3.0 (the IEEE standard was not finalized until later that year). In 2016 Wi-Fi Alliance introduced the Wave 2 certification, to provide higher bandwidth and capacity than Wave 1 products. Wave 2 products include additional features like MU-MIMO, 160 MHz channel width support, support for more 5 GHz channels, and four spatial streams (with four antennas; compared to three in Wave 1 and 802.11n, and eight in IEEE&#x27;s 802.11ax specification).

===802.11ad===

IEEE 802.11ad is an amendment that defines a new physical layer for 802.11 networks to operate in the 60 GHz millimeter wave spectrum. This frequency band has significantly different propagation characteristics than the 2.4 GHz and 5 GHz bands where Wi-Fi networks operate. Products implementing the 802.11ad standard are sold under the WiGig brand name, with a certification program developed by the Wi-Fi Alliance. The peak transmission rate of 802.11ad is 7 Gbit/s.

IEEE 802.11ad is a protocol used for very high data rates (about 8 Gbit/s) and for short range communication (about 1–10 meters).

TP-Link announced the world&#x27;s first 802.11ad router in January 2016.

The WiGig standard as of 2021 has been published after being announced in 2009 and added to the IEEE 802.11 family in December 2012.

===802.11af===
IEEE 802.11af, also referred to as &quot;White-Fi&quot; and &quot;Super Wi-Fi&quot;, is an amendment, approved in February 2014, that allows WLAN operation in TV white space spectrum in the VHF and UHF bands between 54 and 790 MHz. It uses cognitive radio technology to transmit on unused TV channels, with the standard taking measures to limit interference for primary users, such as analog TV, digital TV, and wireless microphones. Access points and stations determine their position using a satellite positioning system such as GPS, and use the Internet to query a geolocation database (GDB) provided by a regional regulatory agency to discover what frequency channels are available for use at a given time and position. The physical layer uses OFDM and is based on 802.11ac. The propagation path loss as well as the attenuation by materials such as brick and concrete is lower in the UHF and VHF bands than in the 2.4 GHz and 5 GHz bands, which increases the possible range. The frequency channels are 6 to 8 MHz wide, depending on the regulatory domain. Up to four channels may be bonded in either one or two contiguous blocks. MIMO operation is possible with up to four streams used for either space–time block code (STBC) or multi-user (MU) operation. The achievable data rate per spatial stream is 26.7 Mbit/s for 6 and 7 MHz channels, and 35.6 Mbit/s for 8 MHz channels. With four spatial streams and four bonded channels, the maximum data rate is 426.7 Mbit/s for 6 and 7 MHz channels and 568.9 Mbit/s for 8 MHz channels.

===802.11-2016===
IEEE 802.11-2016 which was known as IEEE 802.11 REVmc, is a revision based on IEEE 802.11-2012, incorporating 5 amendments (11ae, 11aa, 11ad, 11ac, 11af). In addition, existing MAC and PHY functions have been enhanced and obsolete features were removed or marked for removal. Some clauses and annexes have been renumbered.

===802.11ah===
IEEE 802.11ah, published in 2017, defines a WLAN system operating at sub-1 GHz license-exempt bands. Due to the favorable propagation characteristics of the low-frequency spectra, 802.11ah can provide improved transmission range compared with the conventional 802.11 WLANs operating in the 2.4 GHz and 5 GHz bands. 802.11ah can be used for various purposes including large-scale sensor networks, extended-range hotspots, and outdoor Wi-Fi for cellular WAN carrier traffic offloading, whereas the available bandwidth is relatively narrow. The protocol intends consumption to be competitive with low-power Bluetooth, at a much wider range.

===802.11ai===
IEEE 802.11ai is an amendment to the 802.11 standard that added new mechanisms for a faster initial link setup time.

===802.11aj===
IEEE 802.11aj is a derivative of 802.11ad for use in the 45 GHz unlicensed spectrum available in some regions of the world (specifically China); it also provides additional capabilities for use in the 60 GHz band.

Alternatively known as China Millimeter Wave (CMMW).

===802.11aq===
IEEE 802.11aq is an amendment to the 802.11 standard that will enable pre-association discovery of services. This extends some of the mechanisms in 802.11u that enabled device discovery to discover further the services running on a device, or provided by a network.

=== 802.11-2020 ===
IEEE 802.11-2020, which was known as IEEE 802.11 REVmd, is a revision based on IEEE 802.11-2016 incorporating 5 amendments (11ai, 11ah, 11aj, 11ak, 11aq). In addition, existing MAC and PHY functions have been enhanced and obsolete features were removed or marked for removal. Some clauses and annexes have been added.

===802.11ax===
IEEE 802.11ax is the successor to 802.11ac, marketed as (2.4 GHz and 5 GHz) and (6 GHz) by the Wi-Fi Alliance. It is also known as &quot;High Efficiency&quot; , for the overall improvements to clients in &quot;dense environments&quot;. For an individual client, the maximum improvement in data rate (PHY speed) against the predecessor (802.11ac) is only 39% (for comparison, this improvement was nearly 500% for the predecessors). Yet, even with this comparatively minor 39% figure, the goal was to provide &quot;4 times&quot; the throughput-per-area of 802.11ac (hence &quot;High Efficiency&quot;). The motivation behind this goal was the deployment of WLAN in dense environments such as corporate offices, shopping malls and dense residential apartments. This is achieved by means of a technique called OFDMA, which is basically multiplexing in the &quot;frequency domain&quot; (as opposed to &quot;spatial&quot; multiplexing, as in 802.11ac). This is equivalent to cellular technology applied into .

The IEEE 802.11ax2021 standard was approved on February 9, 2021.

===802.11ay===

IEEE 802.11ay is a standard that is being developed, also called EDMG: Enhanced Directional MultiGigabit PHY. It is an amendment that defines a new physical layer for 802.11 networks to operate in the 60 GHz millimeter wave spectrum. It will be an extension of the existing 11ad, aimed to extend the throughput, range, and use-cases. The main use-cases include indoor operation and short-range communications due to atmospheric oxygen absorption and inability to penetrate walls. The peak transmission rate of 802.11ay is 40 Gbit/s. The main extensions include: channel bonding (2, 3 and 4), MIMO (up to 4 streams) and higher modulation schemes. The expected range is 300–500 m.

===802.11ba===

IEEE 802.11ba Wake-up Radio (WUR) Operation is an amendment to the IEEE 802.11 standard that enables energy-efficient operation for data reception without increasing latency. The target active power consumption to receive a WUR packet is less than 1 milliwatt and supports data rates of 62.5 kbit/s and 250 kbit/s. The WUR PHY uses MC-OOK (multicarrier OOK) to achieve extremely low power consumption.

===802.11bb===
IEEE 802.11bb is a networking protocol standard in the IEEE 802.11 set of protocols that uses infrared light for communications.

===802.11be===
IEEE 802.11be Extremely High Throughput (EHT) is the potential next amendment to the 802.11 IEEE standard, and will likely be designated as Wi-Fi 7. It will build upon 802.11ax, focusing on WLAN indoor and outdoor operation with stationary and pedestrian speeds in the 2.4 GHz, 5 GHz, and 6 GHz frequency bands.

==Common misunderstandings about achievable throughput==
Across all variations of 802.11, maximum achievable throughputs are given either based on measurements under ideal conditions or in the layer-2 data rates. However, this does not apply to typical deployments in which data is being transferred between two endpoints, of which at least one is typically connected to a wired infrastructure and the other endpoint is connected to an infrastructure via a wireless link.

This means that, typically, data frames pass an 802.11 (WLAN) medium and are being converted to 802.3 (Ethernet) or vice versa. Due to the difference in the frame (header) lengths of these two media, the application&#x27;s packet size determines the speed of the data transfer. This means applications that use small packets (e.g., VoIP) create dataflows with high-overhead traffic (i.e., a low goodput). Other factors that contribute to the overall application data rate are the speed with which the application transmits the packets (i.e., the data rate) and, of course, the energy with which the wireless signal is received. The latter is determined by distance and by the configured output power of the communicating devices.

The same references apply to the attached graphs that show measurements of UDP throughput. Each represents an average (UDP) throughput (please note that the error bars are there but barely visible due to the small variation) of 25 measurements. Each is with a specific packet size (small or large) and with a specific data rate (10 kbit/s – 100 Mbit/s). Markers for traffic profiles of common applications are included as well. These figures assume there are no packet errors, which, if occurring, will lower the transmission rate further.

==Channels and frequencies==
802.11b, 802.11g, and 802.11n-2.4 utilize the spectrum, one of the ISM bands. 802.11a, 802.11n, and 802.11ac use the more heavily regulated band. These are commonly referred to as the &quot;2.4 GHz and 5 GHz bands&quot; in most sales literature. Each spectrum is sub-divided into &quot;channels&quot; with a center frequency and bandwidth, analogous to how radio and TV broadcast bands are sub-divided.

The 2.4 GHz band is divided into 14 channels spaced 5 MHz apart, beginning with channel 1, which is centered on 2.412 GHz. The latter channels have additional restrictions or are unavailable for use in some regulatory domains.

The channel numbering of the spectrum is less intuitive due to the differences in regulations between countries. These are discussed in greater detail on the list of WLAN channels.

===Channel spacing within the 2.4 GHz band===
In addition to specifying the channel center frequency, 802.11 also specifies (in Clause 17) a spectral mask defining the permitted power distribution across each channel. The mask requires the signal to be attenuated a minimum of 20 dB from its peak amplitude at ±11 MHz from the center frequency, the point at which a channel is effectively 22 MHz wide. One consequence is that stations can use only every fourth or fifth channel without overlap.

Availability of channels is regulated by country, constrained in part by how each country allocates radio spectrum to various services. At one extreme, Japan permits the use of all 14 channels for 802.11b, and for 802.11g/n-2.4. Other countries such as Spain initially allowed only channels 10 and 11, and France allowed only 10, 11, 12, and 13; however, Europe now allow channels 1 through 13. North America and some Central and South American countries allow only 

Since the spectral mask defines only power output restrictions up to ±11 MHz from the center frequency to be attenuated by −50 dBr, it is often assumed that the energy of the channel extends no further than these limits. It is more correct to say that the overlapping signal on any channel should be sufficiently attenuated to interfere with a transmitter on any other channel minimally, given the separation between channels. Due to the near–far problem a transmitter can impact (desensitize) a receiver on a &quot;non-overlapping&quot; channel, but only if it is close to the victim receiver (within a meter) or operating above allowed power levels. Conversely, a sufficiently distant transmitter on an overlapping channel can have little to no significant effect.

Confusion often arises over the amount of channel separation required between transmitting devices. 802.11b was based on direct-sequence spread spectrum (DSSS) modulation and utilized a channel bandwidth of 22 MHz, resulting in &quot;three&quot; &quot;non-overlapping&quot; channels (1, 6, and 11). 802.11g was based on OFDM modulation and utilized a channel bandwidth of 20 MHz. This occasionally leads to the belief that &quot;four&quot; &quot;non-overlapping&quot; channels (1, 5, 9, and 13) exist under 802.11g. However, this is not the case as per 17.4.6.3 Channel Numbering of operating channels of the IEEE Std 802.11 (2012), which states, &quot;In a multiple cell network topology, overlapping and/or adjacent cells using different channels can operate simultaneously without interference if the distance between the center frequencies is at least 25 MHz.&quot;
and section 18.3.9.3 and Figure 18-13.

This does not mean that the technical overlap of the channels recommends the non-use of overlapping channels. The amount of inter-channel interference seen on a configuration using channels 1, 5, 9, and 13 (which is permitted in Europe, but not in North America) is barely different from a three-channel configuration, but with an entire extra channel.

However, overlap between channels with more narrow spacing (e.g. 1, 4, 7, 11 in North America) may cause unacceptable degradation of signal quality and throughput, particularly when users transmit near the boundaries of AP cells.

===Regulatory domains and legal compliance===
IEEE uses the phrase &quot;regdomain&quot; to refer to a legal regulatory region. Different countries define different levels of allowable transmitter power, time that a channel can be occupied, and different available channels. Domain codes are specified for the United States, Canada, ETSI (Europe), Spain, France, Japan, and China.

Most Wi-Fi certified devices default to &quot;regdomain&quot; 0, which means least common denominator settings, i.e., the device will not transmit at a power above the allowable power in any nation, nor will it use frequencies that are not permitted in any nation.

The &quot;regdomain&quot; setting is often made difficult or impossible to change so that the end-users do not conflict with local regulatory agencies such as the United States&#x27; Federal Communications Commission.

==Layer 2 – Datagrams==
The datagrams are called &quot;frames&quot;. Current 802.11 standards specify frame types for use in the transmission of data as well as management and control of wireless links.

Frames are divided into very specific and standardized sections. Each frame consists of a &quot;MAC header&quot;, &quot;payload&quot;, and &quot;frame check sequence&quot; (FCS). Some frames do not have payloads.

The first two bytes of the MAC header form a frame control field specifying the form and function of the frame. This frame control field is subdivided into the following sub-fields:
* Protocol Version: Two bits representing the protocol version. The currently used protocol version is zero. Other values are reserved for future use.
* Type: Two bits identifying the type of WLAN frame. Control, Data, and Management are various frame types defined in IEEE 802.11.
* Subtype: Four bits providing additional discrimination between frames. Type and Subtype are used together to identify the exact frame.
* ToDS and FromDS: Each is one bit in size. They indicate whether a data frame is headed for a distribution system or it is getting out of it. Control and management frames set these values to zero. All the data frames will have one of these bits set.
** ToDS = 0 and FromDS = 0
*** Communication within a basic service set or an independent basic service set (IBSS) network.
**ToDS = 0 and FromDS = 1
***A frame sent by a station and directed to an AP accessed via the distribution system.
**ToDS = 1 and FromDS = 0
***A frame exiting the distribution system for a station.
**ToDS = 1 and FromDS = 1
***Only kind of frame frame that uses all four MAC addresses in a DATA frame.
***Address 1: access point address exiting from the distribution system.
***Address 2: access point entrance to the distribution system (AP to which the source station is connected).
***Address 3: final station address.
***Address 4: address of the source station.
* More Fragments: The More Fragments bit is set when a packet is divided into multiple frames for transmission. Every frame except the last frame of a packet will have this bit set.
* Retry: Sometimes frames require retransmission, and for this, there is a Retry bit that is set to one when a frame is resent. This aids in the elimination of duplicate frames.
* Power Management: This bit indicates the power management state of the sender after the completion of a frame exchange. Access points are required to manage the connection and will never set the power-saver bit.
* More Data: The More Data bit is used to buffer frames received in a distributed system. The access point uses this bit to facilitate stations in power-saver mode. It indicates that at least one frame is available and addresses all stations connected.
* Protected Frame: The Protected Frame bit is set to the value of one if the frame body is encrypted by a protection mechanism such as Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP), Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA), or Wi-Fi Protected Access II (WPA2).
* Order: This bit is set only when the &quot;strict ordering&quot; delivery method is employed. Frames and fragments are not always sent in order as it causes a transmission performance penalty.

The next two bytes are reserved for the Duration ID field, indicating how long the field&#x27;s transmission will take so other devices know when the channel will be available again. This field can take one of three forms: Duration, Contention-Free Period (CFP), and Association ID (AID).

An 802.11 frame can have up to four address fields. Each field can carry a MAC address. Address 1 is the receiver, Address 2 is the transmitter, Address 3 is used for filtering purposes by the receiver. Address 4 is only present in data frames transmitted between access points in an Extended Service Set or between intermediate nodes in a mesh network.

The remaining fields of the header are:
* The Sequence Control field is a two-byte section used to identify message order and eliminate duplicate frames. The first 4 bits are used for the fragmentation number, and the last 12 bits are the sequence number.
* An optional two-byte Quality of Service control field, present in QoS Data frames; it was added with 802.11e.

The payload or frame body field is variable in size, from 0 to 2304 bytes plus any overhead from security encapsulation, and contains information from higher layers.

The Frame Check Sequence (FCS) is the last four bytes in the standard 802.11 frame. Often referred to as the Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC), it allows for integrity checks of retrieved frames. As frames are about to be sent, the FCS is calculated and appended. When a station receives a frame, it can calculate the FCS of the frame and compare it to the one received. If they match, it is assumed that the frame was not distorted during transmission.

===Management frames===
Management frames are not always authenticated, and allow for the maintenance, or discontinuance, of communication. Some common 802.11 subtypes include:
* Authentication frame: 802.11 authentication begins with the wireless network interface controller (WNIC) sending an authentication frame to the access point containing its identity.
** When open system authentication is being used, the WNIC sends only a single authentication frame, and the access point responds with an authentication frame of its own indicating acceptance or rejection.
** When shared key authentication is being used, the WNIC sends an initial authentication request, and the access point responds with an authentication frame containing challenge text. The WNIC then sends an authentication frame containing the encrypted version of the challenge text to the access point. The access point confirms the text was encrypted with the correct key by decrypting it with its own key. The result of this process determines the WNIC&#x27;s authentication status.
* Association request frame: Sent from a station, it enables the access point to allocate resources and synchronize. The frame carries information about the WNIC, including supported data rates and the SSID of the network the station wishes to associate with. If the request is accepted, the access point reserves memory and establishes an association ID for the WNIC.
* Association response frame: Sent from an access point to a station containing the acceptance or rejection to an association request. If it is an acceptance, the frame will contain information such as an association ID and supported data rates.
* Beacon frame: Sent periodically from an access point to announce its presence and provide the SSID and other parameters for WNICs within range.
* : Sent from a station wishing to terminate connection from another station.
* Disassociation frame: Sent from a station wishing to terminate the connection. It is an elegant way to allow the access point to relinquish memory allocation and remove the WNIC from the association table.
* Probe request frame: Sent from a station when it requires information from another station.
* Probe response frame: Sent from an access point containing capability information, supported data rates, etc., after receiving a probe request frame.
* Reassociation request frame: A WNIC sends a reassociation request when it drops from the currently associated access point range and finds another access point with a stronger signal. The new access point coordinates the forwarding of any information that may still be contained in the buffer of the previous access point.
* Reassociation response frame: Sent from an access point containing the acceptance or rejection to a WNIC reassociation request frame. The frame includes information required for association such as the association ID and supported data rates.
* Action frame: extending management frame to control a certain action. Some of the action categories are QoS, Block Ack, Public, Radio Measurement, Fast BSS Transition, Mesh Peering Management, etc. These frames are sent by a station when it needs to tell its peer for a certain action to be taken. For example, a station can tell another station to set up a block acknowledgement by sending an &quot;ADDBA Request&quot; action frame. The other station would then respond with an &quot;ADDBA Response&quot; action frame.

The body of a management frame consists of frame-subtype-dependent fixed fields followed by a sequence of information elements (IEs).

The common structure of an IE is as follows:

===Control frames===
Control frames facilitate the exchange of data frames between stations. Some common 802.11 control frames include:
* Acknowledgement (ACK) frame: After receiving a data frame, the receiving station will send an ACK frame to the sending station if no errors are found. If the sending station does not receive an ACK frame within a predetermined period of time, the sending station will resend the frame.
* Request to Send (RTS) frame: The RTS and CTS frames provide an optional collision reduction scheme for access points with hidden stations. A station sends an RTS frame as the first step in a two-way handshake required before sending data frames.
* Clear to Send (CTS) frame: A station responds to an RTS frame with a CTS frame. It provides clearance for the requesting station to send a data frame. The CTS provides collision control management by including a time value for which all other stations are to hold off transmission while the requesting station transmits.

===Data frames===
Data frames carry packets from web pages, files, etc. within the body. The body begins with an IEEE 802.2 header, with the Destination Service Access Point (DSAP) specifying the protocol, followed by a Subnetwork Access Protocol (SNAP) header if the DSAP is hex AA, with the organizationally unique identifier (OUI) and protocol ID (PID) fields specifying the protocol. If the OUI is all zeroes, the protocol ID field is an EtherType value. Almost all 802.11 data frames use 802.2 and SNAP headers, and most use an OUI of 00:00:00 and an EtherType value.

Similar to TCP congestion control on the internet, frame loss is built into the operation of 802.11. To select the correct transmission speed or Modulation and Coding Scheme, a rate control algorithm may test different speeds. The actual packet loss rate of Access points varies widely for different link conditions. There are variations in the loss rate experienced on production Access points, between 10% and 80%, with 30% being a common average. It is important to be aware that the link layer should recover these lost frames. If the sender does not receive an Acknowledgement (ACK) frame, then it will be resent.

==Standards and amendments==
Within the IEEE 802.11 Working Group, the following IEEE Standards Association Standard and Amendments exist:
* IEEE 802.11-1997: The WLAN standard was originally 1 Mbit/s and 2 Mbit/s, 2.4 GHz RF and infrared (IR) standard (1997), all the others listed below are Amendments to this standard, except for Recommended Practices 802.11F and 802.11T.
* IEEE 802.11a: 54 Mbit/s, 5 GHz standard (1999, shipping products in 2001)
* IEEE 802.11b: 5.5 Mbit/s and 11 Mbit/s, 2.4 GHz standard (1999)
* IEEE 802.11c: Bridge operation procedures; included in the IEEE 802.1D standard (2001)
* IEEE 802.11d: International (country-to-country) roaming extensions (2001)
* IEEE 802.11e: Enhancements: QoS, including packet bursting (2005)
* IEEE 802.11F: Inter-Access Point Protocol (2003) Withdrawn February 2006
* IEEE 802.11g: 54 Mbit/s, 2.4 GHz standard (backwards compatible with b) (2003)
* IEEE 802.11h: Spectrum Managed 802.11a (5 GHz) for European compatibility (2004)
* IEEE 802.11i: Enhanced security (2004)
* IEEE 802.11j: Extensions for Japan (4.9-5.0 GHz) (2004)
* IEEE 802.11-2007: A new release of the standard that includes amendments a, b, d, e, g, h, i, and j. (July 2007)
* IEEE 802.11k: Radio resource measurement enhancements (2008)
* IEEE 802.11n: Higher Throughput WLAN at 2.4 and 5 GHz; 20 and 40 MHz channels; introduces MIMO to (September 2009)
* IEEE 802.11p: WAVE—Wireless Access for the Vehicular Environment (such as ambulances and passenger cars) (July 2010)
* IEEE 802.11r: Fast BSS transition (FT) (2008)
* IEEE 802.11s: Mesh Networking, Extended Service Set (ESS) (July 2011)
* IEEE 802.11T: Wireless Performance Prediction (WPP)—test methods and metrics Recommendation cancelled
* IEEE 802.11u: Improvements related to HotSpots and 3rd-party authorization of clients, e.g., cellular network offload (February 2011)
* IEEE 802.11v: Wireless network management (February 2011)
* IEEE 802.11w: Protected Management Frames (September 2009)
* IEEE 802.11y: 3650–3700 MHz Operation in the U.S. (2008)
* IEEE 802.11z: Extensions to Direct Link Setup (DLS) (September 2010)
* IEEE 802.11-2012: A new release of the standard that includes amendments k, n, p, r, s, u, v, w, y, and z (March 2012)
* IEEE 802.11aa: Robust streaming of Audio Video Transport Streams (June 2012) - see Stream Reservation Protocol
* IEEE 802.11ac: Very High Throughput WLAN at 5 GHz; wider channels (80 and 160 MHz); Multi-user MIMO (down-link only) (December 2013)
* IEEE 802.11ad: Very High Throughput 60 GHz (December 2012) — see also WiGig
* IEEE 802.11ae: Prioritization of Management Frames (March 2012)
* IEEE 802.11af: TV Whitespace (February 2014)
* IEEE 802.11-2016: A new release of the standard that includes amendments aa, ac, ad, ae, and af (December 2016)
* IEEE 802.11ah: Sub-1 GHz license exempt operation (e.g., sensor network, smart metering) (December 2016)
* IEEE 802.11ai: Fast Initial Link Setup (December 2016)
* IEEE 802.11aj: China Millimeter Wave (February 2018)
* IEEE 802.11ak: Transit Links within Bridged Networks (June 2018)
* IEEE 802.11aq: Pre-association Discovery (July 2018)
* IEEE 802.11-2020: A new release of the standard that includes amendments ah, ai, aj, ak, and aq (December 2020)
* IEEE 802.11ax: High Efficiency WLAN at 2.4, 5 and 6 GHz; introduces OFDMA to (February 2021)
* IEEE 802.11ay: Enhancements for Ultra High Throughput in and around the 60 GHz Band (March 2021)
* IEEE 802.11az: Next Generation Positioning (March 2023)
* IEEE 802.11ba: Wake Up Radio (March 2021)
* IEEE 802.11bb: Light Communications (November 2023)
* IEEE 802.11bc: Enhanced Broadcast Service (February 2024)
* IEEE 802.11bd: Enhancements for Next Generation V2X (see also IEEE 802.11p) (March 2023)

===In process===
* IEEE 802.11be: &quot;Extremely High Throughput&quot; (see also IEEE 802.11ax) (May 2024)
* IEEE 802.11bf: &quot;WLAN Sensing&quot;
* IEEE 802.11bh: &quot;Randomized and Changing MAC Addresses&quot;
* IEEE 802.11bi: &quot;Enhanced Data Privacy&quot;
* IEEE 802.11bk: &quot;320 MHz Positioning&quot;
* IEEE 802.11bn: &quot;Ultra High Reliability&quot;
* IEEE 802.11bp: &quot;Ambient Power Communication&quot;
* IEEE 802.11me: 802.11 Accumulated Maintenance Changes
* IEEE 802.11mf: 802.11 Accumulated Maintenance Changes

802.11F and 802.11T are recommended practices rather than standards and are capitalized as such.

802.11m is used for standard maintenance. 802.11ma was completed for 802.11-2007, 802.11mb for 802.11-2012, 802.11mc for 802.11-2016, and 802.11md for 802.11-2020.

===Standard vs. amendment===
Both the terms &quot;standard&quot; and &quot;amendment&quot; are used when referring to the different variants of IEEE standards.

As far as the IEEE Standards Association is concerned, there is only one current standard; it is denoted by IEEE 802.11 followed by the date published. IEEE 802.11-2020 is the only version currently in publication, superseding previous releases. The standard is updated by means of amendments. Amendments are created by task groups (TG). Both the task group and their finished document are denoted by 802.11 followed by one or two lower case letters, for example, IEEE 802.11a or IEEE 802.11ax. Updating 802.11 is the responsibility of task group m. In order to create a new version, TGm combines the previous version of the standard and all published amendments. TGm also provides clarification and interpretation to industry on published documents. New versions of the IEEE 802.11 were published in 1999, 2007, 2012, 2016, and 2020.

==Nomenclature==
Various terms in 802.11 are used to specify aspects of wireless local-area networking operation and may be unfamiliar to some readers.

For example, &quot;time unit&quot; (usually abbreviated &quot;TU&quot;) is used to indicate a unit of time equal to 1024 microseconds. Numerous time constants are defined in terms of TU (rather than the nearly equal millisecond).

Also, the term &quot;portal&quot; is used to describe an entity that is similar to an 802.1H bridge. A portal provides access to the WLAN by non-802.11 LAN STAs.

==Security==

In 2001, a group from the University of California, Berkeley presented a paper describing weaknesses in the 802.11 Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) security mechanism defined in the original standard; they were followed by Fluhrer, Mantin, and Shamir&#x27;s paper titled &quot;Weaknesses in the Key Scheduling Algorithm of RC4&quot;. Not long after, Adam Stubblefield and AT&amp;T publicly announced the first verification of the attack. In the attack, they were able to intercept transmissions and gain unauthorized access to wireless networks.

The IEEE set up a dedicated task group to create a replacement security solution, 802.11i (previously, this work was handled as part of a broader 802.11e effort to enhance the MAC layer). The Wi-Fi Alliance announced an interim specification called Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA) based on a subset of the then-current IEEE 802.11i draft. These started to appear in products in mid-2003. IEEE 802.11i (also known as WPA2) itself was ratified in June 2004, and uses the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), instead of RC4, which was used in WEP. The modern recommended encryption for the home/consumer space is WPA2 (AES Pre-Shared Key), and for the enterprise space is WPA2 along with a RADIUS authentication server (or another type of authentication server) and a strong authentication method such as EAP-TLS.

In January 2005, the IEEE set up yet another task group &quot;w&quot; to protect management and broadcast frames, which previously were sent unsecured. Its standard was published in 2009.

In December 2011, a security flaw was revealed that affects some wireless routers with a specific implementation of the optional Wi-Fi Protected Setup (WPS) feature. While WPS is not a part of 802.11, the flaw allows an attacker within the range of the wireless router to recover the WPS PIN and, with it, the router&#x27;s 802.11i password in a few hours.

In late 2014, Apple announced that its iOS 8 mobile operating system would scramble MAC addresses during the pre-association stage to thwart retail footfall tracking made possible by the regular transmission of uniquely identifiable probe requests. Android 8.0 &quot;Oreo&quot; introduced a similar feature, named &quot;MAC randomization&quot;.

Wi-Fi users may be subjected to a Wi-Fi deauthentication attack to eavesdrop, attack passwords, or force the use of another, usually more expensive access point.

==See also==
* 802.11 frame types
* Comparison of wireless data standards
* Fujitsu Ltd. v. Netgear Inc.
* Gi-Fi, a term used by some trade press to refer to faster versions of the IEEE 802.11 standards
* LTE-WLAN Aggregation
* OFDM system comparison table
* Passive Wi-Fi
* Reference Broadcast Infrastructure Synchronization
* TU (time unit)
* TV White Space Database
* Ultra-wideband
* White spaces (radio)
* Wi-Fi operating system support
* Wibree or Bluetooth low energy
* WiGig
* Wireless USB – another wireless protocol primarily designed for shorter-range applications

==Notes==

==Footnotes==
==References==
* 
* 
==External links==

* IEEE 802.11 working group
* Official timelines of 802.11 standards from IEEE
* List of all Wi-Fi Chipset Vendors – Including historical timeline of mergers and acquisitions</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193228" start="0" end="11" title="IEEE 802.11" label="IEEE 802.11"/>
<link wikidata="Q616245" start="27" end="35" title="IEEE 802" label="IEEE 802"/>
<link wikidata="Q11381" start="43" end="61" title="local area network" label="local area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q317623" start="68" end="86" title="technical standard" label="technical standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295108" start="114" end="135" title="medium access control" label="medium access control"/>
<link wikidata="Q192727" start="146" end="160" title="physical layer" label="physical layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q212607" start="194" end="221" title="wireless local area network" label="wireless local area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="339" end="344" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="591" end="599" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q841708" start="700" end="712" title="IEEE 802.11p" label="IEEE 802.11p"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="763" end="812" title="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers" label="Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q182129" start="824" end="827" title="Metropolitan area network" label="MAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q193228" start="1255" end="1262" title="IEEE 802.11" label="802.11x"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970258" start="1382" end="1407" title="IEEE 802.11 (legacy mode)" label="the original 1997 version"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396184" start="1611" end="1626" title="radio frequency" label="radio frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q965758" start="1746" end="1756" title="IEEE 802.2" label="IEEE 802.2"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="1804" end="1812" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8795" start="1847" end="1864" title="Internet Protocol" label="Internet Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q625306" start="1941" end="1952" title="half-duplex" label="half-duplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q170474" start="1966" end="1976" title="modulation" label="modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q944633" start="2057" end="2111" title="carrier-sense multiple access with collision avoidance" label="carrier-sense multiple access with collision avoidance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747387" start="2423" end="2430" title="802.11b" label="802.11b"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421681" start="2478" end="2485" title="802.11a" label="802.11a"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746589" start="2487" end="2494" title="802.11g" label="802.11g"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193354" start="2496" end="2503" title="802.11n" label="802.11n"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188495" start="2505" end="2513" title="802.11ac" label="802.11ac"/>
<link wikidata="Q24534575" start="2519" end="2527" title="802.11ax" label="802.11ax"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="2770" end="2773" title="GHz" label="GHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q304545" start="2774" end="2782" title="ISM band" label="ISM band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810092" start="2821" end="2828" title="Part 15" label="Part 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="2841" end="2874" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358085" start="3026" end="3058" title="Electromagnetic interference at 2.4 GHz" label="interference in the 2.4-GHz band"/>
<link wikidata="Q127956" start="3064" end="3078" title="microwave oven" label="microwave oven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195934" start="3081" end="3099" title="cordless telephone" label="cordless telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q39531" start="3106" end="3115" title="Bluetooth" label="Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334354" start="3216" end="3247" title="direct-sequence spread spectrum" label="direct-sequence spread spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q375889" start="3259" end="3301" title="orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing" label="orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q161956" start="3360" end="3376" title="U-NII" label="5 GHz U-NII band"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247360" start="3630" end="3651" title="list of WLAN channels" label="list of WLAN channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396184" start="3891" end="3906" title="radio frequency" label="radio frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="4179" end="4192" title="amateur radio" label="amateur radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810095" start="4268" end="4275" title="Part 97" label="Part 97"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361045" start="4414" end="4428" title="Wi-Fi Alliance" label="Wi-Fi Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q304545" start="4791" end="4799" title="ISM band" label="ISM band"/>
<link wikidata="Q524989" start="4829" end="4844" title="NCR Corporation" label="NCR Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="4845" end="4853" title="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="4859" end="4869" title="Nokia Labs" label="Nokia Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587129" start="4874" end="4889" title="LSI Corporation" label="LSI Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975254" start="5100" end="5107" title="WaveLAN" label="WaveLAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921156" start="5155" end="5164" title="Vic Hayes" label="Vic Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131566" start="5346" end="5350" title="IEEE" label="IEEE"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="5367" end="5376" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361045" start="5450" end="5464" title="Wi-Fi Alliance" label="Wi-Fi Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="5511" end="5516" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="5608" end="5620" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q194158" start="6048" end="6060" title="net bit rate" label="net bit rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351621" start="6072" end="6091" title="megabits per second" label="megabits per second"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611017" start="6107" end="6131" title="forward error correction" label="forward error correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q192727" start="6169" end="6183" title="physical layer" label="physical layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="6206" end="6214" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136013" start="6238" end="6255" title="frequency-hopping" label="frequency-hopping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334354" start="6311" end="6326" title="direct-sequence" label="direct-sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="6417" end="6426" title="microwave" label="microwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q304545" start="6449" end="6493" title="ISM radio band" label="Industrial Scientific Medical frequency band"/>
<link wikidata="Q375889" start="6847" end="6851" title="OFDM" label="OFDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940572" start="7335" end="7352" title="Center frequency" label="carrier frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q304545" start="8785" end="8793" title="ISM band" label="ISM band"/>
<link wikidata="Q375889" start="9083" end="9087" title="OFDM" label="OFDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q216158" start="9770" end="9782" title="adapter card" label="adapter card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421681" start="10402" end="10409" title="802.11a" label="802.11a"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747387" start="10411" end="10412" title="IEEE 802.11b" label="b"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653443" start="10414" end="10415" title="IEEE 802.11d" label="d"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185681" start="10417" end="10418" title="IEEE 802.11e" label="e"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746589" start="10420" end="10421" title="IEEE 802.11g" label="g"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132707" start="10423" end="10424" title="IEEE 802.11h" label="h"/>
<link wikidata="Q644147" start="10426" end="10427" title="IEEE 802.11i" label="i"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528461" start="10429" end="10430" title="IEEE 802.11j" label="j"/>
<link wikidata="Q176862" start="10821" end="10851" title="multiple-input multiple-output" label="multiple-input multiple-output"/>
<link wikidata="Q10516843" start="11679" end="11686" title="802.11k" label="802.11k"/>
<link wikidata="Q634749" start="11688" end="11689" title="IEEE 802.11r" label="r"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970265" start="11691" end="11692" title="IEEE 802.11y" label="y"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193354" start="11694" end="11695" title="IEEE 802.11n" label="n"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970277" start="11697" end="11698" title="IEEE 802.11w" label="w"/>
<link wikidata="Q841708" start="11700" end="11701" title="IEEE 802.11p" label="p"/>
<link wikidata="Q24589626" start="11703" end="11704" title="IEEE 802.11z-2010" label="z"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970262" start="11706" end="11707" title="IEEE 802.11v" label="v"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566612" start="11709" end="11710" title="IEEE 802.11u" label="u"/>
<link wikidata="Q180122" start="11712" end="11713" title="IEEE 802.11s" label="s"/>
<link wikidata="Q749753" start="12301" end="12304" title="QAM" label="QAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q738298" start="12338" end="12353" title="Multi-user MIMO" label="Multi-user MIMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q192727" start="13165" end="13179" title="physical layer" label="physical layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q570342" start="13225" end="13240" title="millimeter wave" label="millimeter wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q59326100" start="13416" end="13424" title="802.11ad" label="802.11ad"/>
<link wikidata="Q59325959" start="13453" end="13458" title="WiGig" label="WiGig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112688" start="14007" end="14018" title="Super Wi-Fi" label="Super Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q256313" start="14103" end="14123" title="White spaces (radio)" label="white space spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q152466" start="14131" end="14134" title="VHF" label="VHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q628096" start="14139" end="14142" title="UHF" label="UHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235733" start="14181" end="14196" title="cognitive radio" label="cognitive radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="14472" end="14475" title="GPS" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q30590272" start="14509" end="14535" title="TV White Space Database" label="geolocation database (GDB)"/>
<link wikidata="Q371792" start="15141" end="15162" title="space–time block code" label="space–time block code"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15616" end="15620" title="IEEE 802.11ae" label="11ae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15622" end="15626" title="IEEE 802.11aa" label="11aa"/>
<link wikidata="Q59326100" start="15628" end="15632" title="11ad" label="11ad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188495" start="15634" end="15638" title="11ac" label="11ac"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995156" start="15640" end="15644" title="11af" label="11af"/>
<link wikidata="Q39531" start="16435" end="16444" title="Bluetooth" label="Bluetooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995158" start="17313" end="17317" title="11ai" label="11ai"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995157" start="17319" end="17323" title="11ah" label="11ah"/>
<link wikidata="Q193228" start="17325" end="17329" title="IEEE 802.11aj" label="11aj"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17331" end="17335" title="IEEE 802.11ak" label="11ak"/>
<link wikidata="Q193228" start="17337" end="17341" title="IEEE 802.11aq" label="11aq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361045" start="17618" end="17632" title="Wi-Fi Alliance" label="Wi-Fi Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q192727" start="17823" end="17826" title="PHY" label="PHY"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383412" start="18054" end="18064" title="throughput" label="throughput"/>
<link wikidata="Q212607" start="18177" end="18181" title="WLAN" label="WLAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697649" start="18328" end="18333" title="OFDMA" label="OFDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555726" start="18374" end="18402" title="Frequency-division multiplexing" label="&amp;quot;frequency domain&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574075" start="18418" end="18450" title="spatial multiplexing" label="&amp;quot;spatial&amp;quot; multiplexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q535695" start="18491" end="18510" title="Cellular network" label="cellular technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q192727" start="18757" end="18771" title="physical layer" label="physical layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q570342" start="18817" end="18832" title="millimeter wave" label="millimeter wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q176862" start="19201" end="19205" title="MIMO" label="MIMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136128" start="19658" end="19661" title="On–off keying" label="OOK"/>
<link wikidata="Q120637004" start="19723" end="19736" title="IEEE 802.11bb" label="IEEE 802.11bb"/>
<link wikidata="Q570951" start="20750" end="20755" title="802.3" label="802.3"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="20757" end="20765" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172393" start="21049" end="21056" title="goodput" label="goodput"/>
<link wikidata="Q11163" start="21460" end="21463" title="User Datagram Protocol" label="UDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q304545" start="22022" end="22030" title="ISM band" label="ISM band"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22745" end="22766" title="List of WLAN channels#5GHz" label="list of WLAN channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575198" start="22910" end="22923" title="spectral mask" label="spectral mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357982" start="23022" end="23032" title="Attenuation" label="attenuated"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329" start="23049" end="23051" title="decibel" label="dB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455619" start="23355" end="23379" title="Frequency allocation" label="allocates radio spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984333" start="24171" end="24187" title="near–far problem" label="near–far problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334354" start="24622" end="24653" title="direct-sequence spread spectrum" label="direct-sequence spread spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q899383" start="26329" end="26342" title="ETSI" label="ETSI (Europe)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="26383" end="26398" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi certified"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144533" start="26455" end="26479" title="least common denominator" label="least common denominator"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="26827" end="26860" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q726868" start="26891" end="26899" title="datagram" label="datagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q884773" start="27212" end="27232" title="frame check sequence" label="frame check sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043562" start="28188" end="28205" title="Service set (802.11 network)" label="basic service set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043562" start="28212" end="28241" title="independent basic service set" label="independent basic service set"/>
<link wikidata="Q273673" start="29788" end="29812" title="Wired Equivalent Privacy" label="Wired Equivalent Privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q272165" start="29820" end="29842" title="Wi-Fi Protected Access" label="Wi-Fi Protected Access"/>
<link wikidata="Q20484" start="30448" end="30459" title="MAC address" label="MAC address"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043562" start="30657" end="30677" title="Extended Service Set" label="Extended Service Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q25552104" start="30713" end="30725" title="mesh network" label="mesh network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185681" start="31087" end="31094" title="802.11e" label="802.11e"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970277" start="31761" end="31785" title="IEEE 802.11w-2009" label="not always authenticated"/>
<link wikidata="Q183177" start="31954" end="31991" title="wireless network interface controller" label="wireless network interface controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043562" start="32972" end="32976" title="SSID" label="SSID"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876004" start="33387" end="33399" title="Beacon frame" label="Beacon frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043562" start="33481" end="33485" title="SSID" label="SSID"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927179" start="34993" end="35014" title="block acknowledgement" label="block acknowledgement"/>
<link wikidata="Q30692552" start="35262" end="35281" title="information element" label="information element"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047049" start="35796" end="35814" title="IEEE 802.11 RTS/CTS" label="RTS and CTS frames"/>
<link wikidata="Q965758" start="36446" end="36456" title="IEEE 802.2" label="IEEE 802.2"/>
<link wikidata="Q177200" start="36486" end="36506" title="Service Access Point" label="Service Access Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q556402" start="36553" end="36579" title="Subnetwork Access Protocol" label="Subnetwork Access Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638019" start="36626" end="36660" title="organizationally unique identifier" label="organizationally unique identifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059278" start="36775" end="36784" title="EtherType" label="EtherType"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835766" start="36918" end="36940" title="TCP congestion control" label="TCP congestion control"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714551" start="37052" end="37080" title="Modulation and Coding Scheme" label="Modulation and Coding Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970491" start="37608" end="37634" title="IEEE Standards Association" label="IEEE Standards Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970258" start="37668" end="37684" title="IEEE 802.11-1997" label="IEEE 802.11-1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="37757" end="37765" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421681" start="37905" end="37917" title="IEEE 802.11a" label="IEEE 802.11a"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747387" start="37981" end="37993" title="IEEE 802.11b" label="IEEE 802.11b"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653444" start="38047" end="38059" title="IEEE 802.11c" label="IEEE 802.11c"/>
<link wikidata="Q210700" start="38106" end="38117" title="IEEE 802.1D" label="IEEE 802.1D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653443" start="38136" end="38148" title="IEEE 802.11d" label="IEEE 802.11d"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185681" start="38213" end="38225" title="IEEE 802.11e" label="IEEE 802.11e"/>
<link wikidata="Q220501" start="38241" end="38244" title="Quality of service" label="QoS"/>
<link wikidata="Q492197" start="38281" end="38293" title="IEEE 802.11F" label="IEEE 802.11F"/>
<link wikidata="Q492197" start="38295" end="38322" title="Inter-Access Point Protocol" label="Inter-Access Point Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746589" start="38356" end="38368" title="IEEE 802.11g" label="IEEE 802.11g"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132707" start="38437" end="38449" title="IEEE 802.11h" label="IEEE 802.11h"/>
<link wikidata="Q644147" start="38520" end="38532" title="IEEE 802.11i" label="IEEE 802.11i"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528461" start="38561" end="38573" title="IEEE 802.11j" label="IEEE 802.11j"/>
<link wikidata="Q10516843" start="38734" end="38746" title="IEEE 802.11k" label="IEEE 802.11k"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193354" start="38797" end="38809" title="IEEE 802.11n" label="IEEE 802.11n"/>
<link wikidata="Q212607" start="38829" end="38833" title="WLAN" label="WLAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q176862" start="38887" end="38891" title="MIMO" label="MIMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q841708" start="38914" end="38926" title="IEEE 802.11p" label="IEEE 802.11p"/>
<link wikidata="Q634749" start="39033" end="39045" title="IEEE 802.11r" label="IEEE 802.11r"/>
<link wikidata="Q180122" start="39081" end="39093" title="IEEE 802.11s" label="IEEE 802.11s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043562" start="39112" end="39132" title="Extended Service Set" label="Extended Service Set"/>
<link wikidata="Q10566612" start="39257" end="39269" title="IEEE 802.11u" label="IEEE 802.11u"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970262" start="39393" end="39405" title="IEEE 802.11v" label="IEEE 802.11v"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454667" start="39416" end="39434" title="network management" label="network management"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970277" start="39453" end="39465" title="IEEE 802.11w" label="IEEE 802.11w"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970265" start="39514" end="39526" title="IEEE 802.11y" label="IEEE 802.11y"/>
<link wikidata="Q24589626" start="39573" end="39585" title="IEEE 802.11z" label="IEEE 802.11z"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622657" start="39848" end="39875" title="Stream Reservation Protocol" label="Stream Reservation Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188495" start="39878" end="39891" title="IEEE 802.11ac" label="IEEE 802.11ac"/>
<link wikidata="Q212607" start="39914" end="39918" title="WLAN" label="WLAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q738298" start="39962" end="39977" title="Multi-user MIMO" label="Multi-user MIMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q59326100" start="40013" end="40026" title="IEEE 802.11ad" label="IEEE 802.11ad"/>
<link wikidata="Q59325959" start="40083" end="40088" title="WiGig" label="WiGig"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995156" start="40157" end="40170" title="IEEE 802.11af" label="IEEE 802.11af"/>
<link wikidata="Q256313" start="40172" end="40185" title="White spaces (radio)" label="TV Whitespace"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995157" start="40318" end="40331" title="IEEE 802.11ah" label="IEEE 802.11ah"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995158" start="40425" end="40438" title="IEEE 802.11ai" label="IEEE 802.11ai"/>
<link wikidata="Q193228" start="40482" end="40495" title="IEEE 802.11aj" label="IEEE 802.11aj"/>
<link wikidata="Q188635" start="40573" end="40589" title="Bridging (networking)" label="Bridged Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q24534575" start="40773" end="40786" title="IEEE 802.11ax" label="IEEE 802.11ax"/>
<link wikidata="Q212607" start="40804" end="40808" title="WLAN" label="WLAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697649" start="40841" end="40846" title="OFDMA" label="OFDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q25100938" start="40868" end="40881" title="IEEE 802.11ay" label="IEEE 802.11ay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41025" end="41038" title="IEEE 802.11ba" label="IEEE 802.11ba"/>
<link wikidata="Q120637004" start="41069" end="41082" title="IEEE 802.11bb" label="IEEE 802.11bb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41183" end="41196" title="IEEE 802.11bd" label="IEEE 802.11bd"/>
<link wikidata="Q841708" start="41245" end="41257" title="IEEE 802.11p" label="IEEE 802.11p"/>
<link wikidata="Q65071978" start="41292" end="41305" title="IEEE 802.11be" label="IEEE 802.11be"/>
<link wikidata="Q24534575" start="41355" end="41368" title="IEEE 802.11ax" label="IEEE 802.11ax"/>
<link wikidata="Q124049233" start="41592" end="41605" title="IEEE 802.11bn" label="IEEE 802.11bn"/>
<link wikidata="Q54953993" start="42018" end="42026" title="802.11mc" label="802.11mc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421681" start="42700" end="42712" title="IEEE 802.11a" label="IEEE 802.11a"/>
<link wikidata="Q24534575" start="42716" end="42729" title="IEEE 802.11ax" label="IEEE 802.11ax"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672057" start="43244" end="43253" title="TU (time unit)" label="time unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q842015" start="43346" end="43357" title="microsecond" label="microsecond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471001" start="43542" end="43548" title="IEEE 802.1" label="802.1H"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="43659" end="43693" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q193228" start="43741" end="43747" title="802.11" label="802.11"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462700" start="43854" end="43881" title="Fluhrer, Mantin and Shamir attack" label="Fluhrer, Mantin, and Shamir"/>
<link wikidata="Q846955" start="43954" end="43957" title="RC4" label="RC4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="44003" end="44011" title="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295108" start="44354" end="44363" title="MAC layer" label="MAC layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q272165" start="44427" end="44449" title="Wi-Fi Protected Access" label="Wi-Fi Protected Access"/>
<link wikidata="Q644147" start="44563" end="44575" title="IEEE 802.11i" label="IEEE 802.11i"/>
<link wikidata="Q190746" start="44644" end="44672" title="Advanced Encryption Standard" label="Advanced Encryption Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q846955" start="44691" end="44694" title="RC4" label="RC4"/>
<link wikidata="Q747499" start="44861" end="44867" title="RADIUS" label="RADIUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146165" start="44976" end="44983" title="EAP-TLS" label="EAP-TLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970277" start="45031" end="45055" title="IEEE 802.11w-2009" label="task group &amp;quot;w&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836466" start="45304" end="45325" title="Wi-Fi Protected Setup" label="Wi-Fi Protected Setup"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="45547" end="45552" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="45572" end="45575" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q23045949" start="45674" end="45698" title="People counter" label="retail footfall tracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q20903996" start="45913" end="45942" title="Wi-Fi deauthentication attack" label="Wi-Fi deauthentication attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q65074986" start="46057" end="46075" title="802.11 frame types" label="802.11 frame types"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156035" start="46078" end="46115" title="Comparison of wireless data standards" label="Comparison of wireless data standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507502" start="46118" end="46146" title="Fujitsu Ltd. v. Netgear Inc." label="Fujitsu Ltd. v. Netgear Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1810887" start="46149" end="46154" title="Gi-Fi" label="Gi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q24892039" start="46247" end="46267" title="LTE-WLAN Aggregation" label="LTE-WLAN Aggregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q375889" start="46270" end="46298" title="OFDM system comparison table" label="OFDM system comparison table"/>
<link wikidata="Q24589680" start="46301" end="46314" title="Passive Wi-Fi" label="Passive Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303921" start="46317" end="46367" title="Reference Broadcast Infrastructure Synchronization" label="Reference Broadcast Infrastructure Synchronization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672057" start="46370" end="46384" title="TU (time unit)" label="TU (time unit)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30590272" start="46387" end="46410" title="TV White Space Database" label="TV White Space Database"/>
<link wikidata="Q851424" start="46413" end="46427" title="Ultra-wideband" label="Ultra-wideband"/>
<link wikidata="Q256313" start="46430" end="46450" title="White spaces (radio)" label="White spaces (radio)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997957" start="46453" end="46483" title="Wi-Fi operating system support" label="Wi-Fi operating system support"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638779" start="46486" end="46492" title="Wibree" label="Wibree"/>
<link wikidata="Q59325959" start="46519" end="46524" title="WiGig" label="WiGig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057062" start="46527" end="46539" title="Wireless USB" label="Wireless USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q186117" start="46823" end="46831" title="timeline" label="timeline"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14741" wikidata="Q938806" url="?curid=14741" title="Irn-Bru">
<text>Irn-Bru ( &quot;iron brew&quot;, ) is a Scottish carbonated soft drink, often described as &quot;Scotland&#x27;s other national drink&quot; after Scotch whisky. Introduced in 1901, the drink is produced in Westfield, Cumbernauld, North Lanarkshire, by A.G. Barr of Glasgow. As well as being sold throughout the United Kingdom, Irn-Bru is available throughout the world and can usually be bought where there is a significant community of people from Scotland. The brand also has its own tartan. It has been the top-selling soft drink in Scotland for over a century, competing directly with global brands such as Coca-Cola.

Originally selling it as Iron Brew, the drink&#x27;s makers, A.G. Barr, were forced to change the name of the drink in 1946 following a change in the law that stipulated that the marketing of products be &quot;literally true&quot;. As the drink did not contain much iron, nor was it brewed, the passage of this legislation led the company to change the product&#x27;s name to the presently used Irn-Bru. Irn-Bru has long been the most popularly consumed soft drink in Scotland, consistently beating rivals such as Coca-Cola, Pepsi and Fanta, and reportedly sells 20 cans every second throughout Scotland. Irn-Bru is sold in a number of international food and drink markets, including countries such as the Netherlands, Spain, Belgium, Malta, certain countries of the African continent, the Middle East, and North America.

==Overview and history==
===Appearance and overview===
Irn-Bru is known for its bright orange colour and unique flavour. As of 1999, it contained 0.002% of ammonium ferric citrate, sugar, 32 flavouring agents including caffeine and quinine (but not in Australia), and two controversial colourings (Sunset Yellow FCF E110 and Ponceau 4R E124). On 27 January 2010, soft-drink manufacturer A.G. Barr agreed to a Food Standards Agency voluntary ban on these two colourings although no date was set for their replacement.

After lobbying by First Minister of Scotland Alex Salmond, a proposed restriction of Sunset Yellow to 10 mg/litre was eased to 20 mg/litre in 2011 – the same amount present in Irn-Bru. As of August 2024, Irn-Bru still contains these colourings.

===Origins===
The first Iron Brew drink was produced by the Maas &amp; Waldstein chemicals company of New York in 1889 under the name IRONBREW. The drink was popular across North America and was widely copied. A similar beverage was launched in 1898 by London essence firm Stevenson &amp; Howell that supplied soft drinks manufacturers in the UK and colonies. Many local bottlers around the UK began selling their own version of the beverage.

Despite the official launch date for Barr&#x27;s Iron Brew being given as 1901, the firms AG Barr &amp; Co (Glasgow) and Robert Barr (Falkirk) jointly launched their own Iron Brew drink at least two years earlier, according to a document in the firm&#x27;s archives which indicates that the drink was already enjoying strong sales by May 1899. The strongman image which Barr&#x27;s adopted for their bottle labels and advertising had been trademarked by the firm Stevenson &amp; Howell in 1898. Barr&#x27;s ordered their labels directly from Stevenson &amp; Howell, which also sold Barr&#x27;s many of the individual flavours with which they mixed their own drinks. An advertisement for Barr&#x27;s Iron Brew dated 1900 featuring the original strongman label can be found in Falkirk&#x27;s Local History Archives.

===Trademark===

Barr&#x27;s trademark application for the brand name Irn-Bru dates from July 1946 when the drink was still off sale because of wartime regulations. The firm first commercialised their drink using this new name in 1948 once government SDI consolidation of the soft drinks industry had ended. The name change followed the introduction of new labelling restrictions which cracked down on spurious health claims and introduced minimum standards for drinks claiming to contain minerals such as iron. However, according to Robert Barr OBE (chairman 1947–1978), there was also a commercial rationale behind the unusual spelling. &quot;Iron Brew&quot; had come to be understood as a generic product category in the UK, whereas adopting the name &quot;Irn-Bru&quot; allowed the firm to have a legally protected brand identity that would enable the firm to benefit from the popularity of their wartime &quot;Adventures of Ba-Bru&quot; comic strip advertising. (The &quot;Iron Brew&quot; name has continued to be used for many versions of the drink sold by rival manufacturers.)

===Popularity and new variants===
1980 saw the introduction of Low Calorie Irn-Bru: this was re-launched in 1991 as Diet Irn-Bru and again in 2011 as Irn-Bru Sugar Free. The Irn-Bru 32 energy drink variant was launched in 2006.

Irn-Bru has long been the most popular soft drink in Scotland, with Coca-Cola second, but competition between the two brands brought their sales to roughly equal levels by 2003. It is also the third best selling soft drink in the UK, after Coca-Cola and Pepsi, outselling high-profile brands such as Fanta, Dr Pepper, Sprite and 7 Up. This success in defending its home market (a feat claimed only by Irn-Bru, Inca Kola and Thums Up; Thums Up sold out to Coca-Cola in 1993, and Inka Kola owners Corporación Lindley S.A. entered into a joint venture with Coca-Cola in 1999, giving up all rights to the name outside Peru) led to ongoing speculation that Coca-Cola, PepsiCo, Inc. or its UK brand franchisee Britvic would attempt to buy A.G. Barr. In November 2012 AG Barr and Britvic announced a merger proposal, but in July 2013 the merger collapsed when terms could not be agreed.

Irn-Bru&#x27;s advertising slogans used to be &#x27;Scotland&#x27;s other National Drink&#x27;, referring to whisky, and &#x27;Made in Scotland from girders&#x27;, a reference to the rusty colour of the drink; though the closest one can come to substantiating this claim is the 0.002% ammonium ferric citrate listed in the ingredients.

Fiery Irn-Bru, a limited edition variant, was released in autumn 2011. It was packaged with a black and orange design, and with the signature man icon with an added image of a fire. It featured the traditional Irn-Bru flavour with an aftertaste similar to ginger.

Irn-Bru was also sold in reusable 750 ml glass bottles which, like other Barr&#x27;s drinks, were able to be returned to the manufacturer in exchange for a 30 pence (previously 20p) deposit paid on purchase. This scheme was widely available in shops across Scotland and led to the colloquial term for an empty: a &quot;glass cheque&quot;. As a result of a 40% drop in returned bottles since the 1990s Barr deemed the washing and re-filling process uneconomical, and on 1 January 2016 ceased the scheme.

===New logo===

2016 saw the introduction of the current logo, conveying &quot;strength&quot; and an &quot;industrial feel&quot;, and a new diet variant called Irn-Bru Xtra in different branding to the existing sugar free variety in a similar fashion to Coca-Cola Zero and Pepsi Max.

Barr changed the formula of Irn-Bru in January 2018 in response to a sugar tax implemented in the UK in April 2018, intended to combat obesity. By reducing the sugar content to less than 5g per 100ml, Barr has made Irn-Bru exempt from the tax. The manufacturer asserted that &quot;most people will not be able to tell the difference in flavour between the old and new formulas&quot;, but fans of the drink launched an unsuccessful &#x27;Save Real Irn-Bru&#x27; campaign to stop or reverse the change, and began stocking up on the more sugary formula.

In May 2019, Barr announced a new energy drink variant of Irn-Bru called Irn-Bru Energy, which was released on 1 July 2019.

In October 2019, Barr announced the launch of the &quot;Irn-Bru 1901&quot;. The drink would be available for a limited time and use the original recipe from 1901.

===Recent history===
In March 2021, Barr announced the relaunch of &quot;IRN-BRU 1901&quot; as a permanent addition to the IRN-BRU lineup.

Irn-Bru was the only soft drink on sale at the 2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference (COP26) in Glasgow, Scotland, due to a sponsorship arrangement. Member of the US House of Representatives Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez tried Irn-Bru at COP26 and said she loved it, and that it tasted just like the Latino soda Kola Champagne. The response from others at the conference ranged from strong dislike to strong liking. The volume of editorial and opinion publicity the drink gained on social and print media was described as &quot;the summit&#x27;s surprise&quot;, coverage worth millions. However, AG Barr&#x27;s share price remained relatively flat at the time.

==Production==

It is produced in Westfield, Cumbernauld, North Lanarkshire, since Barr&#x27;s moved out of their Parkhead, Glasgow factory in the mid-2000s. In 2011, Irn-Bru closed their factory in Mansfield, making the Westfield plant in Cumbernauld the main location for production. Other manufacturing locations include the English city of Sheffield.

==Marketing==


Barr&#x27;s actively promoted their Irn-Bru from the outset, with some of their earliest ads featuring world champion wrestlers and Highland Games athletes Donald Dinnie and Alex Munro who endorsed the drink by means of personal testimonials. In the 1930s, the firm began a long-running series of comic strip ads entitled &quot;The Adventures of Ba-Bru&quot; which ran in various local papers from April 1939 until October 1970. The last traces of this campaign, a large neon sign featuring Ba-Bru which stood in Union St above Glasgow Central railway station, was removed in 1983 and replaced with an illuminated display featuring the tagline &quot;Your Other National Drink&quot;.

Barr has a long-established gimmick associating Irn-Bru with Scottishness, stemming from the claim of its being Scotland&#x27;s most popular soft drink. A tagline, &quot;Made in Scotland from girders&quot;, was used for several years from the 1980s, usually featuring Irn-Bru drinkers becoming unusually strong, durable or magnetic.

An advertising campaign launched in Spring 2000 aimed to &quot;dramatise the extraordinary appeal of Irn-Bru in a likeably maverick style&quot;. David Amers, Planning Director, said: &quot;Irn-Bru is the likeable maverick of the soft drinks market and these ads perfectly capture the brand&#x27;s spirit.&quot; One involved a grandfather (played by actor Robert Wilson) who removed his false teeth to spoil his grandson&#x27;s interest in his can of Irn-Bru. A further TV advertisement featured a senior citizen in a motorised wheelchair robbing a local shopping market of a supply of Irn-Bru.

In 2004 the company created a new concept &quot;Phenomenal&quot;. In 2006 the company launched its first Christmas adverts. This campaign consisted of a parody commercial of a popular Christmas Cartoon, &quot;The Snowman&quot;, and was effective in interesting American audiences in the Irn-Bru brand. A sequel to the commercial would later be released in December 2018.
Further advertising campaigns for Irn-Bru appeared in conjunction with the release of Irn-Bru 32 in 2006.

A 2009 advertisement for the product featured a group of high school pupils performing a musical number, with the refrain &quot;It&#x27;s fizzy, it&#x27;s ginger, it&#x27;s phenomenal!&quot; It was a parody of &quot;High School Musical&quot;, and starred Jack Lowden. In 2012 the company changed its slogan to &quot;gets you through&quot;, which see a number of people drinking Irn-Bru to get through tough situations. In response to the Coca-Cola &#x27;Share a Coke&#x27; campaign, Barr decided to produce thousands of limited edition 750 ml bottles of &quot;Irn-Bru&quot; with the names &#x27;Fanny&#x27;, &#x27;Senga&#x27;, &#x27;Rab&#x27; and &#x27;Tam&#x27; on the label, mimicking that by Coca-Cola. The use of the name &#x27;Fanny&#x27; ties in with one of &quot;Irn-Bru&quot;&#x27;s controversial marketing advertisements.

One of the most controversial Irn-Bru television adverts evoked 1950s entertainment. A mother plays the piano, while the father and two children deliver a song which ends with the mother singing: &quot;...even though I used to be a man&quot;. This advertisement was broadcast in 2000, but when it was repeated in 2003, it led to seventeen complaints about it being offensive to members of the transgender community. Issue A14 of the Ofcom Advertising Complaints bulletin reports that the children&#x27;s response to their mother&#x27;s claim was not offensive. According to the advertising agency Leith, the advertisement was meant to &quot;create a sense of humour while confirming the maverick nature of the brand&quot;. However, the scene involving the mother shaving at the end of the advertisement was deemed by Ofcom to be &quot;capable of causing offence by strongly reinforcing negative stereotypes&quot;, and so it was taken off the air.

In 2003, an Irn-Bru commercial which showed a midwife trying to entice a baby from its mother&#x27;s womb during a difficult delivery sparked fifty complaints. Some saw it as upsetting to women who had suffered miscarriages. One billboard that drew criticism featured a young woman in a bikini along with the slogan &quot;Diet Irn-Bru. I never knew four-and-a-half inches could give so much pleasure&quot;. Another featured a picture of a cow with the slogan &quot;When I&#x27;m a burger, I want to be washed down with Irn-Bru&quot;. This billboard resulted in over 700 complaints but was cleared by advertisement watchdogs. According to a 2003 BBC report, a billboard which featured a depressed goth and the slogan &quot;Cheer up Goth. Have an Irn-Bru.&quot; was also criticised for inciting bullying.

==Brand portfolio==
McCowan&#x27;s also produced Irn-Bru Bars, chewy, fizzy, bright orange confectionery bars which taste strongly of Irn-Bru, though production ended in late 2005. Irn-Bru sorbet is available in some speciality ice cream shops in Scotland.

The drink can be used as a mixer with alcoholic beverages, mainly vodka and whisky. Barr launched an alcopop drink combining Irn-Bru and Bell&#x27;s whisky, although this proved to be unpopular and was discontinued.

==Exports and foreign markets==
===Australia===
In Australia, Irn-Bru was manufactured and distributed under licence by Occasio Australia until 2009. It was available in 500 ml and 1.25-litre in both standard and diet. The drink enjoyed growing success in the country, with its first advertising campaign launched in Queensland in September 2007. It was initially available in major chains such as Coles and Woolworths, Caltex service stations and in many independent grocers and convenience stores. It was then delisted at Coles Supermarkets. Because of manufacturing and bottling issues, Occasio ceased local production in late 2009. It is now imported direct from the UK and distributed by British Provender, and can again be found in the international sections of major supermarket chains and some convenience stores.

===Canada===
Irn-Bru sold in Canada contained no caffeine until 2011, following the decision by Health Canada to repeal the ban on caffeine on non cola soft drinks in March 2010. Non-cola soft drinks can now contain up to 150ppm of caffeine. Now bottles of Irn-Bru have the label &#x27;Now Contains caffeine&#x27; on the packaging. Irn-Bru in Canada is distributed by TFB &amp; Associates Ltd from Markham, Ontario but is packaged by A.G. Barr in Glasgow, Scotland. Irn-Bru can be found at Sobeys, Co-op and Walmart supermarkets. The now-defunct McKinlay soft-drink company in Glace Bay, Cape Breton, Nova Scotia, Canada, offered its own non-licensed beverage called &quot;Irn-Bru&quot; and later &quot;Cape Breton&#x27;s Irn-Bru&quot;. It was a brown carbonated soft-drink with a fruity cola taste.

The standard Irn-Bru distributed in Canada also contains the &quot;Not a source of iron&quot; disclaimer on the label.
The UK version of the drink (with caffeine) was imported by speciality retailers to Canada, given the large Scottish populations in Canada, with the country accounting for the largest number of Scottish expats in the world.

In 2014, Irn-Bru was incorrectly reported to have been one of a number of imported products, including Marmite, banned in Canada as a result of its additives in its ingredients due to a shipment being confiscated; however, a statement released by the Government of Canada in October 2020 reiterated that &quot;Irn-Bru and Marmite are not banned for sale in Canada. These products have been available on Canadian store shelves for more than a decade and will continue to be sold in stores across Canada. ...Imported products, including Irn Bru and Marmite, that meet Canadian requirements under Canada&#x27;s Food and Drug Regulations are and will continue to be available for sale in Canada.&quot;

===Middle East===
Irn-Bru is available throughout the Middle East. It is found mostly in LuLu supermarkets.

===Europe===
Irn-Bru entered the Norwegian market in May 2008. They had to withdraw from the market again in 2009 as a result of problems with production agreements and lack of funding for marketing. They were believed to be sponsoring the Norwegian First Division club Mjøndalen IF in 2009. This later turned out to be fraud carried out by a third-party company, and Mjøndalen IF never received any sponsorship from Irn-Bru, even though the team played the 2009 season with the Irn-Bru logo on their shirts. It is available in the Republic of Ireland, increasingly being stocked in BWG and ADM Londis supplied stores, as well as in supermarkets owned by Dunnes Stores and Tesco Ireland. In Ireland generally, the drink mainly sells in County Donegal.

Other European territories where Irn Bru is sold include Spain, the Netherlands, Germany, Gibraltar, Belgium, Poland, Malta, Greece and Cyprus. In September 2010, profits in England and Wales had increased, with half year pre-tax profits rising 18.8% to £16 million. By July 2024, A.G. Barr, the manufacturers of the drink, were estimated to make £221 million in sales in England alone for the first six months (January–June) of 2024, a 7% increase in sales from the previous year.

===Russia===
Irn-Bru began being sold in Russia in 1997, and by 2002, it had become their third best selling soft drink. After its original bottler went out of business, a new deal was signed for the drink to be manufactured and distributed in larger quantities by the Pepsi Bottling Group of Russia in 2002. Its popularity has been attributed to the drink&#x27;s apparent similarity to discontinued Soviet-era soft drinks. As of 2011, Irn-Bru sales in Russia were still growing.

On 4 March 2022, due to the ongoing 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, A.G. Barr cut ties with the Russian market.

===United States===
Irn-Bru and Diet Irn-Bru have been formulated since 2002 by A.G. Barr to meet the regulations for food colouring of the Food &amp; Drug Administration (FDA). Ponceau 4R, used in the UK formulation, is prohibited by the FDA. Barr uses alternative food and drink colourants manufactured by a US company approved by the FDA. The product labelling also meets US labelling standards on nutritional information and bar code.

==Competitor and generic Iron Brews==
* Rivets was an iron brew drink launched in 1994 by Meri-Mate Ltd of Dundee.
* Highland Brew was launched in 2000 by the Natural Fruit and Beverage Company.
* Several supermarkets including Aldi, Asda and Lidl sell own brand Iron Brews, alongside the original product made by Barr&#x27;s.
* Foxon Park Beverages in Connecticut, US, makes its own &quot;Iron Brew&quot; soda, available throughout the New Haven area

==See also==
* Iron Brew – a similarly named South African soft drink
* List of brand name soft drink products
* List of soft drink flavors
* List of soft drink producers
* List of soft drinks by country

==References==
==Further reading==
* Davidson, Alan. &quot;The Oxford Companion to Food&quot; (1999), &quot;Irn-Bru&quot;, p. 407.
* Leishman, David. &quot;“Original and Best”? How Barr’s Irn-Bru Became a Scottish Icon&quot; (2017), &quot;Etudes écossaises&quot;, No.19, https://doi.org/10.4000/etudesecossaises.1206

==External links==

* Official Irn-Bru web site </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q938806" start="0" end="7" title="Irn-Bru" label="Irn-Bru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897293" start="40" end="48" title="Scottish cuisine" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139722" start="49" end="59" title="carbonation" label="carbonated"/>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="60" end="70" title="soft drink" label="soft drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q382947" start="146" end="159" title="Scotch whisky" label="Scotch whisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988616" start="206" end="228" title="Westfield, Cumbernauld" label="Westfield, Cumbernauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q207111" start="230" end="247" title="North Lanarkshire" label="North Lanarkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647179" start="252" end="261" title="A.G. Barr" label="A.G. Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="265" end="272" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q216797" start="486" end="492" title="tartan" label="tartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="611" end="620" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="889" end="893" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="1137" end="1146" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q47719" start="1148" end="1153" title="Pepsi" label="Pepsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9935" start="1158" end="1163" title="Fanta" label="Fanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q473522" start="1602" end="1625" title="ammonium ferric citrate" label="ammonium ferric citrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q60235" start="1665" end="1673" title="caffeine" label="caffeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q189522" start="1678" end="1685" title="quinine" label="quinine"/>
<link wikidata="Q410095" start="1744" end="1761" title="Sunset Yellow FCF" label="Sunset Yellow FCF"/>
<link wikidata="Q207810" start="1762" end="1763" title="E number" label="E"/>
<link wikidata="Q384709" start="1771" end="1781" title="Ponceau 4R" label="Ponceau 4R"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647179" start="1833" end="1842" title="A.G. Barr" label="A.G. Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741994" start="1855" end="1876" title="Food Standards Agency" label="Food Standards Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362216" start="1982" end="2008" title="First Minister of Scotland" label="First Minister of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q10652" start="2009" end="2021" title="Alex Salmond" label="Alex Salmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246353" start="4671" end="4675" title="Diet soda" label="Diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q215754" start="4740" end="4752" title="energy drink" label="energy drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="4852" end="4861" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q9935" start="5084" end="5089" title="Fanta" label="Fanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q623561" start="5091" end="5100" title="Dr Pepper" label="Dr Pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q206978" start="5102" end="5108" title="Sprite (soft drink)" label="Sprite"/>
<link wikidata="Q270059" start="5113" end="5117" title="7 Up" label="7 Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q593369" start="5194" end="5203" title="Inca Kola" label="Inca Kola"/>
<link wikidata="Q672465" start="5208" end="5216" title="Thums Up" label="Thums Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295867" start="5239" end="5248" title="The Coca-Cola Company" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q5788924" start="5279" end="5303" title="Corporación Lindley S.A." label="Corporación Lindley S.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q334800" start="5447" end="5460" title="PepsiCo, Inc." label="PepsiCo, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q4971696" start="5488" end="5495" title="Britvic" label="Britvic"/>
<link wikidata="Q281" start="5774" end="5780" title="whisky" label="whisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371480" start="5814" end="5820" title="girder" label="girder"/>
<link wikidata="Q473522" start="5950" end="5973" title="ammonium ferric citrate" label="ammonium ferric citrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q28127283" start="7025" end="7039" title="Coca-Cola Zero" label="Coca-Cola Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493770" start="7044" end="7053" title="Pepsi Max" label="Pepsi Max"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7125" end="7156" title="Sugary drink tax#United Kingdom" label="sugar tax implemented in the UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q68580968" start="8084" end="8129" title="2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference" label="2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q55223040" start="8236" end="8260" title="Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez" label="Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez"/>
<link wikidata="Q16858918" start="8352" end="8366" title="Champagne cola" label="Kola Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988616" start="8736" end="8758" title="Westfield, Cumbernauld" label="Westfield, Cumbernauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q207111" start="8760" end="8777" title="North Lanarkshire" label="North Lanarkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134367" start="8816" end="8824" title="Parkhead" label="Parkhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="8826" end="8833" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q42448" start="9046" end="9055" title="Sheffield" label="Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294251" start="9230" end="9243" title="Donald Dinnie" label="Donald Dinnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q800825" start="9602" end="9633" title="Glasgow Central railway station" label="Glasgow Central railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q787483" start="9786" end="9793" title="gimmick" label="gimmick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114749" start="9819" end="9831" title="Scottishness" label="Scottishness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196717" start="10896" end="10907" title="The Snowman" label="The Snowman"/>
<link wikidata="Q53110" start="11381" end="11400" title="High School Musical" label="High School Musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113745" start="11420" end="11431" title="Jack Lowden" label="Jack Lowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="11603" end="11612" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529532" start="12430" end="12435" title="Ofcom" label="Ofcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q185196" start="12991" end="12998" title="midwife" label="midwife"/>
<link wikidata="Q28693" start="13156" end="13168" title="miscarriages" label="miscarriages"/>
<link wikidata="Q14090" start="13232" end="13238" title="bikini" label="bikini"/>
<link wikidata="Q212954" start="13641" end="13645" title="Goth subculture" label="goth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159627" start="13840" end="13853" title="confectionery" label="confectionery"/>
<link wikidata="Q13302" start="13938" end="13944" title="sorbet" label="sorbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q374" start="14073" end="14078" title="vodka" label="vodka"/>
<link wikidata="Q281" start="14083" end="14089" title="whisky" label="whisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571448" start="14108" end="14115" title="alcopop" label="alcopop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883072" start="14144" end="14162" title="Bell&amp;#x27;s whisky" label="Bell&amp;#x27;s whisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="14541" end="14551" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108172" start="14622" end="14627" title="Coles Supermarkets" label="Coles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249145" start="14632" end="14642" title="Woolworths (supermarket)" label="Woolworths"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748528" start="14644" end="14650" title="Ampol" label="Caltex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108172" start="14748" end="14766" title="Coles Supermarkets" label="Coles Supermarkets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143340" start="15537" end="15543" title="Sobeys" label="Sobeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981018" start="15545" end="15550" title="Co-op Atlantic" label="Co-op"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="15555" end="15562" title="Walmart" label="Walmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108251" start="15624" end="15633" title="Glace Bay" label="Glace Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q188489" start="15635" end="15646" title="Cape Breton Island" label="Cape Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331998" start="16295" end="16302" title="Marmite" label="Marmite"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="16314" end="16320" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q422404" start="16443" end="16463" title="Government of Canada" label="Government of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6702930" start="16980" end="16984" title="LuLu Group International" label="LuLu"/>
<link wikidata="Q353508" start="17240" end="17264" title="Norwegian First Division" label="Norwegian First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q85785974" start="17270" end="17282" title="Mjøndalen IF" label="Mjøndalen IF"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836838" start="17583" end="17586" title="BWG Foods" label="BWG"/>
<link wikidata="Q21015800" start="17591" end="17601" title="ADM Londis" label="ADM Londis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266203" start="17655" end="17668" title="Dunnes Stores" label="Dunnes Stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705434" start="17673" end="17686" title="Tesco Ireland" label="Tesco Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q179424" start="17736" end="17750" title="County Donegal" label="County Donegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="17810" end="17815" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="17821" end="17832" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="17834" end="17841" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="17843" end="17852" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="17854" end="17861" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="17863" end="17869" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="17871" end="17876" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="17878" end="17884" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="17889" end="17895" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="17927" end="17934" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="17939" end="17944" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484906" start="18505" end="18525" title="Pepsi Bottling Group" label="Pepsi Bottling Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="18753" end="18785" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="18972" end="19002" title="Food &amp;amp; Drug Administration" label="Food &amp;amp; Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q384709" start="19010" end="19020" title="Ponceau 4R" label="Ponceau 4R"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="19379" end="19385" title="Dundee" label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q125054" start="19500" end="19504" title="Aldi" label="Aldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q297410" start="19506" end="19510" title="Asda" label="Asda"/>
<link wikidata="Q151954" start="19515" end="19519" title="Lidl" label="Lidl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477210" start="19601" end="19621" title="Foxon Park" label="Foxon Park Beverages"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="19709" end="19718" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q17037243" start="19740" end="19749" title="Iron Brew (South African drink)" label="Iron Brew"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608137" start="19797" end="19835" title="List of brand name soft drink products" label="List of brand name soft drink products"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099143" start="19838" end="19864" title="List of soft drink flavors" label="List of soft drink flavors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639707" start="19867" end="19895" title="List of soft drink producers" label="List of soft drink producers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639708" start="19898" end="19928" title="List of soft drinks by country" label="List of soft drinks by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115298" start="19989" end="20017" title="The Oxford Companion to Food" label="The Oxford Companion to Food"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14742" wikidata="Q290378" url="?curid=14742" title="Internet Standard">
<text>In computer network engineering, an Internet Standard is a normative specification of a technology or methodology applicable to the Internet. Internet Standards are created and published by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). They allow interoperation of hardware and software from different sources which allows internets to function. As the Internet became global, Internet Standards became the lingua franca of worldwide communications.

Engineering contributions to the IETF start as an Internet Draft, may be promoted to a Request for Comments, and may eventually become an Internet Standard.

An Internet Standard is characterized by technical maturity and usefulness. The IETF also defines a Proposed Standard as a less mature but stable and well-reviewed specification. A Draft Standard was an intermediate level, discontinued in 2011. A Draft Standard was an intermediary step that occurred after a Proposed Standard but prior to an Internet Standard.

As put in RFC 2026: In general, an Internet Standard is a specification that is stable and well-understood, is technically competent, has multiple, independent, and interoperable implementations with substantial operational experience, enjoys significant public support, and is recognizably useful in some or all parts of the Internet.

==Overview==
An Internet Standard is documented by a Request for Comments (RFC) or a set of RFCs. A specification that is to become a Standard or part of a Standard begins as an Internet Draft, and is later, usually after several revisions, accepted and published by the RFC Editor as an RFC and labeled a &quot;Proposed Standard&quot;. Later, an RFC is elevated as &quot;Internet Standard&quot;, with an additional sequence number, when maturity has reached an acceptable level. Collectively, these stages are known as the &quot;Standards Track&quot;, and are defined in RFC 2026 and RFC 6410. The label &quot;Historic&quot; is applied to deprecated Standards Track documents or obsolete RFCs that were published before the Standards Track was established.

Only the IETF, represented by the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG), can approve Standards Track RFCs. The definitive list of Internet Standards is maintained in the Official Internet Protocol Standards. Previously, STD 1 used to maintain a snapshot of the list.

== History and the purpose of Internet Standards ==
Internet standards are a set of rules that devices have to follow when they connect in a network. Since the technology has evolved, the rules of the engagement between computers had to evolve with it. These are the protocols that are in place used today. Most of these were developed long before the Internet Age, going as far back as the 1970s, not long after the creation of personal computers.

TCP/IP

The official date for when the first internet went live is January 1, 1983. The Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) went into effect. ARPANET (Advanced Research Projects Agency Network) and the Defense Data Network were the networks to implement the Protocols. These protocols are considered to be the essential part of how the Internet works because they define the rules by which the connections between servers operate. They are still used today by implementing various ways data is sent via global networks.

IPsec

Internet Protocol Security is a collection of protocols that ensure the integrity of encryption in the connection between multiple devices. The purpose of this protocol is to protect public networks. According to IETF Datatracker the group dedicated to its creation was proposed into existence on 25 November 1992. Half a year later the group was created and not long after in the mid 1993 the first draft was published.

HTTP

HyperText Transfer Protocol is one of the most commonly used protocols today in the context of the World Wide Web. HTTP is a simple protocol to govern how documents, that are written in HyperText Mark Language(HTML), are exchanged via networks. This protocol is the backbone of the Web allowing for the whole hypertext system to exist practically. It was created by the team of developers spearheaded by Tim Berners-Lee. Berners-Lee is responsible for the proposal of its creation, which he did in 1989. August 6, 1991 is the date he published the first complete version of HTTP on a public forum. This date subsequently is considered by some to be the official birth of the World Wide Web. HTTP has been continually evolving since its creation, becoming more complicated with time and progression of networking technology. By default HTTP is not encrypted so in practice HTTPS is used, which stands for HTTP Secure.

TLS/SSL

TLS stands for Transport Layer Security which is a standard that enables two different endpoints to interconnect sturdy and privately. TLS came as a replacement for SSL. Secure Sockets Layers was first introduced before the creation of HTTPS and it was created by Netscape. As a matter of fact HTTPS was based on SSL when it first came out. It was apparent that one common way of encrypting data was needed so the IETF specified TLS 1.0 in RFC 2246 in January, 1999. It has been upgraded since. Last version of TLS is 1.3 from RFC 8446 in August 2018.

OSI Model

The Open Systems Interconnection model began its development in 1977. It was created by the International Organization for Standardization. It was officially published and adopted as a standard for use in 1979. It was then updated several times and the final version. It took a few years for the protocol to be presented in its final form. ISO 7498 was published in 1984. Lastly in 1995 the OSI model was revised again satisfy the urgent needs of uprising development in the field of computer networking.

UDP

The goal of User Datagram Protocol was to find a way to communicate between two computers as quickly and efficiently as possible. UDP was conceived and realized by David P. Reed in 1980. Essentially the way it works is using compression to send information. Data would be compressed into a datagram and sent point to point. This proved to be a secure way to transmit information and despite the drawback of losing quality of data UDP is still in use.

==Standardization process== 
Becoming a standard is a two-step process within the Internet Standards Process: &quot;Proposed Standard&quot; and &quot;Internet Standard&quot;. These are called &quot;maturity levels&quot; and the process is called the &quot;Standards Track&quot;.

If an RFC is part of a proposal that is on the Standards Track, then at the first stage, the standard is proposed and subsequently organizations decide whether to implement this Proposed Standard. After the criteria in RFC 6410 is met (two separate implementations, widespread use, no errata etc.), the RFC can advance to Internet Standard.

The Internet Standards Process is defined in several &quot;Best Current Practice&quot; documents, notably BCP 9 ( RFC 2026 and RFC 6410). There were previously three standard maturity levels: &quot;Proposed Standard&quot;, &quot;Draft Standard&quot; and &quot;Internet Standard&quot;. RFC 6410 reduced this to two maturity levels.

===Proposed Standard===
RFC 2026 originally characterized Proposed Standards as immature specifications, but this stance was annulled by RFC 7127.

A &quot;Proposed Standard&quot; specification is stable, has resolved known design choices, has received significant community review, and appears to enjoy enough community interest to be considered valuable. Usually, neither implementation nor operational experience is required for the designation of a specification as a Proposed Standard.

Proposed Standards are of such quality that implementations can be deployed in the Internet. However, as with all technical specifications, Proposed Standards may be revised if problems are found or better solutions are identified, when experiences with deploying implementations of such technologies at scale is gathered.

Many Proposed Standards are actually deployed on the Internet and used extensively, as stable protocols. Actual practice has been that full progression through the sequence of standards levels is typically quite rare, and most popular IETF protocols remain at Proposed Standard.

===Draft Standard===
In October 2011, RFC 6410 merged the second and third maturity levels into one &quot;Internet Standard&quot;. Existing older &quot;Draft Standards&quot; retain that classification, absent explicit actions. For old &quot;Draft Standards&quot; two possible actions are available, which must be aproved by the IESG: A &quot;Draft Standard&quot; may be reclassified as an &quot;Internet Standard&quot; as soon as the criteria in RFC 6410 are satisfied; or, after two years since RFC 6410 was aproved as BCP (October 2013), the IESG can choose to reclassify an old &quot;Draft Standard&quot; as &quot;Proposed Standard&quot;.

===Internet Standard===
An Internet Standard is characterized by a high degree of technical maturity and by a generally held belief that the specified protocol or service provides significant benefit to the Internet community. Generally Internet Standards cover interoperability of systems on the Internet through defining protocols, message formats, schemas, and languages. 
An Internet Standard ensures that hardware and software produced by different vendors can work together. Having a standard makes it much easier to develop software and hardware that link different networks because software and hardware can be developed one layer at a time. Normally, the standards used in data communication are called protocols.

All Internet Standards are given a number in the STD series. The series was summarized in its first document, STD 1 (RFC 5000), until 2013, but this practice was retired in RFC 7100. The definitive list of Internet Standards is now maintained by the RFC Editor.

Documents submitted to the IETF editor and accepted as an RFC are not revised; if the document has to be changed, it is submitted again and assigned a new RFC number. When an RFC becomes an Internet Standard (STD), it is assigned an STD number but retains its RFC number. When an Internet Standard is updated, its number is unchanged but refers to a different RFC or set of RFCs. For example, in 2007 RFC 3700 was an Internet Standard (STD 1) and in May 2008 it was replaced with RFC 5000. RFC 3700 received &quot;Historic&quot; status, and RFC 5000 became STD 1.

The list of Internet standards was originally published as STD 1 but this practice has been abandoned in favor of an online list maintained by the RFC Editor.

== Organizations of Internet Standards ==
The standardization process is divided into three steps:

# Proposed standards are standards to be implemented and can be changed at any time
# The draft standard was carefully tested in preparation for riverside to form the future Internet standard
# Internet standards are mature standards.

There are five Internet standards organizations: the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), Internet Society (ISOC), Internet Architecture Board (IAB), Internet Research Task Force (IRTF), World Wide Web Consortium (W3C). All organizations are required to use and express the Internet language in order to remain competitive in the current Internet phase. Some basic aims of the Internet Standards Process are; ensure technical excellence; earlier implementation and testing; perfect, succinct as well as easily understood records.

Creating and improving the Internet Standards is an ongoing effort and Internet Engineering Task Force plays a significant role in this regard. These standards are shaped and available by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). It is the leading Internet standards association that uses well-documented procedures for creating these standards. Once circulated, those standards are made easily accessible without any cost.

Till 1993, the United States federal government was supporting the IETF. Now, the Internet Society&#x27;s Internet Architecture Board (IAB) supervises it. It is a bottom-up organization that has no formal necessities for affiliation and does not have an official membership procedure either. It watchfully works with the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) and other standard development organizations. Moreover, it heavily relies on working groups that are constituted and proposed to an Area Director. IETF relies on its working groups for expansion of IETF conditions and strategies with a goal to make the Internet work superior. The working group then operates under the direction of the Area Director and progress an agreement. After the circulation of the proposed charter to the IESG and IAB mailing lists and its approval then it is further forwarded to the public IETF. It is not essential to have the complete agreement of all working groups and adopt the proposal. IETF working groups are only required to recourse to check if the accord is strong.

Likewise, the Working Group produce documents in the arrangement of RFCs which are memorandum containing approaches, deeds, examination as well as innovations suitable to the functioning of the Internet and Internet-linked arrangements. In other words, Requests for Comments (RFCs) are primarily used to mature a standard network protocol that is correlated with network statements. Some RFCs are aimed to produce information while others are required to publish Internet standards. The ultimate form of the RFC converts to the standard and is issued with a numeral. After that, no more comments or variations are acceptable for the concluding form. This process is followed in every area to generate unanimous views about a problem related to the internet and develop internet standards as a solution to different glitches. There are eight common areas on which IETF focus and uses various working groups along with an area director. In the &quot;general&quot; area it works and develops the Internet standards. In &quot;Application&quot; area it concentrates on internet applications such as Web-related protocols. Furthermore, it also works on the development of internet infrastructure in the form of PPP extensions. IETF also establish principles and description standards that encompass the Internet protocol suite (TCP/IP). The Internet Architecture Board (IAB) along with the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF) counterpart the exertion of the IETF using innovative technologies.

The IETF is the standards making organization concentrate on the generation of &quot;standard&quot; stipulations of expertise and their envisioned usage. The IETF concentrates on matters associated with the progress of current Internet and TCP/IP know-how. It is alienated into numerous working groups (WGs), every one of which is accountable for evolving standards and skills in a specific zone, for example routing or security. People in working groups are volunteers and work in fields such as equipment vendors, network operators and different research institutions. Firstly, it works on getting the common consideration of the necessities that the effort should discourse. Then an IETF Working Group is formed and necessities are ventilated in the influential Birds of a Feather (BoF) assemblies at IETF conferences.

== Internet Engineering Task Force ==
The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) is the premier internet standards organization. It follows an open and well-documented processes for setting internet standards. The resources that the IETF offers include RFCs, internet-drafts, IANA functions, intellectual property rights, standards process, and publishing and accessing RFCs.

=== RFCs ===

* Documents that contain technical specifications and notes for the Internet.
* The acronym RFC came from the phrase &quot;Request For Comments&quot; - this is not used anymore today and is now simply referred to as RFCs.
* The website &quot;RFC Editor&quot; is an official archive of internet standards, draft standards, and proposed standards.

=== Internet Drafts ===

* Working documents of the IETF and its working groups.
* Other groups may distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts

=== Intellectual property rights ===

* All IETF standards are freely available to view and read, and generally free to implement by anyone without permission or payment.

=== Standards Process ===

* The process of creating a standard is straightforward - a specification goes through an extensive review process by the Internet community and revised through experience.

=== Publishing and accessing RFCs ===

* Internet-Drafts that successfully completed the review process.
* Submitted to RFC editor for publication.

== Types of Internet Standards ==
There are two ways in which an Internet Standard is formed and can be categorized as one of the following: &quot;de jure&quot; standards and &quot;de facto&quot; standards. A de facto standard becomes a standard through widespread use within the tech community. A de jure standard is formally created by official standard-developing organizations. These standards undergo the Internet Standards Process. Common de jure standards include ASCII, SCSI, and Internet protocol suite.

=== Internet Standard Specifications ===
Specifications subject to the Internet Standards Process can be categorized into one of the following: Technical Specification (TS) and Applicability Statement (AS). A Technical Specification is a statement describing all relevant aspects of a protocol, service, procedure, convention, or format. This includes its scope and its intent for use, or &quot;domain of applicability&quot;. However, a TSs use within the Internet is defined by an Applicability Statement. An AS specifies how, and under what circumstances, TSs may be applied to support a particular Internet capability. An AS identifies the ways in which relevant TSs are combined and specifies the parameters or sub-functions of TS protocols. An AS also describes the domains of applicability of TSs, such as Internet routers, terminal server, or datagram-based database servers. An AS also applies one of the following &quot;requirement levels&quot; to each of the TSs to which it refers:

* Required: Implementation of the referenced TS is required to achieve interoperability. For example, Internet systems using the Internet Protocol Suite are required to implement IP and ICMP.
* Recommended:  Implementation of the referenced TS is not required, but is desirable in the domain of applicability of the AS. Inclusion of the functions, features, and protocols of Recommended TSs in the developments of systems is encouraged. For example, the TELNET protocol should be implemented by all systems that intend to use remote access.
* Elective: Implementation of the referenced TS is optional. The TS is only necessary in a specific environment. For example, the DECNET MIB could be seen as valuable in an environment where the DECNET protocol is used.

=== Common Standards ===

==== Web Standards ====
TCP/ IP Model &amp; associated Internet Standards
Web standards are a type of internet standard which define aspects of the World Wide Web. They allow for the building and rendering of websites. The three key standards used by the World Wide Web are Hypertext Transfer Protocol, HTML, and URL. Respectively, they specify the transfer of data between a browser and a web server, the content and layout of a web page, and what web page identifiers mean.

==== Network Standards ====
Network standards are a type of internet standard which defines rules for data communication in networking technologies and processes. Internet standards allow for the communication procedure of a device to or from other devices.

In reference to the TCP/IP Model, common standards and protocols in each layer are as follows:

* The Transport layer: TCP and SPX
* Network layer: IP and IPX
* Data Link layer: IEEE 802.3 for LAN and Frame Relay for WAN
* Physical layer: 8P8C and V.92

== The future of Internet Standards ==

The Internet has been viewed as an open playground, free for people to use and communities to monitor. However, large companies have shaped and molded it to best fit their needs. The future of internet standards will be no different. Currently, there are widely used but insecure protocols such as the Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) and Domain Name System (DNS).  This reflects common practices that focus more on innovation than security.  Companies have the power to improve these issues.  With the Internet in the hands of the industry, users must depend on businesses to protect vulnerabilities present in these standards.

Ways to make BGP and DNS safer already exist but they are not widespread. For example, there is the existing BGP safeguard called Routing Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI). It is a database of routes that are known to be safe and have been cryptographically signed. Users and companies submit routes and check other users&#x27; routes for safety. If it were more widely adopted, more routes could be added and confirmed. However, RPKI is picking up momentum. As of December 2020, tech giant Google registered 99% of its routes with RPKI. They are making it easier for businesses to adopt BGP safeguards. DNS also has a security protocol with a low adoption rate: DNS Security Extensions (DNSSEC). Essentially, at every stage of the DNS lookup process, DNSSEC adds a signature to data to show it has not been tampered with.

Some companies have taken the initiative to secure internet protocols. It is up to the rest to make it more widespread.

==See also==

*Standardization
*Web standards

==References==
==External links==
*RFC Editor</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="3" end="19" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="20" end="31" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q290378" start="36" end="53" title="Internet Standard" label="Internet Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101564" start="69" end="82" title="specification" label="specification"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="132" end="140" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="194" end="225" title="Internet Engineering Task Force" label="Internet Engineering Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421134" start="499" end="513" title="Internet Draft" label="Internet Draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="536" end="556" title="Request for Comments" label="Request for Comments"/>
<link wikidata="Q290378" start="707" end="724" title="Internet Standard" label="Proposed Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q290378" start="788" end="802" title="Internet Standard" label="Draft Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="1360" end="1380" title="Request for Comments" label="Request for Comments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421134" start="1485" end="1499" title="Internet Draft" label="Internet Draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="1578" end="1588" title="RFC Editor" label="RFC Editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q749257" start="2075" end="2079" title="IETF Administrative Support Activity" label="IETF"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="2100" end="2135" title="Internet Engineering Steering Group" label="Internet Engineering Steering Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q956129" start="2691" end="2703" title="Internet Age" label="Internet Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="2768" end="2786" title="Personal computer" label="personal computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="2877" end="2933" title="Internet protocol suite" label="Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol (TCP/IP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q177524" start="2952" end="3003" title="ARPANET" label="ARPANET (Advanced Research Projects Agency Network)"/>
<link wikidata="Q210214" start="3338" end="3364" title="IPsec" label="Internet Protocol Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="3766" end="3793" title="HTTP" label="HyperText Transfer Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="3952" end="3981" title="HTML" label="HyperText Mark Language(HTML)"/>
<link wikidata="Q80" start="4170" end="4185" title="Tim Berners-Lee" label="Tim Berners-Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q44484" start="4638" end="4643" title="HTTPS" label="HTTPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="4708" end="4732" title="Transport Layer Security" label="Transport Layer Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="4863" end="4884" title="Secure Sockets Layer" label="Secure Sockets Layers"/>
<link wikidata="Q93312" start="5261" end="5295" title="OSI model" label="Open Systems Interconnection model"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="5349" end="5395" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="International Organization for Standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11163" start="5780" end="5802" title="User Datagram Protocol" label="User Datagram Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="8814" end="8818" title="Internet Engineering Steering Group" label="IESG"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="11014" end="11045" title="Internet Engineering Task Force" label="Internet Engineering Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q749257" start="11054" end="11070" title="Internet Society" label="Internet Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667943" start="11079" end="11106" title="Internet Architecture Board" label="Internet Architecture Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667993" start="11114" end="11142" title="Internet Research Task Force" label="Internet Research Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q37033" start="11151" end="11176" title="World Wide Web Consortium" label="World Wide Web Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17111" end="17137" title="#Standardization process" label="Internet Standards Process"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="17172" end="17177" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q220868" start="17179" end="17183" title="SCSI" label="SCSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="17189" end="17212" title="Internet protocol suite" label="Internet protocol suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="18338" end="18361" title="Internet protocol suite" label="Internet Protocol Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q11135" start="18388" end="18390" title="IP address" label="IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q13162" start="18395" end="18399" title="Internet Control Message Protocol" label="ICMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q160470" start="18663" end="18669" title="Telnet" label="TELNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152931" start="18945" end="18951" title="DECnet" label="DECNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153289" start="19071" end="19084" title="Web standards" label="Web standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="19145" end="19159" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="19271" end="19298" title="Hypertext Transfer Protocol" label="Hypertext Transfer Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="19300" end="19304" title="HTML" label="HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q42253" start="19310" end="19313" title="URL" label="URL"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="19852" end="19855" title="Internet protocol suite" label="TCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q39532" start="19860" end="19863" title="IPX/SPX" label="SPX"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="19881" end="19883" title="Internet protocol suite" label="IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q855158" start="19888" end="19891" title="IPX" label="IPX"/>
<link wikidata="Q570951" start="19911" end="19921" title="IEEE 802.3" label="IEEE 802.3"/>
<link wikidata="Q242506" start="19934" end="19945" title="Frame Relay" label="Frame Relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q21065240" start="19972" end="19976" title="Modular connector" label="8P8C"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142066" start="19981" end="19985" title="V.92" label="V.92"/>
<link wikidata="Q369577" start="21613" end="21628" title="Standardization" label="Standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153289" start="21630" end="21643" title="Web standards" label="Web standards"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14743" wikidata="Q5974132" url="?curid=14743" title="ISOC">
<text>ISOC is an abbreviation which may refer to:

* Information Security Operations Center, is a location where enterprise information systems are monitored, assessed, and defended.
* Internet Society, ISOC, an international organization that promotes Internet use and access
* Internal Security Operations Command, a unit of the Thai military devoted to national security issues
* Islamic Society, various Islamic-based groups
* Independent State of Croatia, a country that existed during WWII</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17056369" start="47" end="85" title="Information Security Operations Center" label="Information Security Operations Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q749257" start="179" end="195" title="Internet Society" label="Internet Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922031" start="273" end="309" title="Internal Security Operations Command" label="Internal Security Operations Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082793" start="377" end="392" title="Islamic society (disambiguation)" label="Islamic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="425" end="453" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Independent State of Croatia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14744" wikidata="Q4007363" url="?curid=14744" title="ITU-T">
<text>The International Telecommunication Union Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T) is one of the three Sectors (branches) of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU). It is responsible for coordinating standards for telecommunications and Information Communication Technology, such as X.509 for cybersecurity, Y.3172 and Y.3173 for machine learning, and H.264/MPEG-4 AVC for video compression, between its Member States, Private Sector Members, and Academia Members.

The World Telecommunication Standardization Assembly (WTSA), the sector&#x27;s governing conference, convenes every four years.

ITU-T has a permanent secretariat called the Telecommunication Standardization Bureau (TSB), which is based at the ITU headquarters in Geneva, Switzerland. The current director of the TSB is Seizo Onoe (of Japan), whose 4-year term commenced on 1 January 2023. Seizo Onoe succeeded Chaesub Lee of South Korea, who was director from 1 January 2015 until 31 December 2022.

== Primary function ==
The ITU-T mission is to ensure the efficient and timely production of standards covering all fields of telecommunications and Information Communication Technology (ICTs) on a worldwide basis, as well as defining tariff and accounting principles for international telecommunication services.

The international standards that are produced by the ITU-T are referred to as &quot;Recommendations&quot; (with the word capitalized to distinguish its meaning from the common parlance sense of the word &quot;recommendation&quot;), as they become mandatory only when adopted as part of a national law.

Since the ITU-T is part of the ITU, which is a United Nations specialized agency, its standards carry more formal international weight than those of most other standards development organizations that publish technical specifications of a similar form.

== History ==
At the initiative of Napoleon III, the French government invited international participants to a conference in Paris in 1865 to facilitate and regulate international telegraph services. A result of the conference was the founding of the forerunner of the modern ITU.

At the 1925 Paris conference, the ITU created two consultative committees to deal with the complexities of the international telephone services, known as () and with long-distance telegraphy ().

In view of the basic similarity of many of the technical problems faced by the and , a decision was taken in 1956 to merge them into a single entity, the International Telegraph and Telephone Consultative Committee (, in ). The first Plenary Assembly of the new organization was held in Geneva, Switzerland in December 1956.

In 1992, the Plenipotentiary Conference (the top policy-making conference of ITU) saw a reform of ITU, giving the Union greater flexibility to adapt to an increasingly complex, interactive and competitive environment. The was renamed the Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T), as one of three Sectors of the Union alongside the Radiocommunication Sector (ITU-R) and the Telecommunication Development Sector (ITU-D).

Historically, the Recommendations of the were presented at plenary assemblies for endorsement, held every four years, and the full set of Recommendations were published after each plenary assembly. However, the delays in producing texts, and translating them into other working languages, did not suit the fast pace of change in the telecommunications industry.

== &quot;Real time&quot; standardization ==
The rise of the personal computer industry in the early 1980s created a new common practice among both consumers and businesses of adopting &quot;bleeding edge&quot; communications technology even if it was not yet standardized. Thus, standards organizations had to put forth standards much faster, or find themselves ratifying de facto standards after the fact. One of the most prominent examples of this was the Open Document Architecture project, which began in 1985 when a profusion of software firms around the world were still furiously competing to shape the future of the electronic office, and was completed in 1999 long after Microsoft Office&#x27;s then-secret binary file formats had become established as the global de facto standard.

The ITU-T now operates under much more streamlined processes. The time between an initial proposal of a draft document by a member company and the final approval of a full-status ITU-T Recommendation can now be as short as a few months (or less in some cases). This makes the standardization approval process in the ITU-T much more responsive to the needs of rapid technology development than in the ITU&#x27;s historical past. New and updated Recommendations are published on an almost daily basis, and nearly all of the library of over 3,270 Recommendations is now free of charge online. (About 30 specifications jointly maintained by the ITU-T and ISO/IEC are not available for free to the public.)

ITU-T has moreover tried to facilitate cooperation between the various forums and standard-developing organizations (SDOs). This collaboration is necessary to avoid duplication of work and the consequent risk of conflicting standards in the market place.

In the work of standardization, ITU-T cooperates with other SDOs, e.g., the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF).

=== Development of Recommendations ===
Most of the work of ITU-T is carried out by its Sector Members and Associates, while the Telecommunication Standardization Bureau (TSB) is the executive arm of ITU-T and coordinator for a number of workshops and seminars to progress existing work areas and explore new ones. The events cover a wide array of topics in the field of information and communication technologies (ICT) and attract high-ranking experts as speakers, and attendees from engineers to high-level management from all industry sectors.

The technical work, the development of Recommendations, of ITU-T is managed by Study Groups (SGs), such as Study Group 13 for network standards, Study Group 16 for multimedia standards, and Study Group 17 for security standards, which are created by the World Telecommunication Standardization Assembly (WTSA) which is held every four years. As part of the deliberations, WTSA has instructed ITU to hold the Global Standards Symposium, which unlike WTSA is open to public for participation. The people involved in these SGs are experts in telecommunications from all over the world. There are currently 11 SGs. Study groups meet face to face (or virtually under exceptional circumstances) according to a calendar issued by the TSB. SGs are augmented by Focus Groups (FGs), an instrument created by ITU-T, providing a way to quickly react to ICT standardization needs and allowing great flexibility in terms of participation and working methods. The key difference between SGs and FGs is that the latter have greater freedom to organize and finance themselves, and to involve non-members in their work, but they do not have the authority to approve Recommendations. Focus Groups can be created very quickly, are usually short-lived and can choose their own working methods, leadership, financing, and types of deliverables. Current Focus Groups include the ITU-WHO Focus Group on Artificial Intelligence for Health (FG-AI4H) as well as Machine Learning for 5G (which developed Y.3172), Quantum Information Technologies for Networks, and Artificial Intelligence for Assisted and Autonomous Driving.

=== Alternative Approval Process ===
The Alternative Approval Process (AAP) is a fast-track approval procedure that was developed to allow standards to be brought to market in the timeframe that industry now demands. The AAP is defined in ITU-T Recommendation A.8.

This dramatic overhaul of standards-making by streamlining approval procedures was implemented in 2001 and is estimated to have cut the time involved in this critical aspect of the standardization process by 80 to 90 percent. This means that an average standard that took around four years to approve and publish until the mid nineties, and two years until 1997, can now be approved in an average of two months, or as little as five weeks.

Besides streamlining the underlying procedures involved in the approval process, an important contributory factor to the use of AAP is electronic document handling. Once the approval process has begun the rest of the process can be completed electronically, in the vast majority of cases, with no further physical meetings.

The introduction of AAP also formalizes public/private partnership in the approval process by providing equal opportunities for both sector members and member states in the approval of technical standards.

A panel of SG experts drafts a proposal that is then forwarded at an SG meeting to the appropriate body which decides if it is sufficiently ready to be designated a draft text and thus gives its consent for further review at the next level.

After this Consent has been given, TSB announces the start of the AAP procedure by posting the draft text to the ITU-T website and calling for comments. This gives the opportunity for all members to review the text. This phase, called &quot;last call&quot;, is a four-week period in which comments can be submitted by member states and sector members.

If no comments other than editorial corrections are received, the Recommendation is considered approved since no issues were identified that might need any further work. However, if there are any comments, the SG chairman, in consultation with TSB, sets up a comment resolution process by the concerned experts. The revised text is then posted on the web for an &quot;additional review&quot; period of three weeks.

Similar to the last call phase, in &quot;additional review&quot; the Recommendation is considered as approved if no comments are received. If comments are received, it is apparent that there are some issues that still need more work, and the draft text and all comments are sent to the next Study Group meeting for further discussion and possible approval.

Those Recommendations considered as having policy or regulatory implications are approved through what is known as the Traditional Approval Process (TAP), which allows a longer period for reflection and commenting by member states. TAP Recommendations are also translated into the six working languages of ITU (Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian, and Spanish).

== Series and Recommendations ==
ITU-T Recommendations are the names given to telecommunications and computer protocol specification documents published by ITU-T.

=== Recommendation categorization ===
ITU-T assigns each Recommendation a name based on the series and Recommendation number. The name starts with the letter of the series the Recommendation belongs to. Each series encompasses a broad category of Recommendations, such as &quot;H-Series Recommendations: Audiovisual and multimedia systems&quot;. The series letter is followed by a period and the Recommendation number, which uniquely identifies the Recommendation within the series. Often, a range of related Recommendations are further grouped within the series and given adjacent numbers, such as &quot;H.200-H.499: Infrastructure of audiovisual services&quot; or &quot;H.260-H.279: Coding of moving video&quot;. Many numbers are &quot;skipped&quot; to give room for future Recommendations to be adjacent to related Recommendations. Recommendations can be revised or &quot;superseded&quot; and keep their existing Recommendation number.

=== Key standards published by ITU ===
* ASN.1 (Abstract Syntax Notation One)
* Coding of audio: G.711 and G.72x series
* Coding of still images: JPEG T.8x, JPEG 2000 T.80x and JPEG XR T.83x series
* Coding of video: H.120, H.261, H.262 (MPEG-2 Video), H.263, H.264 (MPEG-4 AVC), H.265 (HEVC), H.266 (VVC)
* Construction, installation and protection of cables and other elements of outside plant, L-series
* Data communication over the telephone network, V-series
* Fax standards T.2 – T.4, T.30, T.37, T.38
* F.780.2
* G.114 is an ITU Recommendation that addresses acceptable delays for voice applications, is oriented to national telecommunications, and is more stringent than what is normally applied in private voice networks. One of the issues it addresses is voice delay. It states that 150 milliseconds is acceptable, while 400 milliseconds is unacceptable.
* G.191: Software tools for speech and audio coding standardization
* G.651.1 Multi-mode optical fiber (MMF)
* G.652, G.655, G.657 Single-mode optical fiber (SMF)
* G.8201 Error performance parameters and objectives for multi-operator international paths within optical transport networks
* G.hn (Next generation wired home networking over powerlines, phonelines and coaxial cable) 
* Green ICT standards and supplements (L.1000 series)
* H.323 family of standards for multimedia and VoIP
* H.810 Continua Design Guidelines
* H.870 safe listening standard (audio) developed together with the World Health Organization
* Interconnection rate harmonization, D-series (Secretary: Simao Campos)
* International Emergency Preference Scheme E.106
* International telecommunication charge card E.118
* IMSI codes used in SIM cards E.212
* ISDN and PSTN/3G videoconferencing systems, H.320 and H.324
* ISDN (Integrated Services Digital Network) Q.931
*Objective voice quality measurements P.861, P.862, P.863
* Open Systems Interconnection
* Optical Transport Network (OTN) G.709, G.798, G.872
* Passive optical networks (PON) G.983, G.984, G.987
* Public key infrastructure (PKI) X.509
* Public telecommunication numbering plan, E.164
* Security framework X.805
* Signalling System 7 Q.7xx series
* Standards relating to quality of service (QoS) and quality of experience (QoE)
* Specification and Description Language
* Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH) G.707, G.783, G.803
* T.192, Cooperative document handling
* TrustworthyAI
* Wavelength-division multiplexing (WDM)
* X.25, packet switching
* X.400 email
* Y.3800 Quantum Key Distribution
* (x)DSL (Digital Subscriber Line) series of standards for broadband telecoms
* G.8013/Y.1731 Operations, administration and maintenance (OAM) functions and mechanisms for Ethernet-based networks
* Machine Learning for 5G and future networks (IMT2020):
** Y.3172
** Y.3173
** Y.3176
** Y.3181

== International Telecommunication Regulations (ITRs) ==
In addition to the ITU-T Recommendations, which have non-mandatory status unless they are adopted in national laws, ITU-T is also the custodian of a binding international treaty, the International Telecommunication Regulations. The ITRs go back to the earliest days of the ITU when there were two separate treaties, dealing with telegraph and telephone. The ITRs were adopted, as a single treaty, at the World Administrative Telegraphy and Telephone Conference held in Melbourne, 1988 (WATTC-88).

The ITRs comprise ten articles which deal, &quot;inter alia&quot;, with the definition of international telecommunication services, cooperation between countries and national administrations, safety of life and priority of telecommunications and charging and accounting principles. The adoption of the ITRs in 1988 is often taken as the start of the wider liberalization process in international telecommunications, though a few countries, including United States and United Kingdom, had made steps to liberalize their markets before 1988.

The Constitution and Convention of ITU provides for the amendment of ITRs through a World Conference on International Telecommunications (WCIT). Accordingly, in 1998 there began a process of review of the ITRs; and in 2009 extensive preparations began for such a conference, WCIT-12. In addition to &quot;regional preparatory meetings&quot;, the ITU Secretariat developed 13 &quot;Background Briefs on key issues&quot; that were expected to be discussed at the conference. Convened by former ITU secretary-general Hamadoun Touré, the Conference, WCIT-12, was then held in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, during the period 3–14 December 2014.

== AI for Good ==
The Standardization Sector of ITU also organizes AI for Good, the United Nations platform for the sustainable development of Artificial Intelligence.

== Hot topics ==
* ITU-T has expressed a commitment to &quot;bridging the standardization gap&quot; – disparities in the ability of developing countries, relative to developed ones, to access, implement, contribute to and influence international ICT standards.
* The ICT Security Standards Roadmap has been developed to assist in the development of security standards by bringing together information about existing standards and current standards work in key standards development organizations.
* The Next Generation Networks (NGN) concept takes into consideration new realities in the telecommunication industry characterized by factors such as; the need to converge and optimize the operating networks and the extraordinary expansion of digital traffic (i.e., increasing demand for new multimedia services, mobility, etc.).

== See also ==
* ITU Radio Regulations
* Global Standards Collaboration
* ITU-R recommendations
* ITU-T recommendations
* World Summit on the Information Society
* World Standards Day

Except

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==
*ITU-T Recommendations</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4007363" start="4" end="82" title="ITU-T" label="International Telecommunication Union Telecommunication Standardization Sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q4007363" start="84" end="89" title="ITU-T" label="ITU-T"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="137" end="174" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="International Telecommunication Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q369577" start="217" end="226" title="Standardization" label="standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="231" end="249" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="254" end="290" title="Information Communication Technology" label="Information Communication Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065865" start="300" end="305" title="X.509" label="X.509"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053785" start="325" end="331" title="Y.3172" label="Y.3172"/>
<link wikidata="Q106590013" start="336" end="342" title="Y.3173" label="Y.3173"/>
<link wikidata="Q212633" start="369" end="385" title="H.264/MPEG-4 AVC" label="H.264/MPEG-4 AVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q110612772" start="487" end="535" title="World Telecommunication Standardization Assembly" label="World Telecommunication Standardization Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q859482" start="634" end="645" title="Secretariat (administrative office)" label="secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="747" end="766" title="Geneva, Switzerland" label="Geneva, Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q113451478" start="803" end="813" title="Seizo Onoe" label="Seizo Onoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q58303287" start="894" end="905" title="Chaesub Lee" label="Chaesub Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="1891" end="1903" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q115589341" start="2673" end="2699" title="Plenipotentiary Conference" label="Plenipotentiary Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q376047" start="3026" end="3031" title="ITU-R" label="ITU-R"/>
<link wikidata="Q15846374" start="3079" end="3084" title="ITU-D" label="ITU-D"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="3511" end="3528" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q120208" start="3641" end="3654" title="bleeding edge" label="bleeding edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328899" start="3730" end="3752" title="standards organization" label="standards organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q385853" start="3823" end="3840" title="de facto standard" label="de facto standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q772992" start="3909" end="3935" title="Open Document Architecture" label="Open Document Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358398" start="4075" end="4092" title="electronic office" label="electronic office"/>
<link wikidata="Q11255" start="4131" end="4147" title="Microsoft Office" label="Microsoft Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="5279" end="5325" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="International Organization for Standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="5340" end="5371" title="Internet Engineering Task Force" label="Internet Engineering Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q114450879" start="6035" end="6049" title="ITU-T Study Group 13" label="Study Group 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q97704096" start="6073" end="6087" title="ITU-T Study Group 16" label="Study Group 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q114024466" start="6118" end="6132" title="ITU-T Study Group 17" label="Study Group 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q110612772" start="6182" end="6230" title="World Telecommunication Standardization Assembly" label="World Telecommunication Standardization Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q110613241" start="6336" end="6362" title="Global Standards Symposium" label="Global Standards Symposium"/>
<link wikidata="Q97738181" start="7284" end="7341" title="ITU-WHO Focus Group on Artificial Intelligence for Health" label="ITU-WHO Focus Group on Artificial Intelligence for Health"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7363" end="7386" title="ITU Focus Group on Machine Learning for 5G" label="Machine Learning for 5G"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053785" start="7404" end="7410" title="Y.3172" label="Y.3172"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7413" end="7458" title="ITU Focus Group on Quantum Information Technologies for Networks" label="Quantum Information Technologies for Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="7464" end="7523" title="ITU Focus Group on Artificial Intelligence for Autonomous and Assisted Driving" label="Artificial Intelligence for Assisted and Autonomous Driving"/>
<link wikidata="Q333301" start="11648" end="11653" title="ASN.1" label="ASN.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q952898" start="11704" end="11709" title="G.711" label="G.711"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195" start="11753" end="11757" title="JPEG" label="JPEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q931783" start="11764" end="11773" title="JPEG 2000" label="JPEG 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064039" start="11784" end="11791" title="JPEG XR" label="JPEG XR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416318" start="11824" end="11829" title="H.120" label="H.120"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148249" start="11831" end="11836" title="H.261" label="H.261"/>
<link wikidata="Q922109" start="11838" end="11843" title="H.262" label="H.262"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063983" start="11860" end="11865" title="H.263" label="H.263"/>
<link wikidata="Q212633" start="11867" end="11872" title="H.264" label="H.264"/>
<link wikidata="Q43664" start="11887" end="11892" title="H.265" label="H.265"/>
<link wikidata="Q55517509" start="11901" end="11906" title="H.266" label="H.266"/>
<link wikidata="Q389772" start="12015" end="12033" title="Data communication" label="Data communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624253" start="12062" end="12070" title="List of ITU-T V-series recommendations" label="V-series"/>
<link wikidata="Q132744" start="12073" end="12076" title="Fax" label="Fax"/>
<link wikidata="Q132744" start="12098" end="12102" title="T.30 (ITU-T Recommendation)" label="T.30"/>
<link wikidata="Q474382" start="12104" end="12108" title="T.37" label="T.37"/>
<link wikidata="Q743275" start="12110" end="12114" title="T.38" label="T.38"/>
<link wikidata="Q113560726" start="12117" end="12124" title="F.780.2" label="F.780.2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4007363" start="12127" end="12132" title="G.114" label="G.114"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="12139" end="12142" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="ITU"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12474" end="12479" title="G.191" label="G.191"/>
<link wikidata="Q106589948" start="12542" end="12549" title="G.651.1" label="G.651.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781857" start="12550" end="12574" title="Multi-mode optical fiber" label="Multi-mode optical fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q85762357" start="12583" end="12588" title="G.652" label="G.652"/>
<link wikidata="Q106616274" start="12590" end="12595" title="G.655" label="G.655"/>
<link wikidata="Q65073459" start="12597" end="12602" title="G.657" label="G.657"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503585" start="12603" end="12628" title="Single-mode optical fiber" label="Single-mode optical fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q85762359" start="12637" end="12643" title="G.8201" label="G.8201"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129258" start="12763" end="12767" title="G.hn" label="G.hn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128649" start="12911" end="12916" title="H.323" label="H.323"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="12956" end="12960" title="VoIP" label="VoIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q118899381" start="12963" end="12968" title="H.810" label="H.810"/>
<link wikidata="Q85765052" start="12998" end="13003" title="H.870" label="H.870"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="13064" end="13089" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13149" end="13161" title="Simao Campos" label="Simao Campos"/>
<link wikidata="Q85758118" start="13259" end="13264" title="E.118" label="E.118"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218407" start="13267" end="13271" title="International mobile subscriber identity" label="IMSI"/>
<link wikidata="Q230110" start="13286" end="13289" title="Subscriber Identity Module" label="SIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218407" start="13296" end="13301" title="E.212" label="E.212"/>
<link wikidata="Q170397" start="13304" end="13308" title="ISDN" label="ISDN"/>
<link wikidata="Q243961" start="13313" end="13317" title="PSTN" label="PSTN"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="13318" end="13320" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q647545" start="13348" end="13353" title="H.320" label="H.320"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091737" start="13358" end="13363" title="H.324" label="H.324"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759250" start="13409" end="13414" title="Q.931" label="Q.931"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120750" start="13453" end="13458" title="Perceptual Speech Quality Measure" label="P.861"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739975" start="13460" end="13465" title="Perceptual Evaluation of Speech Quality" label="P.862"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119955" start="13467" end="13472" title="Perceptual Objective Listening Quality Analysis" label="P.863"/>
<link wikidata="Q93312" start="13475" end="13503" title="Open Systems Interconnection" label="Open Systems Interconnection"/>
<link wikidata="Q51831" start="13506" end="13531" title="Optical Transport Network" label="Optical Transport Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511965" start="13538" end="13543" title="G.709" label="G.709"/>
<link wikidata="Q51831" start="13545" end="13550" title="G.798" label="G.798"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027795" start="13560" end="13583" title="Passive optical network" label="Passive optical network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511970" start="13591" end="13596" title="G.983" label="G.983"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644353" start="13598" end="13603" title="G.984" label="G.984"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642817" start="13605" end="13610" title="G.987" label="G.987"/>
<link wikidata="Q658476" start="13613" end="13638" title="Public key infrastructure" label="Public key infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065865" start="13645" end="13650" title="X.509" label="X.509"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273341" start="13694" end="13699" title="E.164" label="E.164"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139465" start="13729" end="13748" title="Signalling System 7" label="Signalling System 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q220501" start="13786" end="13804" title="quality of service" label="quality of service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132648" start="13815" end="13836" title="quality of experience" label="quality of experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q600637" start="13845" end="13883" title="Specification and Description Language" label="Specification and Description Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q51823" start="13886" end="13915" title="Synchronous Digital Hierarchy" label="Synchronous Digital Hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511966" start="13929" end="13934" title="G.783" label="G.783"/>
<link wikidata="Q85804728" start="13944" end="13949" title="T.192" label="T.192"/>
<link wikidata="Q115805554" start="13983" end="13996" title="TrustworthyAI" label="TrustworthyAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620670" start="13999" end="14031" title="Wavelength-division multiplexing" label="Wavelength-division multiplexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q622993" start="14040" end="14044" title="X.25" label="X.25"/>
<link wikidata="Q300851" start="14065" end="14070" title="X.400" label="X.400"/>
<link wikidata="Q107439639" start="14079" end="14085" title="Y.3800" label="Y.3800"/>
<link wikidata="Q104534" start="14116" end="14119" title="DSL" label="DSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q85816496" start="14191" end="14204" title="Y.1731" label="G.8013/Y.1731"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053785" start="14367" end="14373" title="Y.3172" label="Y.3172"/>
<link wikidata="Q106590013" start="14377" end="14383" title="Y.3173" label="Y.3173"/>
<link wikidata="Q107015965" start="14387" end="14393" title="Y.3176" label="Y.3176"/>
<link wikidata="Q113364810" start="14397" end="14403" title="Y.3181" label="Y.3181"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522314" start="15009" end="15019" title="inter alia" label="inter alia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55080309" start="16208" end="16219" title="ITU AI for Good" label="AI for Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q661020" start="16813" end="16837" title="Next Generation Networks" label="Next Generation Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q846267" start="17156" end="17177" title="ITU Radio Regulations" label="ITU Radio Regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570655" start="17180" end="17210" title="Global Standards Collaboration" label="Global Standards Collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17213" end="17234" title=":Category:ITU-R recommendations" label="ITU-R recommendations"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17237" end="17258" title=":Category:ITU-T recommendations" label="ITU-T recommendations"/>
<link wikidata="Q689182" start="17261" end="17300" title="World Summit on the Information Society" label="World Summit on the Information Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861872" start="17303" end="17322" title="World Standards Day" label="World Standards Day"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14745" wikidata="Q226324" url="?curid=14745" title="Indian">
<text>Indian or Indians may refer to:
==Associated with India==
* of or related to India
** Indian people
** Indian diaspora
** Languages of India
** Indian English, a dialect of the English language
** Indian cuisine

==Associated with indigenous peoples of the Americas==
* Indigenous peoples of the Americas
** First Nations in Canada
** Native Americans in the United States
** Indigenous peoples of the Caribbean
** Indigenous languages of the Americas

== Places ==
* Indian, West Virginia, U.S.
* The Indians, an archipelago of islets in the British Virgin Islands

== Arts and entertainment ==
=== Film ===
* &quot;Indian&quot; (film series), a Tamil-language film series
** &quot;Indian&quot; (1996 film)
* &quot;Indian&quot; (2001 film), a Hindi-language film

=== Music ===
* Indians (musician), Danish singer Søren Løkke Juul
* &quot;Indian&quot; (song), by Sturm und Drang, 2007
* &quot;Indians&quot; (song), by Anthrax, 1987
* Indians, a song by Gojira from the 2003 album &quot;The Link&quot;

=== Other uses in arts and entertainment ===
* Indian (card game), or blind man&#x27;s bluff
* Indian soap opera, soap operas written, produced, and filmed in India
* &quot;Indians&quot; (play), by Arthur Kopit, 1968
* &quot;Indians&quot; (sculpture), or &quot;The Bowman&quot; and &quot;The Spearman&quot;, by Ivan Meštrović, 1928

== Sport ==
* Akwesasne Indians, a Mohawk lacrosse team
* Cleveland Indians, now Cleveland Guardians, an American baseball team 
* Frölunda HC, previously Frölunda Indians, a Swedish ice hockey club
* Hannover Indians, a German ice hockey club
* Indianapolis Indians, an American baseball team
* Indios de Mayagüez, a baseball team in Puerto Rico
* Springfield Indians, an American ice hockey franchise

== Other uses ==
* Indian Airlines, a now-defunct state-owned airline of India
* Indian Motorcycle, an American brand of motorcycles

== See also ==
* Hindustani (disambiguation)
* India (disambiguation)
* Indianism (disambiguation)
* Indien (disambiguation)
* Indo (disambiguation)
* Indio (disambiguation)
* Indus (disambiguation)
* Indies (disambiguation)
* Indiana (disambiguation)
* Indian Raj (disambiguation)
* Indian Creek (disambiguation)
* Indian Island (disambiguation)
* Indian Peak, a mountain in British Columbia
* Indian Point (disambiguation)
* Indian River (disambiguation)
* Indian Run (disambiguation)
* Indian Ocean
* Indian subcontinent
* American Indians (disambiguation)
* Classification of the Indigenous peoples of the Americas
* Ethnic groups in South Asia
* Native American name controversy</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q226324" start="0" end="6" title="Indian" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q226324" start="10" end="17" title="Indian" label="Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="77" end="82" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q862086" start="86" end="99" title="Indian people" label="Indian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q925034" start="103" end="118" title="Indian diaspora" label="Indian diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q135595" start="122" end="140" title="Languages of India" label="Languages of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348800" start="144" end="158" title="Indian English" label="Indian English"/>
<link wikidata="Q192087" start="197" end="211" title="Indian cuisine" label="Indian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="270" end="304" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indigenous peoples of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="308" end="331" title="First Nations in Canada" label="First Nations in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="335" end="372" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4991716" start="376" end="411" title="Indigenous peoples of the Caribbean" label="Indigenous peoples of the Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q51739" start="415" end="451" title="Indigenous languages of the Americas" label="Indigenous languages of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q14714082" start="468" end="489" title="Indian, West Virginia" label="Indian, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521377" start="498" end="509" title="The Indians" label="The Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q127699234" start="611" end="643" title="Indian (film series)" label="&amp;quot;Indian&amp;quot; (film series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111799" start="677" end="707" title="Indian (1996 film)" label="&amp;quot;Indian&amp;quot; (1996 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019764" start="710" end="740" title="Indian (2001 film)" label="&amp;quot;Indian&amp;quot; (2001 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024033" start="781" end="799" title="Indians (musician)" label="Indians (musician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30818" start="834" end="859" title="Indian (song)" label="&amp;quot;Indian&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024038" start="888" end="914" title="Indians (song)" label="&amp;quot;Indians&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521606" start="987" end="995" title="The Link (album)" label="The Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q1919992" start="1050" end="1068" title="Indian (card game)" label="Indian (card game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022825" start="1098" end="1115" title="Indian soap opera" label="Indian soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024037" start="1170" end="1196" title="Indians (play)" label="&amp;quot;Indians&amp;quot; (play)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719555" start="1222" end="1253" title="Indians (sculpture)" label="&amp;quot;Indians&amp;quot; (sculpture)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4702019" start="1350" end="1367" title="Akwesasne Indians" label="Akwesasne Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="1394" end="1411" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142013" start="1467" end="1478" title="Frölunda HC" label="Frölunda HC"/>
<link wikidata="Q325596" start="1537" end="1553" title="Hannover Indians" label="Hannover Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180539" start="1582" end="1602" title="Indianapolis Indians" label="Indianapolis Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052971" start="1632" end="1650" title="Indios de Mayagüez" label="Indios de Mayagüez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240798" start="1685" end="1704" title="Springfield Indians" label="Springfield Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q876323" start="1759" end="1774" title="Indian Airlines" label="Indian Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091034" start="1821" end="1838" title="Indian Motorcycle" label="Indian Motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766865" start="1891" end="1918" title="Hindustani (disambiguation)" label="Hindustani (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488929" start="1921" end="1943" title="India (disambiguation)" label="India (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q970051" start="1946" end="1972" title="Indianism (disambiguation)" label="Indianism (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25393123" start="1975" end="1998" title="Indien (disambiguation)" label="Indien (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025407" start="2001" end="2022" title="Indo (disambiguation)" label="Indo (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221402" start="2025" end="2047" title="Indio (disambiguation)" label="Indio (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q346249" start="2050" end="2072" title="Indus (disambiguation)" label="Indus (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024531" start="2075" end="2098" title="Indies (disambiguation)" label="Indies (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q226683" start="2101" end="2125" title="Indiana (disambiguation)" label="Indiana (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q123913604" start="2128" end="2155" title="Indian Raj (disambiguation)" label="Indian Raj (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q408188" start="2158" end="2187" title="Indian Creek (disambiguation)" label="Indian Creek (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q738993" start="2190" end="2220" title="Indian Island (disambiguation)" label="Indian Island (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q117715487" start="2223" end="2234" title="Indian Peak" label="Indian Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038495" start="2269" end="2298" title="Indian Point (disambiguation)" label="Indian Point (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q424397" start="2301" end="2330" title="Indian River (disambiguation)" label="Indian River (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22945315" start="2333" end="2360" title="Indian Run (disambiguation)" label="Indian Run (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="2363" end="2375" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="2378" end="2397" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177393" start="2400" end="2433" title="American Indians (disambiguation)" label="American Indians (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340721" start="2436" end="2492" title="Classification of the Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Classification of the Indigenous peoples of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060646" start="2495" end="2522" title="Ethnic groups in South Asia" label="Ethnic groups in South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979964" start="2525" end="2557" title="Native American name controversy" label="Native American name controversy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14747" wikidata="Q20660245" url="?curid=14747" title="Ionic">
<text>Ionic or Ionian may refer to:
==Arts and entertainment==
* Ionic meter, a poetic metre in ancient Greek and Latin poetry
* Ionian mode, a musical mode or a diatonic scale 

==Places and peoples==
* Ionian, of or from Ionia, an ancient region in western Anatolia
* Ionians, one of four major tribes of the ancient Greeks
* Ionian Sea, part of the Mediterranean Sea
* Ionian Islands, a group of islands in Greece

==Science==
* Ionian, of or relating to Io, a moon of the planet Jupiter
* Ionian stage, a proposed name for the now-defined Chibanian stage in stratigraphy.
* Ionic, of or relating to an ion, an atom or molecule with a net electric charge
* Ionic bonding, a type chemical bonding
*Ionic compound, a chemical compound involving ionic bonding

==Other uses==
* Ionic Greek, an ancient dialect of the Greek language
* Ionic (mobile app framework), a software development kit
* Ionic order, one of the orders of classical architecture
* Ionian Technologies, an American biotechnology company
* Hull Ionians, an English rugby club
* Ionic No. 5, a typeface
* , the name of two ships of the White Star Line. 

==See also==

*Ioniq - automotive brand of the Hyundai Motor Company
*
*
* Ion (disambiguation)
* Ionia (disambiguation)
* Ionian School (disambiguation)
* Ionica (disambiguation)
* Ionikos (disambiguation)
* Iona, an island in the Inner Hebrides of Scotland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q20660245" start="0" end="5" title="Ionic" label="Ionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q20660245" start="9" end="15" title="Ionic" label="Ionian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480871" start="59" end="70" title="Ionic meter" label="Ionic meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167788" start="123" end="134" title="Ionian mode" label="Ionian mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q620874" start="217" end="222" title="Ionia" label="Ionia"/>
<link wikidata="Q465331" start="264" end="271" title="Ionians" label="Ionians"/>
<link wikidata="Q37495" start="322" end="332" title="Ionian Sea" label="Ionian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q170295" start="366" end="380" title="Ionian Islands" label="Ionian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123" start="452" end="454" title="Io (moon)" label="Io"/>
<link wikidata="Q492596" start="537" end="546" title="Chibanian" label="Chibanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="600" end="603" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q62500" start="654" end="667" title="Ionic bonding" label="Ionic bonding"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="694" end="708" title="Ionic compound" label="Ionic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q504165" start="772" end="783" title="Ionic Greek" label="Ionic Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q17576071" start="828" end="856" title="Ionic (mobile app framework)" label="Ionic (mobile app framework)"/>
<link wikidata="Q189548" start="887" end="898" title="Ionic order" label="Ionic order"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063646" start="946" end="965" title="Ionian Technologies" label="Ionian Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5935936" start="1003" end="1015" title="Hull Ionians" label="Hull Ionians"/>
<link wikidata="Q43387602" start="1041" end="1052" title="Ionic No. 5" label="Ionic No. 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q98441159" start="1132" end="1137" title="Ioniq" label="Ioniq"/>
<link wikidata="Q226670" start="1192" end="1212" title="Ion (disambiguation)" label="Ion (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q354686" start="1215" end="1237" title="Ionia (disambiguation)" label="Ionia (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q423501" start="1240" end="1270" title="Ionian School (disambiguation)" label="Ionian School (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063673" start="1273" end="1296" title="Ionica (disambiguation)" label="Ionica (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063697" start="1299" end="1323" title="Ionikos (disambiguation)" label="Ionikos (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q610" start="1326" end="1330" title="Iona" label="Iona"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14749" wikidata="Q1094" url="?curid=14749" title="Indium">
<text>Indium is a chemical element; it has symbol In and atomic number 49. It is a silvery-white post-transition metal and one of the softest elements. Chemically, indium is similar to gallium and thallium, and its properties are largely intermediate between the two. It was discovered in 1863 by Ferdinand Reich and Hieronymous Theodor Richter by spectroscopic methods and named for the indigo blue line in its spectrum.

Indium is a technology-critical element used primarily in the production of flat-panel displays as indium tin oxide (ITO), a transparent and conductive coating applied to glass. Indium is also used in the semiconductor industry, in low-melting-point metal alloys such as solders and soft-metal high-vacuum seals. It is produced exclusively as a by-product during the processing of the ores of other metals, chiefly from sphalerite and other zinc sulfide ores.

Indium has no biological role and its compounds are toxic when inhaled or injected into the bloodstream, although they are poorly absorbed following ingestion.

==Etymology==
The name comes from the Latin word &quot;indicum&quot; meaning violet or indigo. The word &quot;indicum&quot; means &quot;Indian&quot;, as the naturally based dye indigo was originally exported to Europe from India.

==Properties==

===Physical===

Indium is a shiny silvery-white, highly ductile post-transition metal with a bright luster. It is so soft (Mohs hardness 1.2) that it can be cut with a knife and leaves a visible line like a pencil when rubbed on paper. It is a member of group 13 on the periodic table and its properties are mostly intermediate between its vertical neighbors gallium and thallium. As with tin, a high-pitched cry is heard when indium is bent – a crackling sound due to crystal twinning. Like gallium, indium is able to wet glass. Like both, indium has a low melting point, 156.60 °C (313.88 °F); higher than its lighter homologue, gallium, but lower than its heavier homologue, thallium, and lower than tin. The boiling point is 2072 °C (3762 °F), higher than that of thallium, but lower than gallium, conversely to the general trend of melting points, but similarly to the trends down the other post-transition metal groups because of the weakness of the metallic bonding with few electrons delocalized.

The density of indium, 7.31 g/cm3, is also greater than gallium, but lower than thallium. Below the critical temperature, 3.41 K, indium becomes a superconductor. Indium crystallizes in the body-centered tetragonal crystal system in the space group &quot;I&quot;4/&quot;mmm&quot; (lattice parameters: &quot;a&quot; = 325 pm, &quot;c&quot; = 495 pm): this is a slightly distorted face-centered cubic structure, where each indium atom has four neighbours at 324 pm distance and eight neighbours slightly further (336 pm). Indium has greater solubility in liquid mercury than any other metal (more than 50 mass percent of indium at 0 °C). Indium displays a ductile viscoplastic response, found to be size-independent in tension and compression. However it does have a size effect in bending and indentation, associated to a length-scale of order 50–100 μm, significantly large when compared with other metals.

===Chemical===
Indium has 49 electrons, with an electronic configuration of Kr]4d5s5p. In compounds, indium most commonly donates the three outermost electrons to become indium(III), In. In some cases, the pair of 5s-electrons are not donated, resulting in indium(I), In. The stabilization of the monovalent state is attributed to the inert pair effect, in which relativistic effects stabilize the 5s-orbital, observed in heavier elements. Thallium (indium&#x27;s heavier homolog) shows an even stronger effect, causing oxidation to thallium(I) to be more probable than to thallium(III), whereas gallium (indium&#x27;s lighter homolog) commonly shows only the +3 oxidation state. Thus, although thallium(III) is a moderately strong oxidizing agent, indium(III) is not, and many indium(I) compounds are powerful reducing agents. While the energy required to include the s-electrons in chemical bonding is lowest for indium among the group 13 metals, bond energies decrease down the group so that by indium, the energy released in forming two additional bonds and attaining the +3 state is not always enough to outweigh the energy needed to involve the 5s-electrons. Indium(I) oxide and hydroxide are more basic and indium(III) oxide and hydroxide are more acidic.

A number of standard electrode potentials, depending on the reaction under study, are reported for indium, reflecting the decreased stability of the +3 oxidation state:

Indium metal does not react with water, but it is oxidized by stronger oxidizing agents such as halogens to give indium(III) compounds. It does not form a boride, silicide, or carbide, and the hydride InH3 has at best a transitory existence in ethereal solutions at low temperatures, being unstable enough to spontaneously polymerize without coordination. Indium is rather basic in aqueous solution, showing only slight amphoteric characteristics, and unlike its lighter homologs aluminium and gallium, it is insoluble in aqueous alkaline solutions.

===Isotopes===

Indium has 39 known isotopes, ranging in mass number from 97 to 135. Only two isotopes occur naturally as primordial nuclides: indium-113, the only stable isotope, and indium-115, which has a half-life of 4.41 years, four orders of magnitude greater than the age of the Universe and nearly 30,000 times greater than half life of thorium-232. The half-life of 115In is very long because the beta decay to 115Sn is spin-forbidden. Indium-115 makes up 95.7% of all indium. Indium is one of three known elements (the others being tellurium and rhenium) of which the stable isotope is less abundant in nature than the long-lived primordial radioisotopes.

The stablest artificial isotope is indium-111, with a half-life of approximately 2.8 days. All other isotopes have half-lives shorter than 5 hours. Indium also has 47 meta states, among which indium-114m1 (half-life about 49.51 days) is the most stable, more stable than the ground state of any indium isotope other than the primordial. All decay by isomeric transition. The indium isotopes lighter than 113In predominantly decay through electron capture or positron emission to form cadmium isotopes, while the indium isotopes heavier than 113In predominantly decay through beta-minus decay to form tin isotopes.

==Compounds==
===Indium(III)===

Indium(III) oxide, In2O3, forms when indium metal is burned in air or when the hydroxide or nitrate is heated. In2O3 adopts a structure like alumina and is amphoteric, that is able to react with both acids and bases. Indium reacts with water to reproduce soluble indium(III) hydroxide, which is also amphoteric; with alkalis to produce indates(III); and with acids to produce indium(III) salts:

:In(OH)3 + 3 HCl → InCl3 + 3 H2O

The analogous sesqui-chalcogenides with sulfur, selenium, and tellurium are also known. Indium forms the expected trihalides. Chlorination, bromination, and iodination of In produce colorless InCl3, InBr3, and yellow InI3. The compounds are Lewis acids, somewhat akin to the better known aluminium trihalides. Again like the related aluminium compound, InF3 is polymeric.

Direct reaction of indium with the pnictogens produces the gray or semimetallic III–V semiconductors. Many of them slowly decompose in moist air, necessitating careful storage of semiconductor compounds to prevent contact with the atmosphere. Indium nitride is readily attacked by acids and alkalis.

===Indium(I)===
Indium(I) compounds are not common. The chloride, bromide, and iodide are deeply colored, unlike the parent trihalides from which they are prepared. The fluoride is known only as an unstable gas. Indium(I) oxide black powder is produced when indium(III) oxide decomposes upon heating to 700 °C.

===Other oxidation states===
Less frequently, indium forms compounds in oxidation state +2 and even fractional oxidation states. Usually such materials feature In–In bonding, most notably in the halides In2X4 and [In2X6]2−, and various subchalcogenides such as In4Se3. Several other compounds are known to combine indium(I) and indium(III), such as InI6(InIIICl6)Cl3, InI5(InIIIBr4)2(InIIIBr6), and InIInIIIBr4.

===Organoindium compounds===
Organoindium compounds feature In–C bonds. Most are In(III) derivatives, but cyclopentadienylindium(I) is an exception. It was the first known organoindium(I) compound, and is polymeric, consisting of zigzag chains of alternating indium atoms and cyclopentadienyl complexes. Perhaps the best-known organoindium compound is trimethylindium, In(CH3)3, used to prepare certain semiconducting materials.

==History==
In 1863, German chemists Ferdinand Reich and Hieronymus Theodor Richter were testing ores from the mines around Freiberg, Saxony. They dissolved the minerals pyrite, arsenopyrite, galena and sphalerite in hydrochloric acid and distilled raw zinc chloride. Reich, who was color-blind, employed Richter as an assistant for detecting the colored spectral lines. Knowing that ores from that region sometimes contain thallium, they searched for the green thallium emission spectrum lines. Instead, they found a bright blue line. Because that blue line did not match any known element, they hypothesized a new element was present in the minerals. They named the element indium, from the indigo color seen in its spectrum, after the Latin &quot;indicum&quot;, meaning &#x27;of India&#x27;.

Richter went on to isolate the metal in 1864. An ingot of was presented at the World Fair 1867. Reich and Richter later fell out when the latter claimed to be the sole discoverer.

==Occurrence==

Indium is created by the long-lasting (up to thousands of years) s-process (slow neutron capture) in low-to-medium-mass stars (range in mass between 0.6 and 10 solar masses). When a silver-109 atom captures a neutron, it transmutes into silver-110, which then undergoes beta decay to become cadmium-110. Capturing further neutrons, it becomes cadmium-115, which decays to indium-115 by another beta decay. This explains why the radioactive isotope is more abundant than the stable one. The stable indium isotope, indium-113, is one of the p-nuclei, the origin of which is not fully understood; although indium-113 is known to be made directly in the s- and r-processes (rapid neutron capture), and also as the daughter of very long-lived cadmium-113, which has a half-life of about eight quadrillion years, this cannot account for all indium-113.

Indium is the 68th most abundant element in Earth&#x27;s crust at approximately 50 ppb. This is similar to the crustal abundance of silver, bismuth and mercury. It very rarely forms its own minerals, or occurs in elemental form. Fewer than 10 indium minerals such as roquesite (CuInS2) are known, and none occur at sufficient concentrations for economic extraction. Instead, indium is usually a trace constituent of more common ore minerals, such as sphalerite and chalcopyrite. From these, it can be extracted as a by-product during smelting. While the enrichment of indium in these deposits is high relative to its crustal abundance, it is insufficient, at current prices, to support extraction of indium as the main product.

Different estimates exist of the amounts of indium contained within the ores of other metals. However, these amounts are not extractable without mining of the host materials (see Production and availability). Thus, the availability of indium is fundamentally determined by the &quot;rate&quot; at which these ores are extracted, and not their absolute amount. This is an aspect that is often forgotten in the current debate, e.g. by the Graedel group at Yale in their criticality assessments, explaining the paradoxically low depletion times some studies cite.

==Production and availability==

Indium is produced exclusively as a by-product during the processing of the ores of other metals. Its main source material are sulfidic zinc ores, where it is mostly hosted by sphalerite. Minor amounts are also extracted from sulfidic copper ores. During the roast-leach-electrowinning process of zinc smelting, indium accumulates in the iron-rich residues. From these, it can be extracted in different ways. It may also be recovered directly from the process solutions. Further purification is done by electrolysis. The exact process varies with the mode of operation of the smelter.

Its by-product status means that indium production is constrained by the amount of sulfidic zinc (and copper) ores extracted each year. Therefore, its availability needs to be discussed in terms of supply potential. The supply potential of a by-product is defined as that amount which is economically extractable from its host materials &quot;per year&quot; under current market conditions (i.e. technology and price). Reserves and resources are not relevant for by-products, since they &quot;cannot&quot; be extracted independently from the main-products. Recent estimates put the supply potential of indium at a minimum of 1,300 t/yr from sulfidic zinc ores and 20 t/yr from sulfidic copper ores. These figures are significantly greater than current production (655 t in 2016). Thus, major future increases in the by-product production of indium will be possible without significant increases in production costs or price. The average indium price in 2016 was 240/kg, down from 705/kg in 2014.

China is a leading producer of indium (290 tonnes in 2016), followed by South Korea (195 t), Japan (70 t) and Canada (65 t). The Teck Resources refinery in Trail, British Columbia, is a large single-source indium producer, with an output of 32.5 tonnes in 2005, 41.8 tonnes in 2004 and 36.1 tonnes in 2003.

The primary consumption of indium worldwide is LCD production. Demand rose rapidly from the late 1990s to 2010 with the popularity of LCD computer monitors and television sets, which now account for 50% of indium consumption. Increased manufacturing efficiency and recycling (especially in Japan) maintain a balance between demand and supply. According to the UNEP, indium&#x27;s end-of-life recycling rate is less than 1%.

==Applications==
===Industrial uses===

In 1924, indium was found to have a valued property of stabilizing non-ferrous metals, and that became the first significant use for the element. The first large-scale application for indium was coating bearings in high-performance aircraft engines during World War II, to protect against damage and corrosion; this is no longer a major use of the element. New uses were found in fusible alloys, solders, and electronics. In the 1950s, tiny beads of indium were used for the emitters and collectors of PNP alloy-junction transistors. In the middle and late 1980s, the development of indium phosphide semiconductors and indium tin oxide thin films for liquid-crystal displays (LCD) aroused much interest. By 1992, the thin-film application had become the largest end use.

Indium(III) oxide and indium tin oxide (ITO) are used as a transparent conductive coating on glass substrates in electroluminescent panels. Indium tin oxide is used as a light filter in low-pressure sodium-vapor lamps. The infrared radiation is reflected back into the lamp, which increases the temperature within the tube and improves the performance of the lamp.

Indium has many semiconductor-related applications. Some indium compounds, such as indium antimonide and indium phosphide, are semiconductors with useful properties: one precursor is usually trimethylindium (TMI), which is also used as the semiconductor dopant in II–VI compound semiconductors. InAs and InSb are used for low-temperature transistors and InP for high-temperature transistors. The compound semiconductors InGaN and InGaP are used in light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and laser diodes. Indium is used in photovoltaics as the semiconductor copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS), also called CIGS solar cells, a type of second-generation thin-film solar cell. Indium is used in PNP bipolar junction transistors with germanium: when soldered at low temperature, indium does not stress the germanium.

Indium wire is used as a vacuum seal and a thermal conductor in cryogenics and ultra-high-vacuum applications, in such manufacturing applications as gaskets that deform to fill gaps. Owing to its great plasticity and adhesion to metals, Indium sheets are sometimes used for cold-soldering in microwave circuits and waveguide joints, where direct soldering is complicated. Indium is an ingredient in the gallium–indium–tin alloy galinstan, which is liquid at room temperature and replaces mercury in some thermometers. Other alloys of indium with bismuth, cadmium, lead, and tin, which have higher but still low melting points (between 50 and 100 °C), are used in fire sprinkler systems and heat regulators.

Indium is one of many substitutes for mercury in alkaline batteries to prevent the zinc from corroding and releasing hydrogen gas. Indium is added to some dental amalgam alloys to decrease the surface tension of the mercury and allow for less mercury and easier amalgamation.

Indium&#x27;s high neutron-capture cross-section for thermal neutrons makes it suitable for use in control rods for nuclear reactors, typically in an alloy of 80% silver, 15% indium, and 5% cadmium. In nuclear engineering, the (n,n&#x27;) reactions of 113In and 115In are used to determine magnitudes of neutron fluxes.

In 2009, Professor Mas Subramanian and former graduate student Andrew Smith at Oregon State University discovered that indium can be combined with yttrium and manganese to form an intensely blue, non-toxic, inert, fade-resistant pigment, YInMn blue, the first new inorganic blue pigment discovered in 200 years.

===Medical applications===
Radioactive indium-111 (in very small amounts) is used in nuclear medicine tests, as a radiotracer to follow the movement of labeled proteins and white blood cells to diagnose different types of infection. Indium compounds are mostly not absorbed upon ingestion and are only moderately absorbed on inhalation; they tend to be stored temporarily in the muscles, skin, and bones before being excreted, and the biological half-life of indium is about two weeks in humans. It is also tagged to growth hormone analogues like octreotide to find growth hormone receptors in neuroendocrine tumors.

==Biological role and precautions==
Indium has no metabolic role in any organism. In a similar way to aluminium salts, indium(III) ions can be toxic to the kidney when given by injection. Indium tin oxide and indium phosphide harm the pulmonary and immune systems, predominantly through ionic indium, though hydrated indium oxide is more than forty times as toxic when injected, measured by the quantity of indium introduced.

People can be exposed to indium in the workplace by inhalation, ingestion, skin contact, and eye contact. Indium lung is a lung disease characterized by pulmonary alveolar proteinosis and pulmonary fibrosis, first described by Japanese researchers in 2003. , 10 cases had been described, though more than 100 indium workers had documented respiratory abnormalities. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health has set a recommended exposure limit (REL) of 0.1 mg/m over an eight-hour workday.

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==

==External links==
* Indium at &quot;The Periodic Table of Videos&quot; (University of Nottingham)
* Reducing Agents &gt; Indium low valent 
* NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1094" start="0" end="6" title="Indium" label="Indium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="12" end="28" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q102500" start="37" end="43" title="Symbol (chemistry)" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094" start="44" end="46" title="Indium" label="In"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="51" end="64" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q19591" start="91" end="112" title="post-transition metal" label="post-transition metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q861" start="179" end="186" title="gallium" label="gallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q932" start="191" end="199" title="thallium" label="thallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q77307" start="291" end="306" title="Ferdinand Reich" label="Ferdinand Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q77308" start="311" end="338" title="Hieronymous Theodor Richter" label="Hieronymous Theodor Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q912034" start="342" end="363" title="spectroscope" label="spectroscopic methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967009" start="382" end="388" title="indigo" label="indigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q61977883" start="429" end="456" title="technology-critical element" label="technology-critical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q125171" start="493" end="511" title="flat-panel display" label="flat-panel display"/>
<link wikidata="Q417718" start="516" end="532" title="indium tin oxide" label="indium tin oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986369" start="622" end="644" title="semiconductor industry" label="semiconductor industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="673" end="679" title="alloys" label="alloys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="688" end="695" title="Solder#Alloying element roles" label="solders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128255" start="762" end="772" title="by-product" label="by-product"/>
<link wikidata="Q105006" start="837" end="847" title="sphalerite" label="sphalerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="858" end="862" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q927407" start="863" end="875" title="Sulfide mineral" label="sulfide ores"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1077" end="1082" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q428124" start="1116" end="1122" title="Violet (color)" label="violet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967009" start="1126" end="1132" title="indigo" label="indigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q422662" start="1216" end="1222" title="Indigo dye" label="indigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1262" end="1267" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q211702" start="1342" end="1349" title="ductile" label="ductile"/>
<link wikidata="Q19591" start="1350" end="1371" title="post-transition metal" label="post-transition metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11998326" start="1386" end="1392" title="Lustre (mineralogy)" label="luster"/>
<link wikidata="Q41472" start="1409" end="1422" title="Mohs hardness" label="Mohs hardness"/>
<link wikidata="Q189294" start="1540" end="1548" title="boron group" label="group 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="1556" end="1570" title="periodic table" label="periodic table"/>
<link wikidata="Q861" start="1645" end="1652" title="gallium" label="gallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q932" start="1657" end="1665" title="thallium" label="thallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="1675" end="1678" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807834" start="1695" end="1698" title="tin cry" label="cry"/>
<link wikidata="Q109856" start="1755" end="1771" title="crystal twinning" label="crystal twinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q817136" start="1805" end="1808" title="wetting" label="wet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="1844" end="1857" title="melting point" label="melting point"/>
<link wikidata="Q899089" start="2268" end="2289" title="Delocalized electron" label="electrons delocalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q111059" start="2392" end="2412" title="critical temperature" label="critical temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q11579" start="2419" end="2420" title="kelvin" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="2439" end="2453" title="superconductor" label="superconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q503601" start="2496" end="2521" title="tetragonal crystal system" label="tetragonal crystal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q899033" start="2529" end="2540" title="space group" label="space group"/>
<link wikidata="Q625641" start="2573" end="2590" title="lattice parameter" label="lattice parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q192274" start="2613" end="2615" title="picometer" label="pm"/>
<link wikidata="Q473227" start="2671" end="2690" title="face-centered cubic" label="face-centered cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935671" start="2954" end="2966" title="Viscoplasticity" label="viscoplastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533418" start="3057" end="3068" title="Size effect on structural strength" label="size effect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3276" end="3278" title="[krypton" label="Kr"/>
<link wikidata="Q171407" start="3497" end="3507" title="valence (chemistry)" label="monovalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497909" start="3535" end="3552" title="inert pair effect" label="inert pair effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330289" start="3563" end="3583" title="relativistic quantum chemistry" label="relativistic effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q741844" start="3672" end="3679" title="Homologous series" label="homolog"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="3720" end="3729" title="Redox" label="oxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q187689" start="3932" end="3947" title="oxidizing agent" label="oxidizing agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q216830" start="4011" end="4025" title="reducing agent" label="reducing agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605" start="4730" end="4737" title="halogen" label="halogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q419302" start="4789" end="4795" title="boride" label="boride"/>
<link wikidata="Q426473" start="4797" end="4805" title="silicide" label="silicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q241906" start="4810" end="4817" title="carbide" label="carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4138049" start="4835" end="4839" title="Indium trihydride" label="InH3"/>
<link wikidata="Q103230" start="4878" end="4883" title="ether" label="ether"/>
<link wikidata="Q182677" start="5054" end="5064" title="amphoteric" label="amphoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="5221" end="5228" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q101395" start="5242" end="5253" title="mass number" label="mass number"/>
<link wikidata="Q759767" start="5307" end="5325" title="primordial nuclide" label="primordial nuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q878130" start="5349" end="5363" title="stable isotope" label="stable isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="5393" end="5402" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q500699" start="5460" end="5479" title="age of the Universe" label="age of the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885290" start="5530" end="5541" title="thorium-232" label="thorium-232"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="5591" end="5601" title="beta decay" label="beta decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="5608" end="5610" title="tin" label="Sn"/>
<link wikidata="Q570412" start="5614" end="5628" title="selection rule" label="spin-forbidden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100" start="5727" end="5736" title="tellurium" label="tellurium"/>
<link wikidata="Q737" start="5741" end="5748" title="rhenium" label="rhenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194370" start="5865" end="5875" title="synthetic radioisotope" label="artificial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025171" start="5887" end="5897" title="indium-111" label="indium-111"/>
<link wikidata="Q846110" start="6202" end="6221" title="isomeric transition" label="isomeric transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q109910" start="6290" end="6306" title="electron capture" label="electron capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357356" start="6310" end="6327" title="positron emission" label="positron emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091" start="6336" end="6343" title="cadmium" label="cadmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q424955" start="6500" end="6517" title="Indium(III) oxide" label="Indium(III) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q177342" start="6641" end="6648" title="alumina" label="alumina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025169" start="6763" end="6784" title="indium(III) hydroxide" label="indium(III) hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="6970" end="6976" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q876" start="6978" end="6986" title="selenium" label="selenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100" start="6992" end="7001" title="tellurium" label="tellurium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025193" start="7044" end="7054" title="indium halides" label="trihalides"/>
<link wikidata="Q415500" start="7122" end="7127" title="indium(III) chloride" label="InCl3"/>
<link wikidata="Q4096881" start="7129" end="7134" title="indium(III) bromide" label="InBr3"/>
<link wikidata="Q900337" start="7171" end="7181" title="Lewis acid" label="Lewis acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q106675" start="7338" end="7347" title="pnictogen" label="pnictogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="7389" end="7402" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4096880" start="7670" end="7677" title="indium(I) bromide" label="bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025193" start="8111" end="8118" title="indium halides" label="halides"/>
<link wikidata="Q252975" start="8435" end="8460" title="cyclopentadienylindium(I)" label="cyclopentadienylindium(I)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855060" start="8605" end="8629" title="cyclopentadienyl complex" label="cyclopentadienyl complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4463086" start="8681" end="8696" title="trimethylindium" label="trimethylindium"/>
<link wikidata="Q77307" start="8796" end="8811" title="Ferdinand Reich" label="Ferdinand Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q77308" start="8816" end="8842" title="Hieronymous Theodor Richter" label="Hieronymus Theodor Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q14819" start="8883" end="8899" title="Freiberg, Saxony" label="Freiberg, Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="8929" end="8935" title="pyrite" label="pyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q191939" start="8937" end="8949" title="arsenopyrite" label="arsenopyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q37559" start="8951" end="8957" title="galena" label="galena"/>
<link wikidata="Q105006" start="8962" end="8972" title="sphalerite" label="sphalerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="8976" end="8993" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q204714" start="9012" end="9025" title="zinc chloride" label="zinc chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q133696" start="9042" end="9053" title="color-blind" label="color-blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q932" start="9183" end="9191" title="thallium" label="thallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967009" start="9452" end="9458" title="indigo" label="indigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="9541" end="9546" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345539" start="9634" end="9644" title="Exposition Universelle (1867)" label="World Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q277209" start="9817" end="9826" title="s-process" label="s-process"/>
<link wikidata="Q180892" start="9912" end="9922" title="solar mass" label="solar mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="10022" end="10032" title="beta decay" label="beta decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="10146" end="10156" title="beta decay" label="beta decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q309712" start="10291" end="10299" title="p-nuclei" label="p-nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q285033" start="10409" end="10418" title="r-process" label="r-process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151232" start="10540" end="10551" title="quadrillion" label="quadrillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q24580" start="10614" end="10662" title="Abundance of elements in Earth&amp;#x27;s crust" label="68th most abundant element in Earth&amp;#x27;s crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="10683" end="10686" title="parts per billion" label="ppb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="10732" end="10738" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q942" start="10740" end="10747" title="bismuth" label="bismuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="10752" end="10759" title="Mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10867" end="10876" title="roquesite" label="roquesite"/>
<link wikidata="Q105006" start="11050" end="11060" title="sphalerite" label="sphalerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q111044" start="11065" end="11077" title="chalcopyrite" label="chalcopyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128255" start="11116" end="11126" title="by-product" label="by-product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128255" start="11960" end="11970" title="by-product" label="by-product"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062593" start="12183" end="12234" title="Zinc smelting" label="roast-leach-electrowinning process of zinc smelting"/>
<link wikidata="Q64403" start="12427" end="12439" title="electrolysis" label="electrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q688725" start="13636" end="13650" title="Teck Resources" label="Teck Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808502" start="13663" end="13686" title="Trail, British Columbia" label="Trail, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="13862" end="13865" title="Liquid crystal display" label="LCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q182016" start="14175" end="14179" title="UNEP" label="UNEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679431" start="14347" end="14365" title="non-ferrous metals" label="non-ferrous metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q190100" start="14483" end="14491" title="bearing (mechanical)" label="bearings"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="14512" end="14520" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="14536" end="14548" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="14580" end="14589" title="corrosion" label="corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q428729" start="14660" end="14673" title="fusible alloy" label="fusible alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q866612" start="14676" end="14682" title="solder" label="solder"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="14689" end="14700" title="electronics" label="electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536502" start="14786" end="14811" title="alloy-junction transistor" label="alloy-junction transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q416291" start="14863" end="14879" title="indium phosphide" label="indium phosphide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="14880" end="14893" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q417718" start="14899" end="14915" title="indium tin oxide" label="indium tin oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="14931" end="14953" title="liquid-crystal display" label="liquid-crystal display"/>
<link wikidata="Q417718" start="15074" end="15090" title="indium tin oxide" label="indium tin oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q487623" start="15111" end="15122" title="transparency (optics)" label="transparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q124291" start="15123" end="15133" title="electrical conductor" label="conductive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="15145" end="15150" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q215803" start="15165" end="15183" title="electroluminescent" label="electroluminescent"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15238" end="15269" title="sodium-vapor lamp#Low-pressure sodium" label="low-pressure sodium-vapor lamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="15275" end="15293" title="infrared radiation" label="infrared radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="15434" end="15447" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q418679" start="15501" end="15518" title="indium antimonide" label="indium antimonide"/>
<link wikidata="Q416291" start="15523" end="15539" title="indium phosphide" label="indium phosphide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="15545" end="15558" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4463086" start="15609" end="15624" title="trimethylindium" label="trimethylindium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="15658" end="15671" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15119237" start="15672" end="15678" title="dopant" label="dopant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659774" start="15688" end="15710" title="compound semiconductor" label="compound semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659774" start="15814" end="15836" title="compound semiconductor" label="compound semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q425734" start="15838" end="15843" title="InGaN" label="InGaN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025190" start="15848" end="15853" title="InGaP" label="InGaP"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="15866" end="15886" title="light-emitting diode" label="light-emitting diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q192127" start="15931" end="15944" title="photovoltaics" label="photovoltaics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15023366" start="15966" end="15996" title="copper indium gallium selenide" label="copper indium gallium selenide"/>
<link wikidata="Q31887" start="16017" end="16032" title="CIGS solar cell" label="CIGS solar cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661392" start="16063" end="16083" title="thin-film solar cell" label="thin-film solar cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q188946" start="16107" end="16134" title="bipolar junction transistor" label="bipolar junction transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q867" start="16141" end="16150" title="germanium" label="germanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190526" start="16250" end="16261" title="cryogenic seal" label="vacuum seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192116" start="16289" end="16299" title="cryogenics" label="cryogenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880334" start="16304" end="16321" title="ultra-high vacuum" label="ultra-high-vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132541" start="16374" end="16380" title="gasket" label="gasket"/>
<link wikidata="Q11339597" start="16517" end="16526" title="Microwave engineering" label="microwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q11233438" start="16540" end="16549" title="waveguide" label="waveguide"/>
<link wikidata="Q675176" start="16653" end="16662" title="galinstan" label="galinstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="16713" end="16720" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q646" start="16729" end="16740" title="thermometer" label="thermometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q942" start="16771" end="16778" title="bismuth" label="bismuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091" start="16780" end="16787" title="cadmium" label="cadmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="16789" end="16793" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="16799" end="16802" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q220224" start="16888" end="16909" title="fire sprinkler system" label="fire sprinkler system"/>
<link wikidata="Q861345" start="16982" end="17000" title="alkaline batteries" label="alkaline batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="17016" end="17020" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="17050" end="17058" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q898259" start="17088" end="17102" title="dental amalgam" label="dental amalgam"/>
<link wikidata="Q170749" start="17126" end="17141" title="surface tension" label="surface tension"/>
<link wikidata="Q615306" start="17309" end="17320" title="control rod" label="control rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="17326" end="17342" title="nuclear reactors" label="nuclear reactors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="17373" end="17379" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091" start="17400" end="17407" title="cadmium" label="cadmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q22096519" start="17550" end="17565" title="Mas Subramanian" label="Mas Subramanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q861888" start="17610" end="17633" title="Oregon State University" label="Oregon State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q941" start="17678" end="17685" title="yttrium" label="yttrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="17690" end="17699" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088" start="17721" end="17725" title="blue" label="blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="17760" end="17767" title="pigment" label="pigment"/>
<link wikidata="Q25112525" start="17769" end="17779" title="YInMn blue" label="YInMn blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q214963" start="17929" end="17945" title="nuclear medicine" label="nuclear medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q903539" start="17958" end="17969" title="radiotracer" label="radiotracer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025174" start="18017" end="18034" title="indium leukocyte imaging" label="white blood cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365" start="18223" end="18229" title="muscle" label="muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074" start="18232" end="18236" title="skin" label="skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q265868" start="18242" end="18246" title="bone" label="bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q686886" start="18279" end="18299" title="biological half-life" label="biological half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q29956617" start="18361" end="18375" title="growth hormone" label="growth hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q419935" start="18391" end="18401" title="octreotide" label="octreotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q29956617" start="18410" end="18424" title="growth hormone" label="growth hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981276" start="18438" end="18459" title="neuroendocrine tumors" label="neuroendocrine tumors"/>
<link wikidata="Q189598" start="18512" end="18521" title="Dietary element" label="metabolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052008" start="18995" end="19006" title="Indium lung" label="Indium lung"/>
<link wikidata="Q60346" start="19259" end="19312" title="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health" label="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302715" start="19323" end="19349" title="recommended exposure limit" label="recommended exposure limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988689" start="19472" end="19500" title="The Periodic Table of Videos" label="The Periodic Table of Videos"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14750" wikidata="Q1103" url="?curid=14750" title="Iodine">
<text>Iodine is a chemical element; it has symbol I and atomic number 53. The heaviest of the stable halogens, it exists at standard conditions as a semi-lustrous, non-metallic solid that melts to form a deep violet liquid at , and boils to a violet gas at . The element was discovered by the French chemist Bernard Courtois in 1811 and was named two years later by Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac, after the Ancient Greek , meaning &#x27;violet&#x27;.

Iodine occurs in many oxidation states, including iodide (I−), iodate (), and the various periodate anions. As the heaviest essential mineral nutrient, iodine is required for the synthesis of thyroid hormones. Iodine deficiency affects about two billion people and is the leading preventable cause of intellectual disabilities.

The dominant producers of iodine today are Chile and Japan. Due to its high atomic number and ease of attachment to organic compounds, it has also found favour as a non-toxic radiocontrast material. Because of the specificity of its uptake by the human body, radioactive isotopes of iodine can also be used to treat thyroid cancer. Iodine is also used as a catalyst in the industrial production of acetic acid and some polymers.

It is on the World Health Organization&#x27;s List of Essential Medicines.

==History==

In 1811, iodine was discovered by French chemist Bernard Courtois, who was born to a family of manufacturers of saltpetre (an essential component of gunpowder). At the time of the Napoleonic Wars, saltpetre was in great demand in France. Saltpetre produced from French nitre beds required sodium carbonate, which could be isolated from seaweed collected on the coasts of Normandy and Brittany. To isolate the sodium carbonate, seaweed was burned and the ash washed with water. The remaining waste was destroyed by adding sulfuric acid. Courtois once added excessive sulfuric acid and a cloud of violet vapour rose. He noted that the vapour crystallised on cold surfaces, making dark black crystals. Courtois suspected that this material was a new element but lacked funding to pursue it further.

Courtois gave samples to his friends, Charles Bernard Desormes (1777–1838) and Nicolas Clément (1779–1841), to continue research. He also gave some of the substance to chemist Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac (1778–1850), and to physicist André-Marie Ampère (1775–1836). On 29 November 1813, Desormes and Clément made Courtois&#x27; discovery public by describing the substance to a meeting of the Imperial Institut de France. On 6 December 1813, Gay-Lussac found and announced that the new substance was either an element or a compound of oxygen and he found that it is an element. Gay-Lussac suggested the name &quot;iode&quot; (anglicised as &quot;iodine&quot;), from the Ancient Greek (, &quot;violet&quot;), because of the colour of iodine vapour. Ampère had given some of his sample to British chemist Humphry Davy (1778–1829), who experimented on the substance and noted its similarity to chlorine and also found it as an element. Davy sent a letter dated 10 December to the Royal Society stating that he had identified a new element called iodine. Arguments erupted between Davy and Gay-Lussac over who identified iodine first, but both scientists found that both of them identified iodine first and also knew that Courtois is the first one to isolate the element.

In 1873, the French medical researcher Casimir Davaine (1812–1882) discovered the antiseptic action of iodine. Antonio Grossich (1849–1926), an Istrian-born surgeon, was among the first to use sterilisation of the operative field. In 1908, he introduced tincture of iodine as a way to rapidly sterilise the human skin in the surgical field.

In early periodic tables, iodine was often given the symbol &quot;J&quot;, for &quot;Jod&quot;, its name in German; in German texts, &quot;J&quot; is still frequently used in place of &quot;I&quot;.

==Properties==

Iodine is the fourth halogen, being a member of group 17 in the periodic table, below fluorine, chlorine, and bromine; since astatine and tennessine are radioactive, iodine is the heaviest stable halogen. Iodine has an electron configuration of [Kr]5s24d105p5, with the seven electrons in the fifth and outermost shell being its valence electrons. Like the other halogens, it is one electron short of a full octet and is hence an oxidising agent, reacting with many elements in order to complete its outer shell, although in keeping with periodic trends, it is the weakest oxidising agent among the stable halogens: it has the lowest electronegativity among them, just 2.66 on the Pauling scale (compare fluorine, chlorine, and bromine at 3.98, 3.16, and 2.96 respectively; astatine continues the trend with an electronegativity of 2.2). Elemental iodine hence forms diatomic molecules with chemical formula I2, where two iodine atoms share a pair of electrons in order to each achieve a stable octet for themselves; at high temperatures, these diatomic molecules reversibly dissociate a pair of iodine atoms. Similarly, the iodide anion, I−, is the strongest reducing agent among the stable halogens, being the most easily oxidised back to diatomic I2. (Astatine goes further, being indeed unstable as At− and readily oxidised to At0 or At+.)

The halogens darken in colour as the group is descended: fluorine is a very pale yellow, chlorine is greenish-yellow, bromine is reddish-brown, and iodine is violet.

Elemental iodine is slightly soluble in water, with one gram dissolving in 3450 mL at 20 °C and 1280 mL at 50 °C; potassium iodide may be added to increase solubility via formation of triiodide ions, among other polyiodides. Nonpolar solvents such as hexane and carbon tetrachloride provide a higher solubility. Polar solutions, such as aqueous solutions, are brown, reflecting the role of these solvents as Lewis bases; on the other hand, nonpolar solutions are violet, the color of iodine vapour. Charge-transfer complexes form when iodine is dissolved in polar solvents, hence changing the colour. Iodine is violet when dissolved in carbon tetrachloride and saturated hydrocarbons but deep brown in alcohols and amines, solvents that form charge-transfer adducts.

The melting and boiling points of iodine are the highest among the halogens, conforming to the increasing trend down the group, since iodine has the largest electron cloud among them that is the most easily polarised, resulting in its molecules having the strongest Van der Waals interactions among the halogens. Similarly, iodine is the least volatile of the halogens, though the solid still can be observed to give off purple vapour. Due to this property iodine is commonly used to demonstrate sublimation directly from solid to gas, which gives rise to a misconception that it does not melt in atmospheric pressure. Because it has the largest atomic radius among the halogens, iodine has the lowest first ionisation energy, lowest electron affinity, lowest electronegativity and lowest reactivity of the halogens.
The interhalogen bond in diiodine is the weakest of all the halogens. As such, 1% of a sample of gaseous iodine at atmospheric pressure is dissociated into iodine atoms at 575 °C. Temperatures greater than 750 °C are required for fluorine, chlorine, and bromine to dissociate to a similar extent. Most bonds to iodine are weaker than the analogous bonds to the lighter halogens. Gaseous iodine is composed of I2 molecules with an I–I bond length of 266.6 pm. The I–I bond is one of the longest single bonds known. It is even longer (271.5 pm) in solid orthorhombic crystalline iodine, which has the same crystal structure as chlorine and bromine. (The record is held by iodine&#x27;s neighbour xenon: the Xe–Xe bond length is 308.71 pm.) As such, within the iodine molecule, significant electronic interactions occur with the two next-nearest neighbours of each atom, and these interactions give rise, in bulk iodine, to a shiny appearance and semiconducting properties. Iodine is a two-dimensional semiconductor with a band gap of 1.3 eV (125 kJ/mol): it is a semiconductor in the plane of its crystalline layers and an insulator in the perpendicular direction.

===Isotopes===

Of the forty known isotopes of iodine, only one occurs in nature, iodine-127. The others are radioactive and have half-lives too short to be primordial. As such, iodine is both monoisotopic and mononuclidic and its atomic weight is known to great precision, as it is a constant of nature.

The longest-lived of the radioactive isotopes of iodine is iodine-129, which has a half-life of 15.7 million years, decaying via beta decay to stable xenon-129. Some iodine-129 was formed along with iodine-127 before the formation of the Solar System, but it has by now completely decayed away, making it an extinct radionuclide. Its former presence may be determined from an excess of its daughter xenon-129, but early attempts to use this characteristic to date the supernova source for elements in the Solar System are made difficult by alternative nuclear processes giving iodine-129 and by iodine&#x27;s volatility at higher temperatures. Due to its mobility in the environment iodine-129 has been used to date very old groundwaters. Traces of iodine-129 still exist today, as it is also a cosmogenic nuclide, formed from cosmic ray spallation of atmospheric xenon: these traces make up 10−14 to 10−10 of all terrestrial iodine. It also occurs from open-air nuclear testing, and is not hazardous because of its very long half-life, the longest of all fission products. At the peak of thermonuclear testing in the 1960s and 1970s, iodine-129 still made up only about 10−7 of all terrestrial iodine. Excited states of iodine-127 and iodine-129 are often used in Mössbauer spectroscopy.

The other iodine radioisotopes have much shorter half-lives, no longer than days. Some of them have medical applications involving the thyroid gland, where the iodine that enters the body is stored and concentrated. Iodine-123 has a half-life of thirteen hours and decays by electron capture to tellurium-123, emitting gamma radiation; it is used in nuclear medicine imaging, including single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and X-ray computed tomography (X-Ray CT) scans. Iodine-125 has a half-life of fifty-nine days, decaying by electron capture to tellurium-125 and emitting low-energy gamma radiation; the second-longest-lived iodine radioisotope, it has uses in biological assays, nuclear medicine imaging and in radiation therapy as brachytherapy to treat a number of conditions, including prostate cancer, uveal melanomas, and brain tumours. Finally, iodine-131, with a half-life of eight days, beta decays to an excited state of stable xenon-131 that then converts to the ground state by emitting gamma radiation. It is a common fission product and thus is present in high levels in radioactive fallout. It may then be absorbed through contaminated food, and will also accumulate in the thyroid. As it decays, it may cause damage to the thyroid. The primary risk from exposure to high levels of iodine-131 is the chance occurrence of radiogenic thyroid cancer in later life. Other risks include the possibility of non-cancerous growths and thyroiditis.

Protection usually used against the negative effects of iodine-131 is by saturating the thyroid gland with stable iodine-127 in the form of potassium iodide tablets, taken daily for optimal prophylaxis. However, iodine-131 may also be used for medicinal purposes in radiation therapy for this very reason, when tissue destruction is desired after iodine uptake by the tissue. Iodine-131 is also used as a radioactive tracer.

== Chemistry and compounds ==
Iodine is quite reactive, but it is less so than the lighter halogens, and it is a weaker oxidant. For example, it does not halogenate carbon monoxide, nitric oxide, and sulfur dioxide, which chlorine does. Many metals react with iodine. By the same token, however, since iodine has the lowest ionisation energy among the halogens and is the most easily oxidised of them, it has a more significant cationic chemistry and its higher oxidation states are rather more stable than those of bromine and chlorine, for example in iodine heptafluoride.

===Charge-transfer complexes ===
The iodine molecule, I2, dissolves in CCl4 and aliphatic hydrocarbons to give bright violet solutions. In these solvents the absorption band maximum occurs in the 520 – 540 nm region and is assigned to a * to &quot;σ&quot;* transition. When I2 reacts with Lewis bases in these solvents a blue shift in I2 peak is seen and the new peak (230 – 330 nm) arises that is due to the formation of adducts, which are referred to as charge-transfer complexes.

===Hydrogen iodide===
The simplest compound of iodine is hydrogen iodide, HI. It is a colourless gas that reacts with oxygen to give water and iodine. Although it is useful in iodination reactions in the laboratory, it does not have large-scale industrial uses, unlike the other hydrogen halides. Commercially, it is usually made by reacting iodine with hydrogen sulfide or hydrazine:

:2 I2 + N2H4 4 HI + N2

At room temperature, it is a colourless gas, like all of the hydrogen halides except hydrogen fluoride, since hydrogen cannot form strong hydrogen bonds to the large and only mildly electronegative iodine atom. It melts at and boils at . It is an endothermic compound that can exothermically dissociate at room temperature, although the process is very slow unless a catalyst is present: the reaction between hydrogen and iodine at room temperature to give hydrogen iodide does not proceed to completion. The H–I bond dissociation energy is likewise the smallest of the hydrogen halides, at 295 kJ/mol.

Aqueous hydrogen iodide is known as hydroiodic acid, which is a strong acid. Hydrogen iodide is exceptionally soluble in water: one litre of water will dissolve 425 litres of hydrogen iodide, and the saturated solution has only four water molecules per molecule of hydrogen iodide. Commercial so-called &quot;concentrated&quot; hydroiodic acid usually contains 48–57% HI by mass; the solution forms an azeotrope with boiling point at 56.7 g HI per 100 g solution. Hence hydroiodic acid cannot be concentrated past this point by evaporation of water. Unlike gaseous hydrogen iodide, hydroiodic acid has major industrial use in the manufacture of acetic acid by the Cativa process.

===Other binary iodine compounds===
With the exception of the noble gases, nearly all elements on the periodic table up to einsteinium (EsI3 is known) are known to form binary compounds with iodine. Until 1990, nitrogen triiodide was only known as an ammonia adduct. Ammonia-free NI3 was found to be isolable at –196 °C but spontaneously decomposes at 0 °C. For thermodynamic reasons related to electronegativity of the elements, neutral sulfur and selenium iodides that are stable at room temperature are also nonexistent, although S2I2 and SI2 are stable up to 183 and 9 K, respectively. As of 2022, no neutral binary selenium iodide has been unambiguously identified (at any temperature). Sulfur-iodine and selenium-iodine polyatomic cations (e.g., [S2I42+][AsF6–]2 and [Se2I42+][Sb2F11–]2) have been prepared and characterised crystallographically.

Given the large size of the iodide anion and iodine&#x27;s weak oxidising power, high oxidation states are difficult to achieve in binary iodides, the maximum known being in the pentaiodides of niobium, tantalum, and protactinium. Iodides can be made by reaction of an element or its oxide, hydroxide, or carbonate with hydroiodic acid, and then dehydrated by mildly high temperatures combined with either low pressure or anhydrous hydrogen iodide gas. These methods work best when the iodide product is stable to hydrolysis. Other syntheses include high-temperature oxidative iodination of the element with iodine or hydrogen iodide, high-temperature iodination of a metal oxide or other halide by iodine, a volatile metal halide, carbon tetraiodide, or an organic iodide. For example, molybdenum(IV) oxide reacts with aluminium(III) iodide at 230 °C to give molybdenum(II) iodide. An example involving halogen exchange is given below, involving the reaction of tantalum(V) chloride with excess aluminium(III) iodide at 400 °C to give tantalum(V) iodide:

&lt;chem display=&quot;block&quot;&gt;3TaCl5 + \underset{(excess)}{5AlI3} -&gt; 3TaI5 + 5AlCl3&lt;/chem&gt;

Lower iodides may be produced either through thermal decomposition or disproportionation, or by reducing the higher iodide with hydrogen or a metal, for example:

&lt;chem display=&quot;block&quot;&gt;TaI5{} + Ta -&gt;[\text{thermal gradient}] [\ce{630^\circ C\ -&gt;\ 575^\circ C}] Ta6I14&lt;/chem&gt;

Most metal iodides with the metal in low oxidation states (+1 to +3) are ionic. Nonmetals tend to form covalent molecular iodides, as do metals in high oxidation states from +3 and above. Both ionic and covalent iodides are known for metals in oxidation state +3 (e.g. scandium iodide is mostly ionic, but aluminium iodide is not). Ionic iodides MI&quot;n&quot; tend to have the lowest melting and boiling points among the halides MX&quot;n&quot; of the same element, because the electrostatic forces of attraction between the cations and anions are weakest for the large iodide anion. In contrast, covalent iodides tend to instead have the highest melting and boiling points among the halides of the same element, since iodine is the most polarisable of the halogens and, having the most electrons among them, can contribute the most to van der Waals forces. Naturally, exceptions abound in intermediate iodides where one trend gives way to the other. Similarly, solubilities in water of predominantly ionic iodides (e.g. potassium and calcium) are the greatest among ionic halides of that element, while those of covalent iodides (e.g. silver) are the lowest of that element. In particular, silver iodide is very insoluble in water and its formation is often used as a qualitative test for iodine.

===Iodine halides===
The halogens form many binary, diamagnetic interhalogen compounds with stoichiometries XY, XY3, XY5, and XY7 (where X is heavier than Y), and iodine is no exception. Iodine forms all three possible diatomic interhalogens, a trifluoride and trichloride, as well as a pentafluoride and, exceptionally among the halogens, a heptafluoride. Numerous cationic and anionic derivatives are also characterised, such as the wine-red or bright orange compounds of and the dark brown or purplish black compounds of I2Cl+. Apart from these, some pseudohalides are also known, such as cyanogen iodide (ICN), iodine thiocyanate (ISCN), and iodine azide (IN3).
Iodine monofluoride (IF) is unstable at room temperature and disproportionates very readily and irreversibly to iodine and iodine pentafluoride, and thus cannot be obtained pure. It can be synthesised from the reaction of iodine with fluorine gas in trichlorofluoromethane at −45 °C, with iodine trifluoride in trichlorofluoromethane at −78 °C, or with silver(I) fluoride at 0 °C. Iodine monochloride (ICl) and iodine monobromide (IBr), on the other hand, are moderately stable. The former, a volatile red-brown compound, was discovered independently by Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac and Humphry Davy in 1813–1814 not long after the discoveries of chlorine and iodine, and it mimics the intermediate halogen bromine so well that Justus von Liebig was misled into mistaking bromine (which he had found) for iodine monochloride. Iodine monochloride and iodine monobromide may be prepared simply by reacting iodine with chlorine or bromine at room temperature and purified by fractional crystallisation. Both are quite reactive and attack even platinum and gold, though not boron, carbon, cadmium, lead, zirconium, niobium, molybdenum, and tungsten. Their reaction with organic compounds depends on conditions. Iodine chloride vapour tends to chlorinate phenol and salicylic acid, since when iodine chloride undergoes homolytic fission, chlorine and iodine are produced and the former is more reactive. However, iodine chloride in carbon tetrachloride solution results in iodination being the main reaction, since now heterolytic fission of the I–Cl bond occurs and I+ attacks phenol as an electrophile. However, iodine monobromide tends to brominate phenol even in carbon tetrachloride solution because it tends to dissociate into its elements in solution, and bromine is more reactive than iodine. When liquid, iodine monochloride and iodine monobromide dissociate into and ions (X = Cl, Br); thus they are significant conductors of electricity and can be used as ionising solvents.

Iodine trifluoride (IF3) is an unstable yellow solid that decomposes above −28 °C. It is thus little-known. It is difficult to produce because fluorine gas would tend to oxidise iodine all the way to the pentafluoride; reaction at low temperature with xenon difluoride is necessary. Iodine trichloride, which exists in the solid state as the planar dimer I2Cl6, is a bright yellow solid, synthesised by reacting iodine with liquid chlorine at −80 °C; caution is necessary during purification because it easily dissociates to iodine monochloride and chlorine and hence can act as a strong chlorinating agent. Liquid iodine trichloride conducts electricity, possibly indicating dissociation to and ions.

Iodine pentafluoride (IF5), a colourless, volatile liquid, is the most thermodynamically stable iodine fluoride, and can be made by reacting iodine with fluorine gas at room temperature. It is a fluorinating agent, but is mild enough to store in glass apparatus. Again, slight electrical conductivity is present in the liquid state because of dissociation to and . The pentagonal bipyramidal iodine heptafluoride (IF7) is an extremely powerful fluorinating agent, behind only chlorine trifluoride, chlorine pentafluoride, and bromine pentafluoride among the interhalogens: it reacts with almost all the elements even at low temperatures, fluorinates Pyrex glass to form iodine(VII) oxyfluoride (IOF5), and sets carbon monoxide on fire.

===Iodine oxides and oxoacids===

Iodine oxides are the most stable of all the halogen oxides, because of the strong I–O bonds resulting from the large electronegativity difference between iodine and oxygen, and they have been known for the longest time. The stable, white, hygroscopic iodine pentoxide (I2O5) has been known since its formation in 1813 by Gay-Lussac and Davy. It is most easily made by the dehydration of iodic acid (HIO3), of which it is the anhydride. It will quickly oxidise carbon monoxide completely to carbon dioxide at room temperature, and is thus a useful reagent in determining carbon monoxide concentration. It also oxidises nitrogen oxide, ethylene, and hydrogen sulfide. It reacts with sulfur trioxide and peroxydisulfuryl difluoride (S2O6F2) to form salts of the iodyl cation, [IO2]+, and is reduced by concentrated sulfuric acid to iodosyl salts involving [IO]+. It may be fluorinated by fluorine, bromine trifluoride, sulfur tetrafluoride, or chloryl fluoride, resulting iodine pentafluoride, which also reacts with iodine pentoxide, giving iodine(V) oxyfluoride, IOF3. A few other less stable oxides are known, notably I4O9 and I2O4; their structures have not been determined, but reasonable guesses are IIII(IVO3)3 and [IO]+[IO3]− respectively.
More important are the four oxoacids: hypoiodous acid (HIO), iodous acid (HIO2), iodic acid (HIO3), and periodic acid (HIO4 or H5IO6). When iodine dissolves in aqueous solution, the following reactions occur:

Hypoiodous acid is unstable to disproportionation. The hypoiodite ions thus formed disproportionate immediately to give iodide and iodate:

Iodous acid and iodite are even less stable and exist only as a fleeting intermediate in the oxidation of iodide to iodate, if at all. Iodates are by far the most important of these compounds, which can be made by oxidising alkali metal iodides with oxygen at 600 °C and high pressure, or by oxidising iodine with chlorates. Unlike chlorates, which disproportionate very slowly to form chloride and perchlorate, iodates are stable to disproportionation in both acidic and alkaline solutions. From these, salts of most metals can be obtained. Iodic acid is most easily made by oxidation of an aqueous iodine suspension by electrolysis or fuming nitric acid. Iodate has the weakest oxidising power of the halates, but reacts the quickest.

Many periodates are known, including not only the expected tetrahedral , but also square-pyramidal , octahedral orthoperiodate , [IO3(OH)3]2−, [I2O8(OH2)]4−, and . They are usually made by oxidising alkaline sodium iodate electrochemically (with lead(IV) oxide as the anode) or by chlorine gas:


They are thermodymically and kinetically powerful oxidising agents, quickly oxidising Mn2+ to , and cleaving glycols, α-diketones, α-ketols, α-aminoalcohols, and α-diamines. Orthoperiodate especially stabilises high oxidation states among metals because of its very high negative charge of −5. Orthoperiodic acid, H5IO6, is stable, and dehydrates at 100 °C in a vacuum to Metaperiodic acid, HIO4. Attempting to go further does not result in the nonexistent iodine heptoxide (I2O7), but rather iodine pentoxide and oxygen. Periodic acid may be protonated by sulfuric acid to give the cation, isoelectronic to Te(OH)6 and , and giving salts with bisulfate and sulfate.

===Polyiodine compounds===
When iodine dissolves in strong acids, such as fuming sulfuric acid, a bright blue paramagnetic solution including cations is formed. A solid salt of the diiodine cation may be obtained by oxidising iodine with antimony pentafluoride:

The salt I2Sb2F11 is dark blue, and the blue tantalum analogue I2Ta2F11 is also known. Whereas the I–I bond length in I2 is 267 pm, that in is only 256 pm as the missing electron in the latter has been removed from an antibonding orbital, making the bond stronger and hence shorter. In fluorosulfuric acid solution, deep-blue reversibly dimerises below −60 °C, forming red rectangular diamagnetic . Other polyiodine cations are not as well-characterised, including bent dark-brown or black and centrosymmetric &quot;C&quot;2&quot;h&quot; green or black , known in the and salts among others.

The only important polyiodide anion in aqueous solution is linear triiodide, . Its formation explains why the solubility of iodine in water may be increased by the addition of potassium iodide solution:

Many other polyiodides may be found when solutions containing iodine and iodide crystallise, such as , , , and , whose salts with large, weakly polarising cations such as Cs+ may be isolated.

===Organoiodine compounds===
Organoiodine compounds have been fundamental in the development of organic synthesis, such as in the Hofmann elimination of amines, the Williamson ether synthesis, the Wurtz coupling reaction, and in Grignard reagents.

The carbon–iodine bond is a common functional group that forms part of core organic chemistry; formally, these compounds may be thought of as organic derivatives of the iodide anion. The simplest organoiodine compounds, alkyl iodides, may be synthesised by the reaction of alcohols with phosphorus triiodide; these may then be used in nucleophilic substitution reactions, or for preparing Grignard reagents. The C–I bond is the weakest of all the carbon–halogen bonds due to the minuscule difference in electronegativity between carbon (2.55) and iodine (2.66). As such, iodide is the best leaving group among the halogens, to such an extent that many organoiodine compounds turn yellow when stored over time due to decomposition into elemental iodine; as such, they are commonly used in organic synthesis, because of the easy formation and cleavage of the C–I bond. They are also significantly denser than the other organohalogen compounds thanks to the high atomic weight of iodine. A few organic oxidising agents like the iodanes contain iodine in a higher oxidation state than −1, such as 2-iodoxybenzoic acid, a common reagent for the oxidation of alcohols to aldehydes, and iodobenzene dichloride (PhICl2), used for the selective chlorination of alkenes and alkynes. One of the more well-known uses of organoiodine compounds is the so-called iodoform test, where iodoform (CHI3) is produced by the exhaustive iodination of a methyl ketone (or another compound capable of being oxidised to a methyl ketone), as follows:

Some drawbacks of using organoiodine compounds as compared to organochlorine or organobromine compounds is the greater expense and toxicity of the iodine derivatives, since iodine is expensive and organoiodine compounds are stronger alkylating agents. For example, iodoacetamide and iodoacetic acid denature proteins by irreversibly alkylating cysteine residues and preventing the reformation of disulfide linkages.

Halogen exchange to produce iodoalkanes by the Finkelstein reaction is slightly complicated by the fact that iodide is a better leaving group than chloride or bromide. The difference is nevertheless small enough that the reaction can be driven to completion by exploiting the differential solubility of halide salts, or by using a large excess of the halide salt. In the classic Finkelstein reaction, an alkyl chloride or an alkyl bromide is converted to an alkyl iodide by treatment with a solution of sodium iodide in acetone. Sodium iodide is soluble in acetone and sodium chloride and sodium bromide are not. The reaction is driven toward products by mass action due to the precipitation of the insoluble salt.

==Occurrence and production==
Iodine is the least abundant of the stable halogens, comprising only 0.46 parts per million of Earth&#x27;s crustal rocks (compare: fluorine: 544 ppm, chlorine: 126 ppm, bromine: 2.5 ppm) making it the 60th most abundant element. Iodide minerals are rare, and most deposits that are concentrated enough for economical extraction are iodate minerals instead. Examples include lautarite, Ca(IO3)2, and dietzeite, 7Ca(IO3)2·8CaCrO4. These are the minerals that occur as trace impurities in the caliche, found in Chile, whose main product is sodium nitrate. In total, they can contain at least 0.02% and at most 1% iodine by mass. Sodium iodate is extracted from the caliche and reduced to iodide by sodium bisulfite. This solution is then reacted with freshly extracted iodate, resulting in comproportionation to iodine, which may be filtered off.

The caliche was the main source of iodine in the 19th century and continues to be important today, replacing kelp (which is no longer an economically viable source), but in the late 20th century brines emerged as a comparable source. The Japanese Minami Kantō gas field east of Tokyo and the American Anadarko Basin gas field in northwest Oklahoma are the two largest such sources. The brine is hotter than 60 °C from the depth of the source. The brine is first purified and acidified using sulfuric acid, then the iodide present is oxidised to iodine with chlorine. An iodine solution is produced, but is dilute and must be concentrated. Air is blown into the solution to evaporate the iodine, which is passed into an absorbing tower, where sulfur dioxide reduces the iodine. The hydrogen iodide (HI) is reacted with chlorine to precipitate the iodine. After filtering and purification the iodine is packed.

These sources ensure that Chile and Japan are the largest producers of iodine today. Alternatively, the brine may be treated with silver nitrate to precipitate out iodine as silver iodide, which is then decomposed by reaction with iron to form metallic silver and a solution of iron(II) iodide. The iodine is then liberated by displacement with chlorine.

==Applications==
About half of all produced iodine goes into various organoiodine compounds, another 15% remains as the pure element, another 15% is used to form potassium iodide, and another 15% for other inorganic iodine compounds. Among the major uses of iodine compounds are catalysts, animal feed supplements, stabilisers, dyes, colourants and pigments, pharmaceutical, sanitation (from tincture of iodine), and photography; minor uses include smog inhibition, cloud seeding, and various uses in analytical chemistry.

===X-ray imaging===
As an element with high electron density and atomic number, iodine efficiently absorbs X-rays. X-ray radiocontrast agents is the top application for iodine. In this application, Organoiodine compounds are injected intravenously. This application is often in conjunction with advanced X-ray techniques such as angiography and CT scanning. At present, all water-soluble radiocontrast agents rely on iodine-containing compounds.

Iodine absorbs X-rays with energies less than 33.3 keV due to the photoelectric effect of the innermost electrons. 

===Biocide===

Use of iodine as a biocide represents a major application of the element, ranked 2nd by weight. Elemental iodine (I2) is used as an antiseptic in medicine. A number of water-soluble compounds, from triiodide (I3−, generated &quot;in situ&quot; by adding iodide to poorly water-soluble elemental iodine) to various iodophors, slowly decompose to release I2 when applied.

===Optical polarising films===
Thin-film-transistor liquid crystal displays rely on polarisation. The liquid crystal transistor is sandwiched between two polarising films and illuminated from behind. The two films prevent light transmission unless the transistor in the middle of the sandwich rotates the light. Iodine-impregnated polymer films are used in polarising optical components with the highest transmission and degree of polarisation.

===Co-catalyst===
Another significant use of iodine is as a cocatalyst for the production of acetic acid by the Monsanto and Cativa processes. In these technologies, hydroiodic acid converts the methanol feedstock into methyl iodide, which undergoes carbonylation. Hydrolysis of the resulting acetyl iodide regenerates hydroiodic acid and gives acetic acid. The majority of acetic acid is produced by these approaches.

===Nutrition===
Salts of iodide and iodate are used extensively in human and animal nutrition. This application reflects the status of iodide as an essential element, being required for two hormones. The production of ethylenediamine dihydroiodide, provided as a nutritional supplement for livestock, consumes a large portion of available iodine. Iodine is a component of iodised salt. 

A saturated solution of potassium iodide is used to treat acute thyrotoxicosis. It is also used to block uptake of iodine-131 in the thyroid gland (see isotopes section above), when this isotope is used as part of radiopharmaceuticals (such as iobenguane) that are not targeted to the thyroid or thyroid-type tissues.

===Others===
Inorganic iodides find specialised uses. Titanium, zirconium, hafnium, and thorium are purified by the Van Arkel–de Boer process, which involves the reversible formation of the tetraiodides of these elements. Silver iodide is a major ingredient to traditional photographic film. Thousands of kilograms of silver iodide are used annually for cloud seeding to induce rain.

The organoiodine compound erythrosine is an important food colouring agent. Perfluoroalkyl iodides are precursors to important surfactants, such as perfluorooctanesulfonic acid.

I is used as the radiolabel in investigating which ligands go to which plant pattern recognition receptors (PRRs).

An iodine based thermochemical cycle has been evaluated for hydrogen production using energy from nuclear power. The cycle has three steps. At , iodine reacts with sulfur dioxide and water to give hydrogen iodide and sulfuric acid:
After a separation stage, at sulfuric acid splits in sulfur dioxide and oxygen:
Hydrogen iodide, at , gives hydrogen and the initial element, iodine:
The yield of the cycle (ratio between lower heating value of the produced hydrogen and the consumed energy for its production, is approximately 38%. , the cycle is not a competitive means of producing hydrogen.

== Spectroscopy ==
The spectrum of the iodine molecule, I2, consists of (not exclusively) tens of thousands of sharp spectral lines in the wavelength range 500–700 nm. It is therefore a commonly used wavelength reference (secondary standard). By measuring with a spectroscopic Doppler-free technique while focusing on one of these lines, the hyperfine structure of the iodine molecule reveals itself. A line is now resolved such that either 15 components (from even rotational quantum numbers, &quot;J&quot;even), or 21 components (from odd rotational quantum numbers, &quot;J&quot;odd) are measurable.

Caesium iodide and thallium-doped sodium iodide are used in crystal scintillators for the detection of gamma rays. The efficiency is high and energy dispersive spectroscopy is possible, but the resolution is rather poor.

==Chemical analysis==

The iodide and iodate anions can be used for quantitative volumetric analysis, for example in iodometry. Iodine and starch form a blue complex, and this reaction is often used to test for either starch or iodine and as an indicator in iodometry. The iodine test for starch is still used to detect counterfeit banknotes printed on starch-containing paper.

The iodine value is the mass of iodine in grams that is consumed by 100 grams of a chemical substance typically fats or oils. Iodine numbers are often used to determine the amount of unsaturation in fatty acids. This unsaturation is in the form of double bonds, which react with iodine compounds.

Potassium tetraiodomercurate(II), K2HgI4, is also known as Nessler&#x27;s reagent. It is once was used as a sensitive spot test for ammonia. Similarly, Mayer&#x27;s reagent (potassium tetraiodomercurate(II) solution) is used as a precipitating reagent to test for alkaloids. Aqueous alkaline iodine solution is used in the iodoform test for methyl ketones.

==Biological role==

Iodine is an essential element for life and, at atomic number &quot;Z&quot; = 53, is the heaviest element commonly needed by living organisms. (Lanthanum and the other lanthanides, as well as tungsten with &quot;Z&quot; = 74 and uranium with &quot;Z&quot; = 92, are used by a few microorganisms.) It is required for the synthesis of the growth-regulating thyroid hormones tetraiodothyronine and triiodothyronine (T4 and T3 respectively, named after their number of iodine atoms). A deficiency of iodine leads to decreased production of T3 and T4 and a concomitant enlargement of the thyroid tissue in an attempt to obtain more iodine, causing the disease goitre. The major form of thyroid hormone in the blood is tetraiodothyronine (T4), which has a longer life than triiodothyronine (T3). In humans, the ratio of T4 to T3 released into the blood is between 14:1 and 20:1. T4 is converted to the active T3 (three to four times more potent than T4) within cells by deiodinases (5&#x27;-iodinase). These are further processed by decarboxylation and deiodination to produce iodothyronamine (T1a) and thyronamine (T0a&#x27;). All three isoforms of the deiodinases are selenium-containing enzymes; thus metallic selenium is needed for triiodothyronine and tetraiodothyronine production.

Iodine accounts for 65% of the molecular weight of T4 and 59% of T3. Fifteen to 20 mg of iodine is concentrated in thyroid tissue and hormones, but 70% of all iodine in the body is found in other tissues, including mammary glands, eyes, gastric mucosa, thymus, cerebrospinal fluid, choroid plexus, arteries, cervix, salivary glands. During pregnancy, the placenta is able to store and accumulate iodine. In the cells of those tissues, iodine enters directly by sodium-iodide symporter (NIS). The action of iodine in mammal tissues is related to fetal and neonatal development, and in the other tissues, it is known. 

===Dietary recommendations and intake===
The daily levels of intake recommended by the United States National Academy of Medicine are between 110 and 130 μg for infants up to 12 months, 90 μg for children up to eight years, 130 μg for children up to 13 years, 150 μg for adults, 220 μg for pregnant women and 290 μg for lactating women. The Tolerable Upper Intake Level (TUIL) for adults is 1,100 μg/day. This upper limit was assessed by analysing the effect of supplementation on thyroid-stimulating hormone.

The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) refers to the collective set of information as Dietary Reference Values, with Population Reference Intake (PRI) instead of RDA, and Average Requirement instead of EAR; AI and UL are defined the same as in the United States. For women and men ages 18 and older, the PRI for iodine is set at 150 μg/day; the PRI during pregnancy and lactation is 200 μg/day. For children aged 1–17 years, the PRI increases with age from 90 to 130 μg/day. These PRIs are comparable to the U.S. RDAs with the exception of that for lactation.

The thyroid gland needs 70 μg/day of iodine to synthesise the requisite daily amounts of T4 and T3. The higher recommended daily allowance levels of iodine seem necessary for optimal function of a number of body systems, including mammary glands, gastric mucosa, salivary glands, brain cells, choroid plexus, thymus, arteries.

Natural food sources of iodine include seafood which contains fish, seaweeds, kelp, shellfish and other foods which contain dairy products, eggs, meats, vegetables, so long as the animals ate iodine richly, and the plants are grown on iodine-rich soil. Iodised salt is fortified with potassium iodate, a salt of iodine, potassium, oxygen.

As of 2000, the median intake of iodine from food in the United States was 240 to 300 μg/day for men and 190 to 210 μg/day for women. The general US population has adequate iodine nutrition, with lactating women and pregnant women having a mild risk of deficiency. In Japan, consumption was considered much higher, ranging between 5,280 μg/day to 13,800 μg/day from wakame and kombu that are eaten, both in the form of kombu and wakame and kombu and wakame umami extracts for soup stock and potato chips. However, new studies suggest that Japan&#x27;s consumption is closer to 1,000–3,000 μg/day. The adult UL in Japan was last revised to 3,000 μg/day in 2015.

After iodine fortification programs such as iodisation of salt have been done, some cases of iodine-induced hyperthyroidism have been observed (so-called Jod-Basedow phenomenon). The condition occurs mainly in people above 40 years of age, and the risk is higher when iodine deficiency is high and the first rise in iodine consumption is high.

===Deficiency===

In areas where there is little iodine in the diet, which are remote inland areas and faraway mountainous areas where no iodine rich foods are eaten, iodine deficiency gives rise to hypothyroidism, symptoms of which are extreme fatigue, goitre, mental slowing, depression, low weight gain, and low basal body temperatures. Iodine deficiency is the leading cause of preventable intellectual disability, a result that occurs primarily when babies or small children are rendered hypothyroidic by no iodine. The addition of iodine to salt has largely destroyed this problem in wealthier areas, but iodine deficiency remains a serious public health problem in poorer areas today. Iodine deficiency is also a problem in certain areas of all continents of the world. Information processing, fine motor skills, and visual problem solving are normalised by iodine repletion in iodine-deficient people.

==Precautions==
===Toxicity===

Elemental iodine (I2) is toxic if taken orally undiluted. The lethal dose for an adult human is 30 mg/kg, which is about 2.1–2.4 grams for a human weighing 70 to 80 kg (even when experiments on rats demonstrated that these animals could survive after eating a 14000 mg/kg dose and are still living after that). Excess iodine is more cytotoxic in the presence of selenium deficiency. Iodine supplementation in selenium-deficient populations is problematic for this reason. The toxicity derives from its oxidising properties, through which it denaturates proteins (including enzymes).

Elemental iodine is also a skin irritant. Solutions with high elemental iodine concentration, such as tincture of iodine and Lugol&#x27;s solution, are capable of causing tissue damage if used in prolonged cleaning or antisepsis; similarly, liquid Povidone-iodine (Betadine) trapped against the skin resulted in chemical burns in some reported cases.

==== Occupational exposure ====
The U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has set the legal limit (Permissible exposure limit) for iodine exposure in the workplace at 0.1 ppm (1 mg/m3) during an 8-hour workday. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) has set a Recommended exposure limit (REL) of 0.1 ppm (1 mg/m3) during an 8-hour workday. At levels of 2 ppm, iodine is immediately dangerous to life and health.

====Allergic reactions====
Some people develop a hypersensitivity to products and foods containing iodine. Applications of tincture of iodine or Betadine can cause rashes, sometimes severe. use of iodine-based contrast agents (see above) can cause reactions ranging from a mild rash to fatal anaphylaxis. Such reactions have led to the misconception (widely held, even among physicians) that some people are allergic to iodine itself; even allergies to iodine-rich foods have been so construed. In fact, there has never been a confirmed report of a true iodine allergy, as an allergy to iodine or iodine salts is biologically impossible. Hypersensitivity reactions to products and foods containing iodine are apparently related to their other molecular components; thus, a person who has demonstrated an allergy to one food or product containing iodine may not have an allergic reaction to another. Patients with various food allergies (fishes, shellfishes, eggs, milk, seaweeds, kelp, meats, vegetables, kombu, wakame) do not have an increased risk for a contrast medium hypersensitivity. The patient&#x27;s allergy history is relevant.
===US DEA List I status===
Phosphorus reduces iodine to hydroiodic acid, which is a reagent effective for reducing ephedrine and pseudoephedrine to methamphetamine. For this reason, iodine was designated by the United States Drug Enforcement Administration as a List I precursor chemical under 21 CFR 1310.02.

==Notes==
== References ==
==Bibliography==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1103" start="0" end="6" title="Iodine" label="Iodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="12" end="28" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q102500" start="37" end="43" title="Chemical symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103" start="44" end="45" title="Iodine" label="I"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="50" end="63" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605" start="95" end="102" title="halogen" label="halogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q102145" start="118" end="137" title="Standard temperature and pressure" label="standard conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q468330" start="302" end="318" title="Bernard Courtois" label="Bernard Courtois"/>
<link wikidata="Q153185" start="360" end="383" title="Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac" label="Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="395" end="408" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801340" start="490" end="496" title="iodide" label="iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q415631" start="503" end="509" title="iodate" label="iodate"/>
<link wikidata="Q417139" start="530" end="539" title="periodate" label="periodate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189598" start="574" end="590" title="Mineral (nutrient)" label="mineral nutrient"/>
<link wikidata="Q422106" start="632" end="648" title="thyroid hormones" label="thyroid hormones"/>
<link wikidata="Q18377123" start="650" end="667" title="Iodine deficiency" label="Iodine deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q183560" start="741" end="766" title="Intellectual disability" label="intellectual disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="812" end="817" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="822" end="827" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="885" end="901" title="organic compound" label="organic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414967" start="944" end="957" title="Radiocontrast agent" label="radiocontrast"/>
<link wikidata="Q826522" start="1085" end="1099" title="thyroid cancer" label="thyroid cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="1126" end="1134" title="Catalysis" label="catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="1167" end="1178" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="1188" end="1195" title="polymer" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q37155" start="1212" end="1272" title="WHO Model List of Essential Medicines" label="World Health Organization&amp;#x27;s List of Essential Medicines"/>
<link wikidata="Q468330" start="1337" end="1353" title="Bernard Courtois" label="Bernard Courtois"/>
<link wikidata="Q177836" start="1400" end="1409" title="potassium nitrate" label="saltpetre"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="1437" end="1446" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="1468" end="1483" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1518" end="1524" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q11183742" start="1557" end="1567" title="Niter" label="nitre beds"/>
<link wikidata="Q190227" start="1577" end="1593" title="sodium carbonate" label="sodium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q237169" start="1624" end="1631" title="seaweed" label="seaweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="1659" end="1667" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="1672" end="1680" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="1809" end="1822" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628298" start="2123" end="2147" title="Charles Bernard Desormes" label="Charles Bernard Desormes"/>
<link wikidata="Q910075" start="2164" end="2179" title="Nicolas Clément" label="Nicolas Clément"/>
<link wikidata="Q153185" start="2261" end="2284" title="Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac" label="Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac"/>
<link wikidata="Q675" start="2315" end="2333" title="André-Marie Ampère" label="André-Marie Ampère"/>
<link wikidata="Q377066" start="2483" end="2501" title="Institut de France" label="Institut de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="2616" end="2622" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q116188907" start="2707" end="2717" title="Anglicisation (linguistics)" label="anglicised"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="2751" end="2764" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q131761" start="2884" end="2896" title="Humphry Davy" label="Humphry Davy"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="2972" end="2980" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="3058" end="3071" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047478" start="3389" end="3404" title="Casimir Davaine" label="Casimir Davaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3619696" start="3461" end="3477" title="Antonio Grossich" label="Antonio Grossich"/>
<link wikidata="Q191618" start="3543" end="3556" title="Sterilization (microbiology)" label="sterilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="3701" end="3715" title="periodic table" label="periodic table"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="3800" end="3806" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605" start="3929" end="3936" title="halogen" label="halogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q650" start="3994" end="4002" title="fluorine" label="fluorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="4004" end="4012" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q879" start="4018" end="4025" title="bromine" label="bromine"/>
<link wikidata="Q999" start="4033" end="4041" title="astatine" label="astatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306" start="4046" end="4056" title="tennessine" label="tennessine"/>
<link wikidata="Q107414" start="4237" end="4253" title="valence electron" label="valence electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622089" start="4446" end="4461" title="periodic trends" label="periodic trends"/>
<link wikidata="Q78974" start="4542" end="4559" title="electronegativity" label="electronegativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751859" start="4775" end="4792" title="diatomic molecule" label="diatomic molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q121874" start="5534" end="5550" title="potassium iodide" label="potassium iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446811" start="5604" end="5613" title="triiodide" label="triiodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q150440" start="5671" end="5677" title="hexane" label="hexane"/>
<link wikidata="Q225045" start="5682" end="5702" title="carbon tetrachloride" label="carbon tetrachloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q900337" start="5828" end="5839" title="Lewis acids and bases" label="Lewis bases"/>
<link wikidata="Q424085" start="5919" end="5942" title="Charge-transfer complex" label="Charge-transfer complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q156" start="6122" end="6129" title="Alcohol (chemistry)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q167198" start="6135" end="6140" title="amine" label="amine"/>
<link wikidata="Q189627" start="6454" end="6480" title="Van der Waals force" label="Van der Waals interactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q131800" start="6684" end="6695" title="sublimation (phase transition)" label="sublimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11438" start="6710" end="6715" title="solid" label="solid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="6719" end="6722" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q106080" start="6777" end="6781" title="melting" label="melt"/>
<link wikidata="Q81809" start="6785" end="6805" title="atmospheric pressure" label="atmospheric pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q483788" start="6834" end="6847" title="atomic radius" label="atomic radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q483769" start="6896" end="6913" title="Ionization energy" label="ionisation energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q271580" start="6922" end="6939" title="electron affinity" label="electron affinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q78974" start="6948" end="6965" title="electronegativity" label="electronegativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q648961" start="7557" end="7569" title="Orthorhombic crystal system" label="orthorhombic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106" start="7699" end="7704" title="xenon" label="xenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="7949" end="7963" title="semiconductor" label="semiconducting"/>
<link wikidata="Q806352" start="8025" end="8033" title="band gap" label="band gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208453" start="8204" end="8222" title="isotopes of iodine" label="isotopes of iodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208453" start="8251" end="8261" title="Isotopes of iodine" label="iodine-127"/>
<link wikidata="Q759767" start="8326" end="8336" title="primordial nuclide" label="primordial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588104" start="8362" end="8374" title="monoisotopic element" label="monoisotopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q337393" start="8379" end="8391" title="mononuclidic element" label="mononuclidic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515411" start="8534" end="8544" title="iodine-129" label="iodine-129"/>
<link wikidata="Q306786" start="8604" end="8614" title="beta decay" label="beta decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106" start="8625" end="8630" title="xenon" label="xenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="8713" end="8725" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422075" start="8783" end="8803" title="extinct radionuclide" label="extinct radionuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q191637" start="8865" end="8873" title="decay product" label="daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174319" start="9270" end="9288" title="cosmogenic nuclide" label="cosmogenic nuclide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062473" start="9302" end="9323" title="cosmic ray spallation" label="cosmic ray spallation"/>
<link wikidata="Q899927" start="9740" end="9762" title="Mössbauer spectroscopy" label="Mössbauer spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16399" start="9900" end="9913" title="Thyroid" label="thyroid gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801335" start="9981" end="9991" title="Iodine-123" label="Iodine-123"/>
<link wikidata="Q109910" start="10040" end="10056" title="electron capture" label="electron capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190435" start="10060" end="10073" title="Isotopes of tellurium" label="tellurium-123"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="10084" end="10099" title="Gamma ray" label="gamma radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q214963" start="10115" end="10139" title="Nuclear medicine" label="nuclear medicine imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q849737" start="10151" end="10193" title="Single-photon emission computed tomography" label="single photon emission computed tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="10206" end="10231" title="CT scan" label="X-ray computed tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501879" start="10250" end="10260" title="Iodine-125" label="Iodine-125"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190435" start="10329" end="10342" title="Isotopes of tellurium" label="tellurium-125"/>
<link wikidata="Q739897" start="10445" end="10462" title="Assay" label="biological assays"/>
<link wikidata="Q214963" start="10464" end="10488" title="nuclear medicine" label="nuclear medicine imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="10496" end="10513" title="radiation therapy" label="radiation therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q896687" start="10517" end="10530" title="brachytherapy" label="brachytherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181257" start="10574" end="10589" title="prostate cancer" label="prostate cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q356372" start="10591" end="10605" title="uveal melanoma" label="uveal melanoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q233309" start="10612" end="10625" title="Brain tumor" label="brain tumours"/>
<link wikidata="Q927316" start="10636" end="10646" title="iodine-131" label="iodine-131"/>
<link wikidata="Q606986" start="10722" end="10731" title="Isotopes of xenon" label="xenon-131"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094166" start="10815" end="10830" title="Nuclear fission product" label="fission product"/>
<link wikidata="Q474044" start="10881" end="10888" title="Nuclear fallout" label="fallout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750292" start="11120" end="11130" title="Radiogenic nuclide" label="radiogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q826522" start="11131" end="11145" title="thyroid cancer" label="thyroid cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11835644" start="11226" end="11237" title="thyroiditis" label="thyroiditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q121874" start="11380" end="11396" title="potassium iodide" label="potassium iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="11506" end="11523" title="radiation therapy" label="radiation therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q903539" start="11645" end="11663" title="radioactive tracer" label="radioactive tracer"/>
<link wikidata="Q888529" start="11820" end="11830" title="Halogenation" label="halogenate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="11831" end="11846" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q207843" start="11848" end="11860" title="nitric oxide" label="nitric oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="11866" end="11880" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="11888" end="11896" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q417165" start="12219" end="12239" title="iodine heptafluoride" label="iodine heptafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462" start="12783" end="12798" title="hydrogen iodide" label="hydrogen iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q888529" start="12902" end="12912" title="Halogenation" label="iodination"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="13080" end="13096" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q58447" start="13100" end="13109" title="hydrazine" label="hydrazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468" start="13221" end="13238" title="hydrogen fluoride" label="hydrogen fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q169324" start="13274" end="13287" title="hydrogen bond" label="hydrogen bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q12571883" start="13383" end="13394" title="Endothermic process" label="endothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="13503" end="13511" title="Catalysis" label="catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q863696" start="13649" end="13673" title="Bond-dissociation energy" label="bond dissociation energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q908093" start="13776" end="13791" title="hydroiodic acid" label="hydroiodic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q325401" start="14142" end="14151" title="azeotrope" label="azeotrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="14385" end="14396" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q579304" start="14404" end="14418" title="Cativa process" label="Cativa process"/>
<link wikidata="Q19609" start="14483" end="14494" title="Noble gas" label="noble gases"/>
<link wikidata="Q82804" start="14557" end="14561" title="Einsteinium(III) iodide" label="EsI3"/>
<link wikidata="Q407716" start="14632" end="14650" title="nitrogen triiodide" label="nitrogen triiodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046" start="15469" end="15476" title="niobium" label="niobium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123" start="15478" end="15486" title="tantalum" label="tantalum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109" start="15492" end="15504" title="protactinium" label="protactinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q416421" start="16007" end="16025" title="carbon tetraiodide" label="carbon tetraiodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q415673" start="16062" end="16082" title="Molybdenum dioxide" label="molybdenum(IV) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q159096" start="16095" end="16116" title="Aluminium iodide" label="aluminium(III) iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202658" start="16135" end="16156" title="molybdenum(II) iodide" label="molybdenum(II) iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q413987" start="16238" end="16258" title="tantalum(V) chloride" label="tantalum(V) chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q21079499" start="16311" end="16329" title="tantalum(V) iodide" label="tantalum(V) iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2228916" start="17014" end="17029" title="Scandium triiodide" label="scandium iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q159096" start="17051" end="17067" title="aluminium iodide" label="aluminium iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="17768" end="17777" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="17782" end="17789" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="17883" end="17889" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q19052" start="17938" end="17951" title="silver iodide" label="silver iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q201048" start="18098" end="18109" title="Diamagnetism" label="diamagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q907670" start="18110" end="18122" title="interhalogen" label="interhalogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q419067" start="18600" end="18613" title="pseudohalogen" label="pseudohalides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184988" start="18638" end="18653" title="cyanogen iodide" label="cyanogen iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q77747995" start="18668" end="18679" title="thiocyanate" label="thiocyanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q407627" start="18699" end="18704" title="azide" label="azide"/>
<link wikidata="Q419914" start="18712" end="18731" title="Iodine monofluoride" label="Iodine monofluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q417415" start="18835" end="18855" title="iodine pentafluoride" label="iodine pentafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q423000" start="18962" end="18984" title="trichlorofluoromethane" label="trichlorofluoromethane"/>
<link wikidata="Q419600" start="19001" end="19019" title="iodine trifluoride" label="iodine trifluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q414689" start="19065" end="19083" title="silver(I) fluoride" label="silver(I) fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q414607" start="19093" end="19112" title="Iodine monochloride" label="Iodine monochloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q416182" start="19123" end="19141" title="iodine monobromide" label="iodine monobromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q153185" start="19266" end="19289" title="Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac" label="Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac"/>
<link wikidata="Q131761" start="19294" end="19306" title="Humphry Davy" label="Humphry Davy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16571" start="19435" end="19452" title="Justus von Liebig" label="Justus von Liebig"/>
<link wikidata="Q15045177" start="19679" end="19705" title="fractional crystallization (chemistry)" label="fractional crystallisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q880" start="19747" end="19755" title="platinum" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="19760" end="19764" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q618" start="19777" end="19782" title="boron" label="boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="19784" end="19790" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091" start="19792" end="19799" title="cadmium" label="cadmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="19801" end="19805" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038" start="19807" end="19816" title="zirconium" label="zirconium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046" start="19818" end="19825" title="niobium" label="niobium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053" start="19827" end="19837" title="molybdenum" label="molybdenum"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="19843" end="19851" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q130336" start="19957" end="19963" title="phenol" label="phenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q193572" start="19968" end="19982" title="salicylic acid" label="salicylic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q908109" start="20021" end="20038" title="Homolysis (chemistry)" label="homolytic fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q225045" start="20134" end="20154" title="carbon tetrachloride" label="carbon tetrachloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q907567" start="20221" end="20240" title="Heterolysis (chemistry)" label="heterolytic fission"/>
<link wikidata="Q419600" start="20689" end="20707" title="Iodine trifluoride" label="Iodine trifluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q411225" start="20941" end="20957" title="xenon difluoride" label="xenon difluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q419622" start="20972" end="20990" title="Iodine trichloride" label="Iodine trichloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q417415" start="21392" end="21412" title="Iodine pentafluoride" label="Iodine pentafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q6125309" start="21761" end="21783" title="pentagonal bipyramidal molecular geometry" label="pentagonal bipyramidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q417165" start="21784" end="21804" title="iodine heptafluoride" label="iodine heptafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q411305" start="21868" end="21888" title="chlorine trifluoride" label="chlorine trifluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q419447" start="21890" end="21912" title="chlorine pentafluoride" label="chlorine pentafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q417069" start="21918" end="21939" title="bromine pentafluoride" label="bromine pentafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637631" start="22042" end="22047" title="Pyrex" label="Pyrex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="22103" end="22118" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q860404" start="22163" end="22175" title="Iodine oxide" label="Iodine oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q216678" start="22403" end="22414" title="Hygroscopy" label="hygroscopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q414644" start="22415" end="22431" title="iodine pentoxide" label="iodine pentoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q408822" start="22551" end="22561" title="iodic acid" label="iodic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="22654" end="22668" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q424418" start="22782" end="22796" title="nitrogen oxide" label="nitrogen oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q151313" start="22798" end="22806" title="ethylene" label="ethylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="22812" end="22828" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q242715" start="22845" end="22860" title="sulfur trioxide" label="sulfur trioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="22976" end="22989" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q650" start="23049" end="23057" title="fluorine" label="fluorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q419784" start="23059" end="23078" title="bromine trifluoride" label="bromine trifluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q414732" start="23080" end="23100" title="sulfur tetrafluoride" label="sulfur tetrafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916758" start="23105" end="23121" title="chloryl fluoride" label="chloryl fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q417415" start="23133" end="23153" title="iodine pentafluoride" label="iodine pentafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q414644" start="23178" end="23194" title="iodine pentoxide" label="iodine pentoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q414664" start="23447" end="23462" title="hypoiodous acid" label="hypoiodous acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q15720828" start="23470" end="23481" title="Iodite" label="iodous acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q408822" start="23490" end="23500" title="iodic acid" label="iodic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q411297" start="23513" end="23526" title="periodic acid" label="periodic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q19557" start="23983" end="23995" title="alkali metal" label="alkali metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q217813" start="24073" end="24081" title="chlorate" label="chlorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q64403" start="24380" end="24392" title="electrolysis" label="electrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="24403" end="24414" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q411126" start="24705" end="24718" title="sodium iodate" label="sodium iodate"/>
<link wikidata="Q410749" start="24743" end="24757" title="Lead dioxide" label="lead(IV) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q56809357" start="24888" end="24888" title="permanganate" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q421916" start="24903" end="24910" title="Diol" label="glycols"/>
<link wikidata="Q124606520" start="24914" end="24923" title="Dicarbonyl" label="diketones"/>
<link wikidata="Q130220183" start="24927" end="24933" title="Hydroxy ketone" label="ketols"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415654" start="24937" end="24950" title="Alkanolamine" label="aminoalcohols"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500485" start="24958" end="24965" title="diamine" label="diamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q411297" start="25088" end="25106" title="Periodic acid" label="Orthoperiodic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q411297" start="25166" end="25183" title="Periodic acid" label="Metaperiodic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="25351" end="25364" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q188479" start="25572" end="25584" title="Paramagnetism" label="paramagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q411381" start="25700" end="25722" title="antimony pentafluoride" label="antimony pentafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123" start="25770" end="25778" title="tantalum" label="tantalum"/>
<link wikidata="Q411017" start="26011" end="26030" title="fluorosulfuric acid" label="fluorosulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446811" start="26384" end="26393" title="triiodide" label="triiodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="26693" end="26696" title="caesium" label="Cs+"/>
<link wikidata="Q899109" start="26845" end="26864" title="Hofmann elimination" label="Hofmann elimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q167198" start="26868" end="26873" title="amine" label="amine"/>
<link wikidata="Q898790" start="26880" end="26906" title="Williamson ether synthesis" label="Williamson ether synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q898901" start="26912" end="26935" title="Wurtz reaction" label="Wurtz coupling reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238028" start="26944" end="26960" title="Grignard reagent" label="Grignard reagent"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="26968" end="26974" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351" start="27040" end="27057" title="organic chemistry" label="organic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801340" start="27133" end="27145" title="Iodide" label="iodide anion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600234" start="27160" end="27182" title="Organoiodine chemistry" label="organoiodine compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600234" start="27184" end="27197" title="Organoiodine chemistry" label="alkyl iodides"/>
<link wikidata="Q156" start="27237" end="27244" title="Alcohol (chemistry)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q418115" start="27251" end="27271" title="phosphorus triiodide" label="phosphorus triiodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q658656" start="27299" end="27324" title="nucleophilic substitution" label="nucleophilic substitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238028" start="27353" end="27369" title="Grignard reagent" label="Grignard reagent"/>
<link wikidata="Q320141" start="27554" end="27567" title="leaving group" label="leaving group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153832" start="27752" end="27769" title="organic synthesis" label="organic synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48995693" start="27989" end="27996" title="Hypervalent organoiodine compounds" label="iodanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082890" start="28057" end="28077" title="2-Iodoxybenzoic acid" label="2-iodoxybenzoic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q101497" start="28129" end="28137" title="aldehyde" label="aldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q5961335" start="28144" end="28166" title="iodobenzene dichloride" label="iodobenzene dichloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q81406" start="28216" end="28222" title="alkene" label="alkene"/>
<link wikidata="Q159226" start="28228" end="28234" title="alkyne" label="alkyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q898447" start="28312" end="28325" title="Haloform reaction" label="iodoform test"/>
<link wikidata="Q412393" start="28333" end="28341" title="iodoform" label="iodoform"/>
<link wikidata="Q170744" start="28395" end="28408" title="Ketone" label="methyl ketone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191895" start="28755" end="28768" title="iodoacetamide" label="iodoacetamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q416375" start="28773" end="28788" title="iodoacetic acid" label="iodoacetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q186474" start="28834" end="28842" title="cysteine" label="cysteine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230226" start="28886" end="28895" title="disulfide" label="disulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q899304" start="28954" end="28974" title="Finkelstein reaction" label="Finkelstein reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q426809" start="29311" end="29325" title="Organochlorine chemistry" label="alkyl chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456623" start="29332" end="29345" title="Organobromine chemistry" label="alkyl bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600234" start="29365" end="29377" title="Organoiodine chemistry" label="alkyl iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q390305" start="29410" end="29423" title="sodium iodide" label="sodium iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q49546" start="29427" end="29434" title="acetone" label="acetone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314" start="29476" end="29491" title="sodium chloride" label="sodium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q15768" start="29496" end="29510" title="sodium bromide" label="sodium bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q899494" start="29562" end="29573" title="Law of mass action" label="mass action"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="29727" end="29744" title="Parts-per notation" label="parts per million"/>
<link wikidata="Q650" start="29785" end="29793" title="fluorine" label="fluorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="29804" end="29812" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q879" start="29823" end="29830" title="bromine" label="bromine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185998" start="30028" end="30037" title="Calcium iodate" label="lautarite"/>
<link wikidata="Q558947" start="30144" end="30151" title="caliche" label="caliche"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="30162" end="30167" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q184373" start="30191" end="30205" title="sodium nitrate" label="sodium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q411126" start="30280" end="30293" title="Sodium iodate" label="Sodium iodate"/>
<link wikidata="Q407891" start="30349" end="30365" title="sodium bisulfite" label="sodium bisulfite"/>
<link wikidata="Q584415" start="30441" end="30459" title="comproportionation" label="comproportionation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055316" start="30608" end="30612" title="kelp" label="kelp"/>
<link wikidata="Q214403" start="30694" end="30699" title="brine" label="brine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6863045" start="30746" end="30768" title="Minami Kantō gas field" label="Minami Kantō gas field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="30777" end="30782" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4750736" start="30800" end="30814" title="Anadarko Basin" label="Anadarko Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="30838" end="30846" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130283" start="30961" end="30969" title="List of purification methods in chemistry" label="purified"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="30990" end="31003" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q132814" start="31172" end="31181" title="Evaporation" label="evaporate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="31241" end="31255" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462" start="31280" end="31295" title="hydrogen iodide" label="hydrogen iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q207442" start="31539" end="31553" title="silver nitrate" label="silver nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q19052" start="31583" end="31596" title="silver iodide" label="silver iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786756" start="31687" end="31702" title="iron(II) iodide" label="iron(II) iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="31754" end="31762" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600234" start="31834" end="31856" title="Organoiodine chemistry" label="organoiodine compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q121874" start="31927" end="31943" title="potassium iodide" label="potassium iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q12547845" start="31971" end="31997" title="Iodine compounds" label="inorganic iodine compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="32044" end="32053" title="Catalysis" label="catalysts"/>
<link wikidata="Q867226" start="32157" end="32175" title="tincture of iodine" label="tincture of iodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q60767354" start="32214" end="32229" title="Smog tower" label="smog inhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q217418" start="32231" end="32244" title="cloud seeding" label="cloud seeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346" start="32266" end="32286" title="analytical chemistry" label="analytical chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q905186" start="32333" end="32349" title="electron density" label="electron density"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414967" start="32410" end="32423" title="Radiocontrast agent" label="radiocontrast"/>
<link wikidata="Q468414" start="32618" end="32629" title="angiography" label="angiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="32634" end="32641" title="CT scan" label="CT scan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275337" start="32706" end="32733" title="Iodinated contrast" label="iodine-containing compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q83213" start="32802" end="32822" title="photoelectric effect" label="photoelectric effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q274493" start="33000" end="33010" title="antiseptic" label="antiseptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446811" start="33066" end="33075" title="triiodide" label="triiodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801340" start="33122" end="33128" title="iodide" label="iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q901552" start="33182" end="33190" title="iodophor" label="iodophor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366737" start="33270" end="33314" title="TFT LCD" label="Thin-film-transistor liquid crystal displays"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="33323" end="33335" title="polarization (waves)" label="polarisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="33596" end="33606" title="polarization (waves)" label="polarising"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="33778" end="33789" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q901246" start="33797" end="33805" title="Monsanto process" label="Monsanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q579304" start="33810" end="33824" title="Cativa process" label="Cativa process"/>
<link wikidata="Q908093" start="33851" end="33866" title="hydroiodic acid" label="hydroiodic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q14982" start="33880" end="33888" title="methanol" label="methanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q900377" start="33935" end="33948" title="carbonylation" label="carbonylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189598" start="34253" end="34270" title="Mineral (nutrient)" label="essential element"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027890" start="34323" end="34352" title="ethylenediamine dihydroiodide" label="ethylenediamine dihydroiodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138622" start="34368" end="34390" title="nutrition" label="nutritional supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q902318" start="34477" end="34489" title="iodised salt" label="iodised salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q121874" start="34517" end="34533" title="potassium iodide" label="potassium iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q16499" start="34557" end="34571" title="Hyperthyroidism" label="thyrotoxicosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q927316" start="34608" end="34618" title="iodine-131" label="iodine-131"/>
<link wikidata="Q27286979" start="34737" end="34747" title="iobenguane" label="iobenguane"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="34866" end="34874" title="Titanium" label="Titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038" start="34876" end="34885" title="zirconium" label="zirconium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119" start="34887" end="34894" title="hafnium" label="hafnium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115" start="34900" end="34907" title="thorium" label="thorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q899149" start="34928" end="34953" title="Van Arkel–de Boer process" label="Van Arkel–de Boer process"/>
<link wikidata="Q217418" start="35166" end="35179" title="cloud seeding" label="cloud seeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q420101" start="35223" end="35234" title="erythrosine" label="erythrosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q902094" start="35345" end="35373" title="perfluorooctanesulfonic acid" label="perfluorooctanesulfonic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q903539" start="35393" end="35403" title="Radioactive tracer" label="radiolabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q899107" start="35427" end="35433" title="ligand (biochemistry)" label="ligand"/>
<link wikidata="Q418772" start="35447" end="35482" title="Pattern recognition receptor" label="plant pattern recognition receptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="35656" end="35670" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="35709" end="35722" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822050" start="36349" end="36385" title="Saturated absorption spectroscopy" label="spectroscopic Doppler-free technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413102" start="36428" end="36437" title="Hyperfine structure" label="hyperfine"/>
<link wikidata="Q910990" start="36758" end="36770" title="scintillator" label="scintillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q899190" start="37029" end="37038" title="iodometry" label="iodometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q900774" start="37157" end="37166" title="Redox indicator" label="indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q502918" start="37232" end="37243" title="counterfeit" label="counterfeit"/>
<link wikidata="Q898793" start="37295" end="37307" title="iodine value" label="iodine value"/>
<link wikidata="Q79529" start="37374" end="37392" title="chemical substance" label="chemical substance"/>
<link wikidata="Q61476" start="37490" end="37500" title="fatty acid" label="fatty acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q258652" start="37539" end="37550" title="double bond" label="double bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q416649" start="37589" end="37621" title="Potassium tetraiodomercurate(II)" label="Potassium tetraiodomercurate(II)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="37721" end="37728" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10583639" start="37741" end="37761" title="Mayer&amp;#x27;s reagent" label="Mayer&amp;#x27;s reagent"/>
<link wikidata="Q70702" start="37853" end="37861" title="alkaloid" label="alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q412393" start="37912" end="37920" title="iodoform" label="iodoform"/>
<link wikidata="Q170744" start="37930" end="37944" title="Ketone" label="methyl ketones"/>
<link wikidata="Q189598" start="37981" end="37998" title="Mineral (nutrient)" label="essential element"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801" start="38112" end="38121" title="Lanthanum" label="Lanthanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q19569" start="38136" end="38146" title="lanthanide" label="lanthanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="38160" end="38168" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098" start="38197" end="38204" title="uranium" label="uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q773449" start="38340" end="38358" title="Levothyroxine" label="tetraiodothyronine"/>
<link wikidata="Q327362" start="38363" end="38379" title="triiodothyronine" label="triiodothyronine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16399" start="38551" end="38565" title="thyroid" label="thyroid tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q165135" start="38623" end="38629" title="goitre" label="goitre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="38923" end="38928" title="cell (biology)" label="cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q24781273" start="38932" end="38942" title="deiodinase" label="deiodinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q898436" start="38995" end="39010" title="decarboxylation" label="decarboxylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815997" start="39039" end="39054" title="3-Iodothyronamine" label="iodothyronamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q419754" start="39065" end="39076" title="thyronamine" label="thyronamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q876" start="39132" end="39140" title="selenium" label="selenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364" start="39482" end="39486" title="Eye" label="eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q54196" start="39512" end="39531" title="cerebrospinal fluid" label="cerebrospinal fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q666412" start="39559" end="39565" title="cervix" label="cervix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212935" start="39606" end="39614" title="placenta" label="placenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738547" start="39712" end="39735" title="Sodium/iodide cotransporter" label="sodium-iodide symporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="39956" end="39969" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352382" start="39970" end="39998" title="National Academy of Medicine" label="National Academy of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645498" start="40023" end="40025" title="microgram" label="μg"/>
<link wikidata="Q211544" start="40350" end="40377" title="thyroid-stimulating hormone" label="thyroid-stimulating hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q516521" start="40384" end="40414" title="European Food Safety Authority" label="European Food Safety Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q189961" start="41175" end="41189" title="Mammary gland" label="mammary glands"/>
<link wikidata="Q383249" start="41191" end="41205" title="gastric mucosa" label="gastric mucosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q134938" start="41207" end="41221" title="salivary gland" label="salivary gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243699" start="41224" end="41235" title="Brain cell" label="brain cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q926250" start="41237" end="41251" title="choroid plexus" label="choroid plexus"/>
<link wikidata="Q163987" start="41253" end="41259" title="thymus" label="thymus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9655" start="41261" end="41269" title="artery" label="arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q192935" start="41311" end="41318" title="seafood" label="seafood"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="41334" end="41338" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q237169" start="41340" end="41348" title="Seaweed" label="seaweeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055316" start="41350" end="41354" title="kelp" label="kelp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501235" start="41356" end="41365" title="shellfish" label="shellfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095" start="41376" end="41381" title="Food" label="foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q185217" start="41396" end="41410" title="Dairy product" label="dairy products"/>
<link wikidata="Q93189" start="41412" end="41416" title="Eggs as food" label="eggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q10990" start="41418" end="41423" title="Meat" label="meats"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="41425" end="41435" title="Vegetable" label="vegetables"/>
<link wikidata="Q902318" start="41525" end="41537" title="Iodised salt" label="Iodised salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q414599" start="41556" end="41572" title="potassium iodate" label="potassium iodate"/>
<link wikidata="Q864682" start="41978" end="41984" title="wakame" label="wakame"/>
<link wikidata="Q11261547" start="41989" end="41994" title="kombu" label="kombu"/>
<link wikidata="Q202637" start="42069" end="42074" title="umami" label="umami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259977" start="42075" end="42083" title="Extract" label="extracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075310" start="42088" end="42098" title="Stock (food)" label="soup stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q173265" start="42103" end="42115" title="Potato chip" label="potato chips"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314" start="42332" end="42336" title="Sodium chloride" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16499" start="42382" end="42397" title="hyperthyroidism" label="hyperthyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636323" start="42428" end="42450" title="Jod-Basedow phenomenon" label="Jod-Basedow phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18377123" start="42786" end="42803" title="iodine deficiency" label="iodine deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q16501" start="42818" end="42832" title="hypothyroidism" label="hypothyroidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="42856" end="42871" title="Fatigue" label="extreme fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q165135" start="42873" end="42879" title="goitre" label="goitre"/>
<link wikidata="Q183560" start="42881" end="42895" title="Intellectual disability" label="mental slowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="42897" end="42907" title="Depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403879" start="42909" end="42924" title="Weight gain" label="low weight gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="42930" end="42957" title="Hypothermia" label="low basal body temperatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q183560" start="43013" end="43036" title="intellectual disability" label="intellectual disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q16501" start="43112" end="43125" title="Hypothyroidism" label="hypothyroidic"/>
<link wikidata="Q274160" start="43587" end="43592" title="toxicity" label="toxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q246181" start="43895" end="43904" title="cytotoxicity" label="cytotoxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322302" start="43924" end="43943" title="selenium deficiency" label="selenium deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q867226" start="44248" end="44266" title="tincture of iodine" label="tincture of iodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q409860" start="44271" end="44292" title="Lugol&amp;#x27;s iodine" label="Lugol&amp;#x27;s solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413990" start="44317" end="44330" title="Dermatotoxin" label="tissue damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q241516" start="44394" end="44409" title="Povidone-iodine" label="Povidone-iodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q746186" start="44539" end="44584" title="Occupational Safety and Health Administration" label="Occupational Safety and Health Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376583" start="44617" end="44643" title="Permissible exposure limit" label="Permissible exposure limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q60346" start="44733" end="44786" title="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health" label="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302715" start="44805" end="44831" title="Recommended exposure limit" label="Recommended exposure limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q682341" start="44915" end="44955" title="Immediately dangerous to life or health" label="immediately dangerous to life and health"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958765" start="45007" end="45023" title="hypersensitivity" label="hypersensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q168800" start="45250" end="45261" title="anaphylaxis" label="anaphylaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="46123" end="46133" title="Phosphorus" label="Phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q908093" start="46152" end="46167" title="hydroiodic acid" label="hydroiodic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q219626" start="46211" end="46220" title="ephedrine" label="ephedrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q263958" start="46225" end="46240" title="pseudoephedrine" label="pseudoephedrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="46244" end="46259" title="methamphetamine" label="methamphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q622899" start="46321" end="46352" title="Drug Enforcement Administration" label="Drug Enforcement Administration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46358" end="46383" title="DEA list of chemicals#List I chemicals" label="List I precursor chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065972" start="46390" end="46404" title="Code of Federal Regulations" label="21 CFR 1310.02"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14751" wikidata="Q54078" url="?curid=14751" title="IKEA">
<text>IKEA ( , ), is a multinational conglomerate founded in Sweden that designs and sells , household goods, and various related services.

IKEA is owned and operated by a series of not-for-profit and for-profit corporations collectively known and managed as Inter IKEA Group and Ingka Group. The IKEA brand itself is owned and managed by Inter IKEA Systems B.V., a company incorporated and headquartered in the Netherlands. 

IKEA was started in 1943 by Ingvar Kamprad, and has been the world&#x27;s largest furniture retailer since 2008. The brand name is an acronym of founder Ingvar Kamprad&#x27;s initials; Elmtaryd, the family farm where Kamprad was born; and the nearby village of Agunnaryd, Kamprad&#x27;s hometown in Småland, southern Sweden.

The group is primarily known for its modernist furniture designs, simple approach to interior design, and its immersive shopping concept, based around decorated room settings within big-box stores, where customers can interact with products onsite. In addition, the firm is known for its attention to cost control and continuous product development, notably, the ready-to-assemble model of furniture sales, and other elements which have allowed IKEA to establish lower prices than its competitors.

, there are 473 IKEA stores operating in 63 countries and in fiscal year 2024, €45.1billion worth of IKEA goods were sold. For multiple reasons, including lowering taxes payable, IKEA uses a complicated corporate structure in which IKEA stores are operated under franchise from Inter IKEA Systems B.V. which handles branding, design, manufacturing, and supply. Another part of the IKEA group, Ingka Group, operates the majority of IKEA stores as a franchisee and pays royalties to Inter IKEA Systems B.V. Some IKEA stores are also operated by independent franchises. The IKEA website contains about 12,000 products and there were over 4.6billion visitors to IKEA&#x27;s websites in FY2024.

==History==

In 1943, then-17-year-old Ingvar Kamprad founded IKEA as a mail-order sales business, and began to resell furniture five years later. The first store was opened in Älmhult, Småland, Sweden in 1958, under the name Möbel-IKÉA (Möbel means &quot;furniture&quot; in Swedish). The name IKEA is an acronym that stands for Ingvar Kamprad Elmtaryd Agunnaryd. The acronym is composed of the initials of the founder&#x27;s name as well as Elmtaryd, which is the farm on which he grew up, and Agunnaryd, which is the village close to Elmtaryd. 
The first stores outside Sweden were opened in Norway (1963) and Denmark (1969). The stores spread to other parts of Europe in the 1970s, with the first store outside Scandinavia opening in Switzerland (1973), followed by West Germany (1974), Japan (1974), Australia, Hong Kong (1975), Canada (1976), Singapore and the Netherlands (1978). IKEA further expanded in the 1980s, opening stores in countries such as France and Spain (1981), Belgium (1984), the United States (1985), the United Kingdom (1987), and Italy (1989). Germany and the United States, with 55 stores (three in Puerto Rico in latter) each, are the company&#x27;s biggest markets.

IKEA entered Latin America in February 2010, opening in the Dominican Republic. As for the region&#x27;s largest markets, on 8 April 2021, a store was opened in Mexico City.
In August 2018, IKEA opened its first store in India, in Hyderabad. There are now stores in Bengaluru and Mumbai.
In November 2021, IKEA opened its largest store in the world, measuring , in the Philippines at the Mall of Asia Complex in Pasay City.

In March 2022, IKEA announced the closing of all 17 stores in Russia, resulting from the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine. Because of the ongoing war and unimproved situation in Russia, IKEA said on 15 June that it would sell factories, close offices and reduce its workforce. Later it became known that IKEA does not plan to sell its business, but expected to return to Russia within two years. By October 2022, IKEA laid off about 10,000 Russian employees. In September 2023, the chain of 14 supermarkets, then owned by Ingka, was bought by the Russian Gazprombank.

IKEA was hit hard by COVID-19 because of lockdowns in various countries, like in the UK and Canada. Because demand had fallen, its annual catalogue ceased publication after 70 years in print. The prices of their products have risen significantly in 2022 because of rising costs and inflation. In April 2022, IKEA has shut down one of its stores in Guiyang when sales took a significant hit from the pandemic. Because of strict COVID-19 lockdowns in China, IKEA has closed another store in Shanghai by July 2022.

On 10 August 2022, IKEA opened its first store in Chile, the first store in South America. Another store opened in Colombia in September 2023 in Bogotá, soon to be followed by a store in Peru.

===First store opening in each location===

==Store layout==

===Traditional store layout===
IKEA stores are typically blue buildings with yellow accents — Sweden&#x27;s national colours. They are often designed in a one-way layout, leading customers counter-clockwise along what IKEA calls &quot;the long natural way&quot; designed to encourage the customer to see the store in its entirety (as opposed to a traditional retail store, which allows a customer to go directly to the section where the desired goods and services are displayed). There are often shortcuts to other parts of the showroom.

The sequence first involves going through the furniture showrooms making note of selected items. The showroom usually consists of simulated room settings where customers can see the actual furniture in use, e.g.: a living-room with a sofa, a TV set, a bookcase and a dining table, accessorized with plants, cushions, rugs, lamps, plates, glasses and cutlery. Showroom sections are usually displayed in the order of the rooms of a house: living rooms, dining rooms, kitchens, bedrooms, kids&#x27; rooms. The customer then collects a shopping cart and proceeds to an open-shelf &quot;Market Hall&quot; warehouse for smaller items. Lastly, the self-service furniture warehouse stores the showroom products in flat pack form for the customer to collect the ones previously noted. Sometimes, they are directed to collect products from an external warehouse on the same site or at a site nearby after purchase. Finally, customers pay for their products at a cash register. Not all furniture is stocked at the store level, such as particular sofa colours needing to be shipped from a warehouse to the customer&#x27;s home or the store.

Most stores follow the layout of having the showroom upstairs with the marketplace and self-service warehouse downstairs. Some stores are single level, while others have separate warehouses to allow more stock to be kept on-site. Single-level stores are found predominantly in areas where the cost of land would be less than the cost of building a 2-level store. Some stores have dual-level warehouses with machine-controlled silos to allow large quantities of stock to be accessed throughout the selling day.
Most IKEA stores offer an &quot;as-is&quot; or &quot;bargain corner&quot; (recently rebranded as &quot;re-shop and re-use&quot;) area at the end of the warehouse, just before the cash registers. Returned, damaged, and formerly showcased products are displayed here and sold with a significant discount.

In March 2022, IKEA swiftly exited the Russian market, due to Russia&#x27;s invasion of Ukraine, leading to a surplus of items that were earmarked for the Russian market in IKEA&#x27;s warehouses. To get rid of these items quickly, IKEA has been reselling these in a number of non-Russian IKEA stores near the bargain corner at a discount.

===Alternative smaller store formats===
The majority of IKEA stores are located outside of city centres, primarily because of land cost and traffic access. Smaller store formats have been unsuccessfully tested in the past (the &quot;midi&quot; concept in the early 1990s, which was tested in Ottawa and Heerlen with , or a &quot;boutique&quot; shop in Manhattan).

====New formats for full-size stores====

A new format for a full-size, city centre store was introduced with the opening of the Manchester store, situated in Ashton-under-Lyne in 2006. Another store, in Coventry, opened in December 2007. The store had seven floors and a different flow from other IKEA stores; however, it closed down in 2020 due to the site being deemed unsuitable for future business. IKEA&#x27;s Southampton store that opened in February 2009 is also in the city centre and built in an urban style similar to the Coventry store. IKEA built these stores in response to UK government restrictions on large retail establishment outside city centres.

====Adaptation to Japanese market====
Japan was another market where IKEA performed badly, exited the market completely and then re-entered with an alternative store design and layout with which it finally found success. IKEA entered the Japanese market in 1974 through a franchise arrangement with a local partner, only to withdraw in failure in 1986. Japan was one of the first markets outside its original core European market. Despite Japan being the then second largest economy in the world, IKEA did not adapt its store layout strategy to the Japanese consumer. Japanese consumers did not have a culture of DIY furniture assembly, and many in the early days had no way to haul flat-packs home to their small apartments. Nor did the store layouts familiar to European customers initially make sense to Japanese consumers, so prior to re-entering the Japanese market in 2006, IKEA management did extensive local market research in more effective store layouts. One area of local adaptation was the room displays common to every IKEA store worldwide. Rather than just replicate a European room layout, the Japan management was careful to set up room displays more closely resembling Japanese apartment rooms, such as one for &quot;a typical Japanese teenage boy who likes baseball and computer games&quot;.

====Inner-city stores====
IKEA adapted its store location and services to the &#x27;inner-city&#x27; format for expansion in China, unlike other countries where IKEA stores for economic and planning restriction reasons tends to be just outside city centres. In China, planning restrictions are less of an issue due to the lack of cars for much of its customer base. Accordingly, in store design alternatives, IKEA has had to offer store locations and formats closer to public transportation. The store design alternative thinking and strategy in China has been to locate stores to facilitate access for non-car owning customers. In some locations in China, IKEA stores can be found not in the usual suburban or near airport locations like other countries, but rather places such as downtown shopping centres with a &#x27;mini-IKEA&#x27; store to attract shoppers. One store design alternative trend IKEA has implemented has been &#x27;pop-up&#x27; stores along social media platforms in their advertising strategy, for the first-time as a company, to reach new customers demographics while still reinforcing its global brand locally in China.

====Small sized stores====
In Hong Kong, where shop space is limited and costly, IKEA has opened 4 stores, all in multi-storey commercial buildings. They are smaller than other IKEA stores but large by Hong Kong standards. In addition to tailoring store sizes for specific countries, IKEA alters the sizes of products to accommodate cultural differences. In 2015, IKEA announced it would attempt smaller store design at locations in Canada. IKEA claimed this new model would allow them to expand quickly into new markets rather than spending years opening a full-size store.
In 2020, IKEA opened at Al Wahda Mall in Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, which, at , was one of the smallest IKEA stores to-date. The company also opened at 360 Mall in Kuwait and in Harajuku, a trendy part of Tokyo, that same year. The size of the Kuwaiti 360 Mall store was slightly larger than Al Wahda&#x27;s (despite bringing a similar concept), at , built as an extension of the mall. As for IKEA Harajuku, the , 7-storey store houses the chain&#x27;s first and only &quot;konbini&quot; concept. In 2021, IKEA opened another one of its smallest stores, located at the JEM Mall in Jurong East, Singapore. Replacing liquidated department store Robinsons, IKEA Jurong is only , encompassing three levels; it was the first location in Southeast Asia that did not provide the &quot;Market Hall&quot; warehouse in its store. Also during 2021, IKEA opened a small-store-format location on Bali, Indonesia, replacing the liquidated former Giant hypermarket. IKEA Bali is dubbed &quot;Customer Meeting Point&quot;, and is the smallest store to open thus far, at .

In 2022, another smaller store was opened inside Livat Hammersmith, London, at , followed by a store inside Mall Taman Anggrek, Jakarta, which was opened on 7 April 2022.

==Products and services==
===Furniture and homeware===
Rather than being sold pre-assembled, much of IKEA&#x27;s furniture is designed to be assembled by the customer. The company claims that this helps reduce costs and use of packaging by not shipping air; the volume of a bookcase, for example, is considerably less if it is shipped unassembled rather than assembled. This is also more practical for European customers using public transport, because flat packs can be more easily carried.

IKEA contends that it has been a pioneering force in sustainable approaches to mass consumer culture. Kamprad calls this &quot;democratic design&quot;, meaning that the company applies an integrated approach to manufacturing and design (see also environmental design). In response to the explosion of human population and material expectations in the 20th and 21st centuries, the company implements economies of scale, capturing material streams and creating manufacturing processes that hold costs and resource use down, such as the extensive use of medium-density fibreboard (&quot;MDF&quot;), also called &quot;particle board&quot;.

Notable items of IKEA furniture include the Poäng armchair, the Billy bookcase and the Klippan sofa, all of which have sold by the tens of millions since the late 1970s and early 1980s.

The IKEA and LEGO brands teamed up to create a range of simple storage solutions for children and adults.

====Furniture and product naming====
IKEA products are identified by one-word (occasionally, two-word) names, predominantly in the Swedish language (or otherwise Scandinavian in origin). With few exceptions, most product names are based on a special naming system developed by the company. The company founder Kamprad was dyslexic, and found that naming the furniture with proper names and words, rather than a long product code, made the products easier to identify and remember. Products are usually named after locations in Scandinavian countries, using names of places in Sweden for sofas and coffee tables, Denmark for textiles, and Norway for beds. Lamps get their names from seas and lakes, while outdoor furniture is named after islands.

A number of IKEA&#x27;s products bearing Swedish names have (or have had) pronunciations that are humorous to some and offensive to others (but no less &quot;lost-in-translation&quot;), by not only English-speakers but speakers of many different languages. At times, this product-identification has resulted in certain names being changed, or withdrawn completely from certain markets. More often than not, this confusion is simply a result of the Swedish language not being executed correctly, let alone understood, by the reader; nonetheless, this has resulted in potentially &quot;naughty&quot;—or even gravely offensive—connotations, depending on the area in question. Notable examples (for English-speakers) include a since-discontinued (2013) computer desk called &quot;jerker&quot; (referring to &quot;the jerks&quot; or &quot;jerks&quot;), a foliar plant spray called &quot;fukta&quot; (&quot;moisten&quot;), a workbench called &quot;fartfull&quot; (&quot;speedy&quot;, &quot;quick&quot;), and a table called &quot;lyckhem&quot; (pronounced roughly as &quot;look-em&quot;), meaning &quot;bliss&quot; or a &quot;happy home&quot;.

Due to several products being named after real places, some locales have ended-up sharing names with objects considered generally unpleasant, such as a toilet brush being named after the lake of Bolmen, or a rubbish bin named after the Norwegian village of Tofte. In November 2021, VisitSweden.com launched a jocular campaign named &quot;Discover the Originals&quot;, which invited tourists to visit the physical locations which have received such unfortunate associations with IKEA products.

===Design services===
In March 2021, IKEA launched IKEA Studio in partnership with Apple Inc., an app enabling customers to design full-scale rooms with IKEA furniture using augmented reality on an iPhone.

===Smart home===
In 2016, IKEA started a move into the smart home business. The IKEA TRÅDFRI smart lighting kit was one of the first ranges signalling this change. IKEA has also started a partnership with Philips Hue. The wireless charging furniture, integrating wireless Qi charging into everyday furniture, is another strategy for the smart home business.

A collaboration to build Sonos smart speaker technology into furniture sold by IKEA was announced in December 2017. The first products resulting from the collaboration launched in August 2019.

Under the product name SYMFONISK, IKEA and Sonos have made two distinct wireless speakers that integrate with existing Sonos households or can be used to start with the Sonos-ecosystem, one that&#x27;s also a lamp and another that&#x27;s a more traditional looking bookshelf speaker. Both products as well as accessories for the purpose of mounting the bookshelf speakers have gone on sale worldwide on 1 August.

From the start, IKEA SYMFONISK can only be controlled from the Sonos app, but IKEA added support for the speakers in their own Home Smart app to be paired with scenes that control both the lights, air purifiers, smart plugs and smart blinds together with the speakers.

===Houses and flats===
IKEA has also expanded its product base to include flat-pack houses and apartments, in an effort to cut prices involved in a first-time buyer&#x27;s home. The IKEA product, named BoKlok was launched in Sweden in 1996 in a joint venture with Skanska. Now working in the Nordic countries and in the UK, sites confirmed in England include London, Ashton-under-Lyne, Leeds, Gateshead, Warrington, Bristol and Liverpool.

====Solar PV systems====
At the end of September 2013, the company announced that solar panel packages, so-called &quot;residential kits&quot;, for houses will be sold at 17 UK stores by mid-2014. The decision followed a successful pilot project at the Lakeside IKEA store, whereby one photovoltaic system was sold almost every day. The solar CIGS panels are manufactured by Solibro, a German-based subsidiary of the Chinese company Hanergy. By the end of 2014, IKEA began to sell Solibro&#x27;s solar residential kits in the Netherlands and in Switzerland. In November 2015, IKEA ended its contract with Hanergy and in April 2016 started working with Solarcentury to sell solar panels in the United Kingdom. The deal would allow customers to be able to order panels online and at three stores before being expanded to all United Kingdom stores by the end of summer.

====Furniture rental====
In April 2019, the company announced that it would begin test marketing a new concept, renting furniture to customers. One of the motivating factors was that inexpensive IKEA products were viewed as &quot;disposable&quot; and often ended up being scrapped after a few years of use. This was at a time when especially younger buyers said they wanted to minimize their impact on the environment. The company understood this view. In an interview, Jesper Brodin, the chief executive of Ingka Group (the largest franchisee of IKEA stores), commented that &quot;climate change and unsustainable consumption are among the biggest challenges we face in society&quot;. The other strategic objectives of the plan were to be more affordable and more convenient. The company said it would test the rental concept in all 30 markets by 2020, expecting it to increase the number of times a piece of furniture would be used before recycling.

===Restaurant and food markets===

The first IKEA store opened in 1958 with a small cafe that transitioned into a full-blown restaurant in 1960 that, until 2011, sold branded Swedish prepared specialist foods, such as meatballs, packages of gravy, lingonberry jam, various biscuits and crackers, and salmon and fish roe spread. The new label has a variety of items including chocolates, meatballs, jams, pancakes, salmon and various drinks.

Although the cafes primarily serve Swedish food, the menu varies based on the culture, food and location of each store. With restaurants in 38 countries, the menu often incorporates local dishes, including shawarma in Saudi Arabia, poutine in Canada, macarons in France, and gelato in Italy. In Indonesia, the Swedish meatballs recipe is changed to accommodate the country&#x27;s halal requirements. Stores in Israel sell kosher food under rabbinical supervision. The kosher restaurants are separated into dairy and meat areas.

In many locations, the IKEA restaurants open daily before the rest of the store and serve breakfast. All food products are based on Swedish recipes and traditions. Food accounted for 5% of IKEA&#x27;s sales by 2019.

IKEA sells plant-based meatballs made from potatoes, apples, pea protein, and oats in all of its stores. According to United States journalist Avery Yale Kamila, IKEA began testing its plant-based meatballs in 2014, then launched the plant-based meatballs in 2015 and began testing vegan hot dogs in 2018. In 2019, journalist James Hansen reported in Eater London that IKEA would only sell vegetarian food at Christmas time.

===Småland===
Every store has a children&#x27;s play area, named Småland (Swedish for &quot;small lands&quot;; it is also the Swedish province of Småland where founder Kamprad was born). Parents drop off their children at a gate to the playground, and pick them up after they arrive at another entrance. In some stores, parents are given free pagers by the on-site staff, which the staff can use to summon parents whose children need them earlier than expected; in others, staff summon parents through announcements over the in-store public address system or by calling them on their mobile phones. The largest Småland play area is located at the IKEA store in Navi Mumbai, India. Some of these were closed down due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

=== IKEA Preowned ===
In August 2024, Ikea announced it would be trialing an on-line marketplace where customers can connect to buy and sell pre-owned items made by Ikea.

The marketplace, called Ikea Preowned, would run from August until December 2024 and be centred on the cities of Oslo, Norway and Madrid, Spain.

===Other ventures===
Until 28 September 2023, IKEA owned &amp; operated the MEGA Family Shopping Centre chain in Russia. Its operations have since been sold to Gazprombank.

On 8 August 2008, IKEA UK launched a virtual mobile phone network called IKEA Family Mobile, which ran on T-Mobile. At launch it was the cheapest pay-as-you-go network in the UK. In June 2015 the network announced that its services would cease to operate from 31 August 2015.

, IKEA has a joint venture with TCL to provide Uppleva integrated HDTV and entertainment system products.

In mid-August 2012, the company announced that it would establish a chain of 100 economy hotels in Europe but, unlike its few existing hotels in Scandinavia, they would not carry the IKEA name, nor would they use IKEA furniture and furnishings – they would be operated by an unnamed international group of hoteliers. As of 30 April 2018, however, the company owned only a single hotel, the IKEA Hotell in Älmhult, Sweden.

It was previously planning to open another one, in New Haven, Connecticut, United States, after converting the historic Pirelli Building. The company received approval for the concept from the city&#x27;s planning commission in mid-November 2018; the building was to include 165 rooms and the property would offer 129 dedicated parking spaces. Research in April 2019 provided no indication that the hotel had been completed as of that time. The building was then sold to Connecticut architect and developer Becker + Becker for $1.2million. Opening in 2022 under Hotel Marcel, it is managed by Charlestowne Hotels and became part of Hilton&#x27;s Tapestry Collection.

From 2016 to 2018, IKEA sold a commuter belt-driven bicycle, the Sladda.

In September 2017, IKEA announced they would be acquiring the UD company TaskRabbit. The deal, completed later that year, has TaskRabbit operating as an independent company.

In March 2020, IKEA announced that it had partnered with Pizza Hut Hong Kong on a joint venture. IKEA launched a new side table called SÄVA. The table, designed to resemble a pizza saver, would be boxed in packaging resembling a pizza box, and the building instructions included a suggestion to order a Swedish meatball pizza from Pizza Hut, which would contain the same meatballs served in IKEA restaurants.

In April 2020, IKEA acquired AI imaging startup Geomagical Labs.

In July 2020, IKEA opened a concept store in the Harajuku district of Tokyo, Japan, where it launched its first ever apparel line.

Ingka Centres, IKEA&#x27;s malls division, announced in December 2021 that it would open two malls, anchored by IKEA stores, in Gurugram and Noida in India at a cost of around . Both malls are expected to open by 2025.

In 2016, IKEA Canada partnered with the Setsuné Indigenous Fashion Incubator, co-founded by Sage Paul, to design and produce the collection ÅTERSTÄLLA, which means to restore, heal, or redecorate, and it was made entirely from salvaged Ikea textiles, reflecting the traditional Indigenous value to &quot;use everything&quot;.

==Corporate structure==

IKEA is owned and operated by a series of not-for-profit and for-profit corporations. The corporate structure is divided into two main parts: operations and franchising.

INGKA Holding B.V., based in the Netherlands, owns the Ingka Group, which takes care of the centres, retails, customer fulfillment, and all the other services related to IKEA products. The IKEA brand is owned and managed by Inter IKEA Systems B.V., based in the Netherlands, owned by Inter IKEA Holding B.V. Inter IKEA Holding is also in charge of design, manufacturing and supply of IKEA products.

Inter IKEA Systems is owned by Inter IKEA Holding BV, a company registered in the Netherlands, formerly registered in Luxembourg (under the name Inter IKEA Holding SA). Inter IKEA Holding, in turn, is owned by the Interogo Foundation, based in Liechtenstein. In 2016, the INGKA Holding sold its design, manufacturing and logistics subsidiaries to Inter IKEA Holding.

In June 2013, Ingvar Kamprad resigned from the board of Inter IKEA Holding SA and his youngest son Mathias Kamprad replaced Per Ludvigsson as the chairman of the holding company. Following his decision to step down, the 87-year-old founder explained, &quot;I see this as a good time for me to leave the board of Inter IKEA Group. By that we are also taking another step in the generation shift that has been ongoing for some years.&quot; After the 2016 company restructure, Inter IKEA Holding SA no longer exists, having reincorporated in the Netherlands. Mathias Kamprad became a board member of the Inter IKEA Group and the Interogo Foundation. Mathias and his two older brothers, who also have leadership roles at IKEA, work on the corporation&#x27;s overall vision and long-term strategy.

===Control by Kamprad===
Along with helping IKEA make a non-taxable profit, IKEA&#x27;s complicated corporate structure allowed Kamprad to maintain tight control over the operations of INGKA Holding, and thus the operation of most IKEA stores. The INGKA Foundation&#x27;s five-person executive committee was chaired by Kamprad. It appoints a board of INGKA Holding, approves any changes to INGKA Holding&#x27;s bylaws, and has the right to preempt new share issues. If a member of the executive committee quits or dies, the other four members appoint their replacement.

In Kamprad&#x27;s absence, the foundation&#x27;s bylaws include specific provisions requiring it to continue operating the INGKA Holding group and specifying that shares can be sold only to another foundation with the same objectives as the INGKA Foundation.

===Financial information===
The net profit of IKEA Group (which does not include Inter IKEA systems) in fiscal year 2009 (after paying franchise fees to Inter IKEA systems) was €2.538billion on sales of €21.846billion. Because INGKA Holding is owned by the non-profit INGKA Foundation, none of this profit is taxed. The foundation&#x27;s nonprofit status also means that the Kamprad family cannot reap these profits directly, but the Kamprads do collect a portion of IKEA sales profits through the franchising relationship between INGKA Holding and Inter IKEA Systems.

As a franchisee, the Ingka Group pays 3% of royalties to Inter IKEA Systems. Inter IKEA Systems collected €631million of franchise fees in 2004 but reported pre-tax profits of only €225million in 2004. One of the major pre-tax expenses that Inter IKEA systems reported was €590million of &quot;other operating charges&quot;. IKEA has refused to explain these charges, but Inter IKEA Systems appears to make large payments to I.I. Holding, another Luxembourg-registered group that, according to &quot;The Economist,&quot; &quot;is almost certain to be controlled by the Kamprad family&quot;. I.I. Holding made a profit of €328million in 2004.

In 2004, the Inter IKEA group of companies and I.I. Holding reported combined profits of €553m and paid €19m in taxes, or approximately 3.5 percent.

IKEA has avoided millions of euros in taxes performing some intricate mechanisms and it was noted by the EU back in 2017. The main countries where they operated their business using tax loopholes were the Netherlands, Luxembourg and Belgium.

Public Eye, a non-profit organisation in Switzerland that promotes corporate responsibility, has formally criticised IKEA for its tax avoidance strategies. In 2007, the organisation nominated IKEA for one of its Public Eye &quot;awards&quot;, which highlight corporate irresponsibility.

In February 2016, the Greens / EFA group in the European Parliament issued a report entitled &quot;IKEA: Flat Pack Tax Avoidance&quot; on the tax planning strategies of IKEA and their possible use to avoid tax in several European countries. The report was sent to Pierre Moscovici, the European Commissioner for Economic and Financial Affairs, Taxation and Customs, and Margrethe Vestager, the European Commissioner for Competition, expressing the hope that it would be of use to them in their respective roles &quot;to advance the fight for tax justice in Europe&quot;.

==Manufacturing, logistics, and labour==
Although IKEA originated in Sweden, their household products and furniture products are manufactured in many different countries, in order to achieve cost efficiency. For most of its products, the final assembly is performed by the end-user (consumer).

Swedwood, an IKEA subsidiary, produces all of the company&#x27;s wood-based products, with the largest Swedwood factory located in Southern Poland. According to the subsidiary, over 16,000 employees across 50 sites in 10 countries manufacture the 100million pieces of furniture that IKEA sells annually. IKEA furniture uses the hardwood alternative particle board. Hultsfred, a factory in southern Sweden, is the company&#x27;s sole supplier.

Distribution centre efficiency and flexibility have been one of IKEA&#x27;s ongoing priorities and thus it has implemented automated, robotic warehouse systems and warehouse management systems (WMS). Such systems facilitate a merger of the traditional retail and mail order sales channels into an omni-channel fulfillment model. In 2020, Ikea was noted by &quot;Supply Chain&quot; magazine as having one of the most automated warehouse systems in the world.

In the 1980s under the rule of the Romanian dictator Nicolae Ceaușescu, Romania&#x27;s secret police, the Securitate, received six-figure payments from IKEA. According to declassified files at the National College for Studying the Securitate Archives, IKEA agreed to overcharge for products made in Romania and some of the overpayment funds were deposited into an account controlled by the Securitate.

=== 2021 supply chain problems ===
Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, IKEA has been facing major supply chain issues since 2021, which could extend into 2022. Jon Abrahamsson, the chief executive of Inter IKEA has stated that the main issue is shipping products from China, as a &quot;quarter&quot; of IKEA products are made there. A variety of reasons led to supply shortages, including consumption shocks. In addition, factories were unable to produce raw materials and workers even after they began receiving orders.

===Labour practices===
During the 1980s, IKEA kept its costs down by using production facilities in East Germany. A portion of the workforce at those factories consisted of political prisoners. This fact, revealed in a report by Ernst &amp; Young commissioned by the company, resulted from the intermingling of criminals and political dissidents in the state-owned production facilities IKEA contracted with, a practice which was generally known in West Germany. IKEA was one of a number of companies, including West German firms, which benefited from this practice. The investigation resulted from attempts by former political prisoners to obtain compensation. In November 2012, IKEA admitted being aware at the time of the possibility of use of forced labour and failing to exercise sufficient control to identify and avoid it. A summary of the Ernst &amp; Young report was released on 16 November 2012.

In 2018, Ikea was accused of union busting when employees sought to organize, using such tactics as captive audience meetings.

IKEA was named one of the 100 Best Companies for Working Mothers in 2004 and 2005 by &quot;Working Mothers&quot; magazine. It ranked 80 in Fortune&#x27;s 200 Best Companies to Work For in 2006 and in October 2008, IKEA Canada LP was named one of &quot;Canada&#x27;s Top 100 Employers&quot; by Mediacorp Canada Inc.

==Environmental initiatives==

===Umbrella initiatives===
After initial environmental issues like the highly publicized formaldehyde scandals in the early 1980s and 1992, IKEA took a proactive stance on environmental issues and tried to prevent future incidents through a variety of measures. In 1990, IKEA invited Karl-Henrik Robèrt, founder of the Natural Step, to address its board of directors. Robert&#x27;s system conditions for sustainability provided a strategic approach to improving the company&#x27;s environmental performance. In 1990, IKEA adopted the Natural Step framework as the basis for its environmental plan. This led to the development of an Environmental Action Plan, which was adopted in 1992. The plan focused on structural change, allowing IKEA to &quot;maximize the impact of resources invested and reduce the energy necessary to address isolated issues&quot;. The environmental measures taken include the following:

# Replacing polyvinylchloride (PVC) in wallpapers, home textiles, shower curtains, lampshades and furniture—PVC has been eliminated from packaging and is being phased out in electric cables;
# Minimizing the use of formaldehyde in its products, including textiles;
# Eliminating acid-curing lacquers;
# Producing a model of chair (OGLA) made from 100% post-consumer plastic waste;
# Introducing a series of air-inflatable furniture products into the product line. Such products reduce the use of raw materials for framing and stuffing and reduce transportation weight and volume to about 15% of that of conventional furniture;
# Reducing the use of chromium for metal surface treatment;
# Limiting the use of substances such as cadmium, lead, PCB, PCP, and Azo pigments;
# Using wood from responsibly managed forests that replant and maintain biological diversity;
# Using only recyclable materials for flat packaging and &quot;pure&quot; (non-mixed) materials for packaging to assist in recycling.
# Introducing rental bicycles with trailers for customers in Denmark.

In 2000, IKEA introduced its code of conduct for suppliers that covers social, safety, and environmental questions. Today IKEA has around 60 auditors who perform hundreds of supplier audits every year. The main purpose of these audits is to make sure that the IKEA suppliers follow the law in each country where they are based. Most IKEA suppliers fulfil the law today with exceptions for some special issues, one being excessive working hours in Asia, in countries such as China and India.

, IKEA has signed on with 25 other companies to participate in the British Retail Consortium&#x27;s Better Retail Better World initiative, which challenges companies to meet objectives outlined by the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.

===Product life cycle===
To make IKEA a more sustainable company, a product life cycle was created. For the idea stage, products should be flat-packed so that more items can be shipped at once; products should also be easier to dismantle and recycle. Raw materials are used, and since wood and cotton are two of IKEA&#x27;s most important manufacturing products, the company works with environmentally friendly forests and cotton, whereby the excessive use of chemicals and water is avoided.

IKEA stores recycle waste and many run on renewable energy. All employees are trained in environmental and social responsibility, while public transit is one of the priorities when the location of stores is considered. Also, the coffee and chocolate served at IKEA stores is UTZ Certified.

The last stage of the life cycle is the end of life. Most IKEA stores recycle light bulbs and drained batteries, and the company is also exploring the recycling of sofas and other home furnishing products.

===Energy sources===
In August 2008, IKEA announced that it had created IKEA GreenTech, a €50million venture capital fund. Located in Lund (a university town in Sweden), it will invest in 8–10 companies in the coming five years with focus on solar panels, alternative light sources, product materials, energy efficiency and water saving and purification. The aim is to commercialise green technologies for sale in IKEA stores within 3–4 years.

On 17 February 2011, IKEA announced its plans to develop a wind farm in Dalarna County, Sweden, furthering its goal of using only renewable energy to fuel its operations. , 17 United States IKEA stores are powered by solar panels, with 22 additional installations in progress, and IKEA owns the 165 MW Cameron Wind farm in Cameron County on the South Texas coast and a 42 MW coastal wind farm in Finland.

In September 2019, IKEA announced that they would be investing $2.8billion in renewable energy infrastructure. The company is targeting making their entire supply chain climate positive by 2030.

===Sourcing of wood===

The group is responsible for approximately 1% of world commercial-product wood consumption, making it the largest individual user of wood in the world. IKEA claims to use 99.5% recycled or FSC-certified wood. However, IKEA has been shown to be involved in unsustainable and most likely illegal logging of old-growth and protected forests in multiple Eastern European countries in recent years.

IKEA is the world&#x27;s largest buyer and retailer of wood. In 2015, IKEA claimed to use 1% of the world&#x27;s supply of timber.

According to IKEA&#x27;s 2021 &quot;Sustainability Report&quot;, 99.5% of all wood that the company uses is either recycled or meets the standards of the Forest Stewardship Council. IKEA states that &quot;[a]ll wood used for IKEA products must meet our critical requirements that ensure it&#x27;s not (e.g.) sourced from illegally harvested forests [...]&quot;. However, despite these claims, IKEA has been involved in unsustainable and most likely illegal logging of wood in multiple Eastern European countries in recent years; see Criticism of IKEA.

IKEA owns about 136,000 acres of forest in the US and about 450,000 acres in Europe.

On 14 January 2021, IKEA announced that Ingka Investments had acquired approximately 10,840 acres (4,386 hectares) near the Altamaha River Basin in the U.S. state of Georgia from The Conservation Fund. The acquisition comes with the agreement &quot;to protect the land from fragmentation, restore the longleaf pine forest, and safe-guard the habitat of the gopher tortoise&quot;.

IKEA is reported to be the largest private landowner in Romania since 2015.

===Use of wood===
In 2011, the company examined its wood consumption and noticed that almost half of its global pine and spruce consumption was for the fabrication of pallets. The company consequently started a transition to the use of paper pallets and the &quot;Optiledge system&quot;. The OptiLedge product is totally recyclable, made from 100% virgin high-impact copolymer polypropylene (PP) plastic. The system is a &quot;unit load alternative to the use of a pallet. The system consists of the OptiLedge (usually used in pairs), aligned and strapped to the bottom carton to form a base layer upon which to stack more products. Corner boards are used when strapping to minimize the potential for package compression.&quot; The conversion began in Germany and Japan, before its introduction into the rest of Europe and North America. The system has been marketed to other companies, and IKEA has formed the OptiLedge company to manage and sell the product.

===Packaging and bags===
Since March 2013, IKEA has stopped providing plastic bags to customers, but offers reusable bags for sale. The IKEA restaurants also only offer reusable plates, knives, forks, spoons, etc. Toilets in some IKEA WC-rooms have been outfitted with dual-function flushers. IKEA has recycling bins for compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs), energy-saving bulbs, and batteries.

In 2001, IKEA was one of the first companies to operate its own cross-border goods trains through several countries in Europe.

===Electric vehicles===
IKEA has expanded its sustainability plan in the UK to include electric car charge points for customers at all locations by the end of 2013. The effort will include Nissan and Ecotricity and promise to deliver an 80% charge in 30 minutes.

From 2016, IKEA has only sold energy-efficient LED lightbulbs, lamps and light fixtures. LED lightbulbs use as little as 15% of the power of a regular incandescent light bulb.

==Donations made by IKEA==
The INGKA Foundation is officially dedicated to promoting &quot;innovations in architecture and interior design&quot;. The net worth of the foundation exceeded the net worth of the much better known Gates Foundation (now the largest private foundation in the world) for a period. However, most of the Group&#x27;s profit is spent on investment.

IKEA is involved in several international charitable causes, particularly in partnership with UNICEF, including:
* In the wake of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami, IKEA Australia agreed to match dollar for dollar co-workers&#x27; donations and donated all sales of the IKEA Blue Bag to the cause.
* After the 2005 Kashmir earthquake, IKEA gave 500,000 blankets to the relief effort in the region.
* IKEA has provided furniture for over 100 &quot;bridge schools&quot; in Liberia.
* Following the 2008 Sichuan earthquake in China, IKEA Beijing sold an alligator toy for 40 yuan (US$5.83, €3.70) with all income going to the children in the earthquake struck area.
* In 2013, IKEA donated more than $2.6million to UNICEF to help children and families affected by Typhoon Haiyan in the Philippines.

IKEA also supports American Forests to restore forests and reduce pollution.

On 3 March 2022, IKEA announced €20million donation to UNHCR for relief support of Ukrainians who suffer from the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.

IKEA donated €10 million to Doctors Without Borders for its work in Syria in response to the 2023 Turkey–Syria earthquake.

===IKEA Social Initiative===
In September 2005, IKEA Social Initiative was formed to manage the company&#x27;s social involvement on a global level. IKEA Social Initiative is headed by Marianne Barner.

The main partners of IKEA Social Initiative are UNICEF and Save the Children.

On 23 February 2009, at the ECOSOC event in New York, UNICEF announced that IKEA Social Initiative has become the agency&#x27;s largest corporate partner, with total commitments of more than US$180million (£281,079,000).

Examples of involvements:
* The IKEA Social Initiative contributes €1 (£1.73) to UNICEF and Save the Children from each soft toy sold during the holiday seasons, raising a total of €16.7million (£28.91million) so far. In 2013, an IKEA soft toy, Lufsig, created a storm and sold out in Hong Kong and in Southern China because it had been misnamed in Chinese.
* The IKEA Social Initiative provided soft toys to children in Burma after Cyclone Nargis.
* Starting in June 2009, for every Sunnan solar-powered lamp sold in IKEA stores worldwide, IKEA Social Initiative will donate one Sunnan with the help of UNICEF.
* In September 2011, the IKEA Foundation pledged to donate $62million to help Somali refugees in Kenya.
* According to &quot;The Economist&quot;, however, IKEA&#x27;s charitable giving is meager, &quot;barely a rounding error in the foundation&#x27;s assets&quot;.

In 2009, Sweden&#x27;s largest television station, SVT, revealed that IKEA&#x27;s money—the three per cent collection from each store—does not actually go to a charitable foundation in the Netherlands, as IKEA has said. Inter IKEA is owned by a foundation in Liechtenstein, called Interogo, which has amassed $12billion (£18billion), and is controlled by the Kamprad family.

==Marketing==
===Catalogue===
IKEA used to publish an annual catalogue, first published in Swedish in 1951. It is considered to be the main marketing tool of the company, consuming 70% of its annual marketing budget. The catalogue is distributed both in stores and by mail, with most of it being produced by IKEA Communications AB in IKEA&#x27;s hometown of Älmhult, Sweden. At its peak in 2016, 200million copies of the catalogue were distributed in 32 languages to more than 50 markets. In December 2020, IKEA announced that they would cease publication of both the print and digital versions of the catalogue, with the 2021 edition (released in 2020) being the final edition.

===IKEA Family===
In common with some other retailers, IKEA launched a loyalty card called &quot;IKEA Family&quot;. The card is free of charge and can be used to obtain discounts on certain products found in-store. It is available worldwide. In conjunction with the card, IKEA also publishes and sells a printed quarterly magazine titled &quot;IKEA Family Live&quot; which supplements the card and catalogue. The magazine is already printed in thirteen languages and an English edition for the United Kingdom was launched in February 2007. It is expected to have a subscription of over 500,000.

===IKEA Place app===
On 12 September 2017, IKEA announced the augmented reality app, IKEA Place, following by Apple&#x27;s release of its ARkit technology and iOS 11. IKEA Place helps consumers to visualize true to scale IKEA products into real environment.

===Advertising===
In 1994, IKEA ran a commercial in the United States, titled &quot;Dining Room&quot;, widely thought to be the first to feature a homosexual couple; it aired for several weeks before being withdrawn after calls for a boycott and a bomb threat directed at IKEA stores. Other IKEA commercials appeal to the wider LGBTQ community, one featuring a transgender woman.
In 2002, the inaugural television component of the &quot;Unböring&quot; campaign, titled &quot;Lamp&quot;, went on to win several awards, including a Grand Clio, Golds at the London International Awards and the ANDY Awards, and the Grand Prix at the Cannes Lions International Advertising Festival, the most prestigious awards ceremony in the advertising community.

A debate ensued between Fraser Patterson, Chief Executive of Onis, and Andrew McGuinness, partner at Beattie McGuinness Bungay (BMB), the advertising and PR agency that was awarded the £12 million IKEA account. The essence of the debate was that BMB claimed to be unaware of Onis&#x27;s campaign as Onis was not an advertising agency. Onis&#x27;s argument was that its advertising could be seen in prominent landmarks throughout London, having been already accredited, showing concern about the impact IKEA&#x27;s campaign would have on the originality of its own. BMB and IKEA subsequently agreed to provide Onis with a feature page on the IKEA campaign site linking through to Onis&#x27;s website for a period of one year.

In 2008, IKEA paired up with the makers of video game &quot;The Sims 2&quot; to make a stuff pack called &quot;IKEA Home Stuff&quot;, featuring many IKEA products. It was released on 24 June 2008 in North America and 26 June 2008 in Europe. It is the second stuff pack with a major brand, the first being &quot;The Sims 2 H&amp;M Fashion Stuff&quot;.

IKEA took over the title sponsorship of Philadelphia&#x27;s annual Thanksgiving Day parade in 2008, replacing Boscov&#x27;s, which filed for bankruptcy in August 2008.

In November 2008, a subway train decorated in IKEA style was introduced in Novosibirsk, Russia. Four cars were turned into a mobile showroom of the Swedish design. The redesigned train, which features colourful seats and fancy curtains, carried passengers until 6 June 2009.

In March 2010, IKEA developed an event in four important Métro stations in Paris, in which furniture collections are displayed in high-traffic spots, giving potential customers a chance to check out the brand&#x27;s products. The Métro walls were also filled with prints that showcase IKEA interiors.

In September 2017, IKEA launched the &quot;IKEA Human Catalogue&quot; campaign, in which memory champion Yanjaa Wintersoul memorized all 328 pages of the catalogue in minute detail in just a week before its launch. To prove the legitimacy and accuracy of the campaign, live demonstrations were held at press conferences in IKEA stores across Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand as well as a Facebook Live event held at the Facebook Singapore headquarters and talk show demonstrations in the US with Steve Harvey among others. The advertising campaign was hugely successful winning numerous industry awards including the Webby award 2018 for best social media campaign, an Ogilvy award and is currently a contender for the Cannes Lions 2018.

In 2020, IKEA conducted a &quot;Buy Back Friday&quot; campaign with a message to present a new life to old furniture instead of offering customers to buy new items for Black Friday.

In June 2021, IKEA said it had suspended adverts on GB News because of concerns the channel&#x27;s content would go against their aim to be inclusive. In a statement IKEA said: &quot;We have safeguards in place to prevent our advertising from appearing on platforms that are not in line with our humanistic values. We are in the process of investigating how this may have occurred to ensure it won&#x27;t happen again in future, and have suspended paid display advertising in the meantime.&quot;

At the end of August 2023, IKEA launched a 6-second advertisement titled “Ads That Skip You” highlighting the benefits of neat organization. Created by agency Leo Burnett India, the ad illustrates quickly finding items with time to press &quot;skip ad.&quot; The view-through rate exceeded expectations by over 35%, reaching above 90% in all targeted markets. Additionally, there was an overall increase of 32% in clicks compared to the original target. In September 2024, IKEA added a fresh twist to its marketing strategy by transforming everyday windows into out-of-home advertising spaces.

==In popular culture==
In 2018, the company&#x27;s plush toy shark &quot;Blåhaj&quot; was widely used in an internet meme, with social media users posting humorous photos of it in their homes.

IKEA has been referenced a number of times in novelty music. In 2003, American musician Jonathan Coulton released the song &quot;IKEA&quot; on the album &quot;Smoking Monkey&quot;. In 2005, British musician Mitch Benn with the band The Distractions penned the novelty song &quot;Ikea&quot;. In December 2019, comedy metal band Nanowar of Steel released the song &quot;Valhallelujah&quot; which is dedicated to Odin and IKEA. The music video features a longship with the sail adorned with the IKEA logo, and a fictional IKEA catalogue written in Old Norse runes. The lyrics include references to various IKEA products, namely BEDDINGE, KIVIK, VITTSJÖ, KNOPPARP, BESTÅ and SLATTUM.

The 1999 American movie Fight Club references IKEA furniture to show the consumerist culture of modern times.

IKEA stores have been featured in many works of fiction. Some examples include:
* The 1986 Swedish crime comedy film &quot;Jönssonligan dyker upp igen&quot; features a failed robbery of the IKEA store at Kungens Kurva by the eponymous gang.
* The 2009 American film &quot;500 Days of Summer&quot; features the main characters flirting around the showroom of an IKEA store. It was filmed on-location at an IKEA store. One of the tracks from the film&#x27;s score is entitled &quot;Ikea&quot; to reflect the scene.
* &quot;IKEA Heights&quot;, a 2009 comedic melodrama web series, was filmed without permission in an IKEA store.
* The 2014 novel &quot;The Extraordinary Journey of the Fakir Who Got Trapped in an Ikea Wardrobe&quot; by French author Romain Puertolas features a trip to an IKEA store in Paris, France.
* The 2014 horror comedy novel &quot;Horrorstör&quot; is set in a haunted store called ORSK, modelled on IKEA, and the novel is designed to look like the IKEA catalogue.
* The SCP Foundation, an online collaborative horror writing community documenting fictional anomalies, features an entry (numbered SCP-3008) originating in 2017 about an IKEA store which is notably bigger on the inside than its exterior implies, and from which escaping is difficult. The interior of this store is populated by entities dressed in IKEA staff attire, resembling highly deformed, faceless humanoids, which are normally passive during the &quot;day&quot; (when the lights are switched on) but become aggressive during the &quot;night&quot; (when the lights are switched off), informing &#x27;customers&#x27; to &quot;leave the store&quot;, and enforcing this if not listened to.
** A number of survival horror video games have been created based on SCP-3008.
* The 2021 children&#x27;s picture book &quot;Bears Out of The Box&quot; features IKEA&#x27;s Fabler Bjorn doll, who is trying to venture outside the store.

==See also==
* Criticism of IKEA

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q54078" start="0" end="4" title="IKEA" label="IKEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="17" end="30" title="Multinational corporation" label="multinational"/>
<link wikidata="Q778575" start="31" end="43" title="conglomerate (company)" label="conglomerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="55" end="61" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q369594" start="87" end="102" title="household goods" label="household goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q116834119" start="177" end="191" title="not-for-profit" label="not-for-profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="196" end="206" title="for-profit" label="for-profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q54078" start="254" end="270" title="IKEA" label="Inter IKEA Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q54078" start="275" end="286" title="IKEA" label="Ingka Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q54078" start="334" end="357" title="IKEA" label="Inter IKEA Systems B.V."/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="407" end="418" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q216932" start="450" end="464" title="Ingvar Kamprad" label="Ingvar Kamprad"/>
<link wikidata="Q14745" start="504" end="513" title="furniture" label="furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="556" end="563" title="acronym" label="acronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274133" start="683" end="692" title="Agunnaryd" label="Agunnaryd"/>
<link wikidata="Q199957" start="721" end="728" title="Småland" label="Småland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="739" end="745" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888983" start="785" end="794" title="Modern furniture" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q179232" start="833" end="848" title="interior design" label="interior design"/>
<link wikidata="Q16766413" start="930" end="943" title="big-box store" label="big-box store"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092595" start="1111" end="1128" title="ready-to-assemble furniture" label="ready-to-assemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="1308" end="1319" title="fiscal year" label="fiscal year"/>
<link wikidata="Q171947" start="1510" end="1519" title="franchising" label="franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q47508289" start="1525" end="1543" title="Inter IKEA Systems" label="Inter IKEA Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q216932" start="1977" end="1991" title="Ingvar Kamprad" label="Ingvar Kamprad"/>
<link wikidata="Q122872" start="2115" end="2122" title="Älmhult" label="Älmhult"/>
<link wikidata="Q199957" start="2124" end="2131" title="Småland" label="Småland"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="2532" end="2538" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="2550" end="2557" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="2652" end="2663" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="2675" end="2686" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="2707" end="2719" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="2728" end="2733" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="2742" end="2751" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="2753" end="2762" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="2771" end="2777" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="2786" end="2795" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="2804" end="2815" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2896" end="2902" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="2907" end="2912" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="2921" end="2928" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2941" end="2954" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2967" end="2981" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="3008" end="3015" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="3147" end="3160" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="3194" end="3212" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489" start="3295" end="3306" title="Mexico City" label="Mexico City"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="3355" end="3360" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361" start="3365" end="3374" title="Hyderabad" label="Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="3503" end="3514" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435577" start="3522" end="3542" title="SM Mall of Asia" label="Mall of Asia Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q17189" start="3546" end="3556" title="Pasay" label="Pasay City"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="3621" end="3627" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="3648" end="3680" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924338" start="4114" end="4125" title="Gazprombank" label="Gazprombank"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="4149" end="4157" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q192271" start="4476" end="4483" title="Guiyang" label="Guiyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q89655944" start="4555" end="4582" title="COVID-19 pandemic in China" label="COVID-19 lockdowns in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="4617" end="4625" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="4691" end="4696" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="4717" end="4730" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="4756" end="4764" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="4786" end="4792" title="Bogotá" label="Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="4828" end="4832" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q973877" start="5005" end="5021" title="national colours" label="national colours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369310" start="6077" end="6089" title="self-service" label="self-service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092595" start="6142" end="6151" title="flat pack" label="flat pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="7442" end="7475" title="Russia&amp;#x27;s invasion of Ukraine" label="Russia&amp;#x27;s invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="8013" end="8019" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9799" start="8024" end="8031" title="Heerlen" label="Heerlen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="8073" end="8082" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="8215" end="8225" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q659803" start="8245" end="8262" title="Ashton-under-Lyne" label="Ashton-under-Lyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="8290" end="8298" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="8502" end="8513" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="10029" end="10037" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="10042" end="10055" title="computer game" label="computer game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704936" start="11808" end="11821" title="Al Wahda Mall" label="Al Wahda Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519" start="11825" end="11856" title="Abu Dhabi" label="Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198266" start="11942" end="11950" title="360 Mall" label="360 Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="11954" end="11960" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q746573" start="11968" end="11976" title="Harajuku" label="Harajuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="11995" end="12000" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361709" start="12264" end="12271" title="konbini" label="konbini"/>
<link wikidata="Q14874447" start="12359" end="12382" title="Jem, Singapore" label="JEM Mall in Jurong East"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="12384" end="12393" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352972" start="12433" end="12442" title="Robinsons &amp;amp; Co." label="Robinsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125978" start="12673" end="12688" title="Bali" label="Bali, Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4217013" start="12722" end="12727" title="Giant (hypermarket)" label="Giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q16893474" start="12896" end="12913" title="Livat Hammersmith" label="Livat Hammersmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="12915" end="12921" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195759" start="12955" end="12973" title="Mall Taman Anggrek" label="Mall Taman Anggrek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630" start="12975" end="12982" title="Jakarta" label="Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092595" start="13160" end="13185" title="Ready-to-assemble furniture" label="assembled by the customer"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="13565" end="13585" title="sustainability" label="sustainable approach"/>
<link wikidata="Q89640" start="13591" end="13612" title="Consumerism" label="mass consumer culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000091" start="13758" end="13778" title="environmental design" label="environmental design"/>
<link wikidata="Q386191" start="13800" end="13829" title="explosion of human population" label="explosion of human population"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970087" start="13911" end="13929" title="economies of scale" label="economies of scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q642231" start="14063" end="14088" title="medium-density fibreboard" label="medium-density fibreboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q28125472" start="14193" end="14198" title="Poäng" label="Poäng"/>
<link wikidata="Q862980" start="14213" end="14218" title="Billy (bookcase)" label="Billy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421117" start="14236" end="14243" title="Klippan (sofa)" label="Klippan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="14574" end="14590" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="14605" end="14616" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132971" start="14765" end="14773" title="dyslexic" label="dyslexic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956565" start="15309" end="15328" title="Brand blunder" label="offensive to others"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588869" start="15348" end="15367" title="Language barrier" label="lost-in-translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q347690" start="16109" end="16118" title="workbench" label="workbench"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064762" start="16480" end="16492" title="toilet brush" label="toilet brush"/>
<link wikidata="Q891521" start="16523" end="16529" title="Bolmen" label="Bolmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q216530" start="16536" end="16547" title="trash can" label="rubbish bin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434129" start="16585" end="16590" title="Tofte, Norway" label="Tofte"/>
<link wikidata="Q131138" start="16637" end="16644" title="Joke" label="jocular"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="16905" end="16915" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q254183" start="16996" end="17013" title="augmented reality" label="augmented reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="17020" end="17026" title="iPhone" label="iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q18212263" start="17234" end="17245" title="Philips Hue" label="Philips Hue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357469" start="17301" end="17312" title="Qi (standard)" label="Qi charging"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492619" start="17413" end="17418" title="Sonos" label="Sonos"/>
<link wikidata="Q26884850" start="17419" end="17432" title="smart speaker" label="smart speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537811" start="18530" end="18537" title="Skanska" label="Skanska"/>
<link wikidata="Q659803" start="18633" end="18650" title="Ashton-under-Lyne" label="Ashton-under-Lyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="18652" end="18657" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q216372" start="18659" end="18668" title="Gateshead" label="Gateshead"/>
<link wikidata="Q215733" start="18670" end="18680" title="Warrington" label="Warrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="18694" end="18703" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897785" start="18992" end="19011" title="photovoltaic system" label="photovoltaic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q31887" start="19049" end="19059" title="CIGS panel" label="CIGS panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15941099" start="19081" end="19088" title="Solibro" label="Solibro"/>
<link wikidata="Q15941099" start="19139" end="19146" title="Hanergy" label="Hanergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15941099" start="19311" end="19318" title="Hanergy" label="Hanergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556910" start="19358" end="19370" title="Solarcentury" label="Solarcentury"/>
<link wikidata="Q945934" start="20768" end="20773" title="gravy" label="gravy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065990" start="20775" end="20790" title="lingonberry jam" label="lingonberry jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487092" start="20838" end="20853" title="Smörgåskaviar" label="fish roe spread"/>
<link wikidata="Q191498" start="21391" end="21397" title="kosher" label="kosher"/>
<link wikidata="Q89840562" start="21858" end="21875" title="Avery Yale Kamila" label="Avery Yale Kamila"/>
<link wikidata="Q632832" start="21997" end="22011" title="Vegetarian hot dog" label="vegan hot dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q55610449" start="22066" end="22078" title="Eater London" label="Eater London"/>
<link wikidata="Q11875349" start="22189" end="22198" title="play area" label="play area"/>
<link wikidata="Q199957" start="22287" end="22294" title="Småland" label="Småland"/>
<link wikidata="Q832436" start="22484" end="22489" title="pager" label="pager"/>
<link wikidata="Q61445" start="22802" end="22813" title="Navi Mumbai" label="Navi Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q624897" start="23278" end="23305" title="MEGA Family Shopping Centre" label="MEGA Family Shopping Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924338" start="23362" end="23373" title="Gazprombank" label="Gazprombank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058891" start="23413" end="23441" title="Mobile virtual network operator" label="virtual mobile phone network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971572" start="23449" end="23467" title="IKEA Family Mobile" label="IKEA Family Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q327634" start="23482" end="23490" title="T-Mobile International AG" label="T-Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858140" start="23522" end="23535" title="Prepay mobile phone" label="pay-as-you-go"/>
<link wikidata="Q733958" start="23685" end="23688" title="TCL Corporation" label="TCL"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="24234" end="24256" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q63615028" start="24745" end="24757" title="Pirelli Tire Building" label="Hotel Marcel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4106938" start="24891" end="24910" title="belt-driven bicycle" label="belt-driven bicycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687267" start="24998" end="25008" title="TaskRabbit" label="TaskRabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q191615" start="25157" end="25166" title="Pizza Hut" label="Pizza Hut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199988" start="25275" end="25286" title="pizza saver" label="pizza saver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097650" start="25329" end="25338" title="pizza box" label="pizza box"/>
<link wikidata="Q11541377" start="25604" end="25617" title="concept store" label="concept store"/>
<link wikidata="Q746573" start="25625" end="25633" title="Harajuku" label="Harajuku"/>
<link wikidata="Q11460" start="25693" end="25705" title="Apparel" label="apparel line"/>
<link wikidata="Q238508" start="25836" end="25844" title="Gurgaon" label="Gurugram"/>
<link wikidata="Q278204" start="25849" end="25854" title="Noida" label="Noida"/>
<link wikidata="Q123417414" start="26020" end="26029" title="Sage Paul" label="Sage Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q116834119" start="26322" end="26336" title="not-for-profit" label="not-for-profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="26341" end="26351" title="for-profit" label="for-profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q47508300" start="26451" end="26464" title="INGKA Holding" label="INGKA Holding"/>
<link wikidata="Q47508289" start="26675" end="26693" title="Inter IKEA Systems" label="Inter IKEA Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q47508289" start="26735" end="26753" title="Inter IKEA Holding" label="Inter IKEA Holding"/>
<link wikidata="Q728265" start="29458" end="29467" title="royalties" label="royalties"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479770" start="29535" end="29548" title="franchise fee" label="franchise fee"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="29914" end="29927" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="30412" end="30423" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="30425" end="30435" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="30440" end="30447" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355132" start="30450" end="30460" title="Public Eye (organization)" label="Public Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q751935" start="30760" end="30772" title="The Greens–European Free Alliance" label="Greens / EFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="30786" end="30805" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q356919" start="31002" end="31018" title="Pierre Moscovici" label="Pierre Moscovici"/>
<link wikidata="Q270820" start="31108" end="31126" title="Margrethe Vestager" label="Margrethe Vestager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780232" start="31132" end="31169" title="European Commissioner for Competition" label="European Commissioner for Competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q898776" start="31954" end="31968" title="particle board" label="particle board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636399" start="31970" end="31979" title="Hultsfred" label="Hultsfred"/>
<link wikidata="Q278660" start="32213" end="32240" title="warehouse management system" label="warehouse management system"/>
<link wikidata="Q25111980" start="32346" end="32376" title="Omnichannel order fulfillment" label="omni-channel fulfillment model"/>
<link wikidata="Q80504" start="32561" end="32578" title="Nicolae Ceaușescu" label="Nicolae Ceaușescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q208980" start="32614" end="32624" title="Securitate" label="Securitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="32807" end="32814" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="33527" end="33539" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q217105" start="33600" end="33618" title="political prisoner" label="political prisoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q489097" start="33656" end="33673" title="Ernst &amp;amp; Young" label="Ernst &amp;amp; Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="34174" end="34187" title="unfree labour" label="forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456341" start="34363" end="34376" title="union busting" label="union busting"/>
<link wikidata="Q112968547" start="34434" end="34458" title="captive audience meeting" label="captive audience meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q372989" start="34601" end="34615" title="Fortune (magazine)" label="Fortune&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029243" start="34714" end="34745" title="Canada&amp;#x27;s Top 100 Employers" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s Top 100 Employers"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="34898" end="34910" title="formaldehyde" label="formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813024" start="35093" end="35111" title="Karl-Henrik Robèrt" label="Karl-Henrik Robèrt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639079" start="35124" end="35140" title="the Natural Step" label="the Natural Step"/>
<link wikidata="Q185451" start="35239" end="35257" title="Strategy" label="strategic approach"/>
<link wikidata="Q146368" start="35734" end="35751" title="polyvinylchloride" label="polyvinylchloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="35937" end="35949" title="formaldehyde" label="formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q11236878" start="36013" end="36020" title="lacquer" label="lacquer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233511" start="36074" end="36087" title="Post-consumer waste" label="post-consumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202090" start="36088" end="36101" title="plastic pollution" label="plastic waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="36371" end="36379" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091" start="36450" end="36457" title="cadmium" label="cadmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q211171" start="36465" end="36468" title="Polychlorinated biphenyl" label="PCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q423922" start="36470" end="36473" title="Pentachlorophenol" label="PCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984395" start="36479" end="36491" title="Azo dye" label="Azo pigments"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="36565" end="36585" title="Biodiversity" label="biological diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q132580" start="36600" end="36620" title="Recycling" label="recyclable materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q920019" start="37351" end="37376" title="British Retail Consortium" label="British Retail Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649586" start="37500" end="37529" title="Sustainable Development Goals" label="Sustainable Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305872" start="38300" end="38313" title="UTZ Certified" label="UTZ Certified"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167" start="38657" end="38661" title="Lund" label="Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q58803" start="38765" end="38777" title="solar cells" label="solar panels"/>
<link wikidata="Q103732" start="39040" end="39054" title="Dalarna County" label="Dalarna County"/>
<link wikidata="Q27051" start="39291" end="39305" title="Cameron County, Texas" label="Cameron County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631608" start="39337" end="39360" title="List of offshore wind farms in the Baltic Sea" label="42 MW coastal wind farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q748367" start="39783" end="39786" title="Forest Stewardship Council" label="FSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q597393" start="39880" end="39895" title="illegal logging" label="illegal logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q748367" start="40275" end="40301" title="Forest Stewardship Council" label="Forest Stewardship Council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40654" end="40671" title="Criticism of IKEA#Wood sourcing practices" label="Criticism of IKEA"/>
<link wikidata="Q434188" start="40884" end="40898" title="Altamaha River" label="Altamaha River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="40926" end="40933" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727402" start="40939" end="40960" title="The Conservation Fund" label="The Conservation Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q505996" start="41385" end="41392" title="pallets" label="pallets"/>
<link wikidata="Q421281" start="41585" end="41594" title="copolymer" label="copolymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q498439" start="42250" end="42261" title="plastic bag" label="plastic bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q987182" start="42288" end="42301" title="Reusable shopping bag" label="reusable bags"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310202" start="42449" end="42471" title="dual flush toilet" label="dual-function flushers"/>
<link wikidata="Q207571" start="42501" end="42526" title="compact fluorescent lamps" label="compact fluorescent lamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q20165" start="42889" end="42895" title="Nissan" label="Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333901" start="42900" end="42910" title="Ecotricity" label="Ecotricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553201" start="43011" end="43024" title="LED lightbulb" label="LED lightbulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q47616" start="43115" end="43138" title="incandescent light bulb" label="incandescent light bulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598357" start="43172" end="43188" title="Stichting INGKA Foundation" label="INGKA Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q655286" start="43367" end="43383" title="Gates Foundation" label="Gates Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q740308" start="43608" end="43614" title="UNICEF" label="UNICEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="43648" end="43688" title="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami" label="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q210137" start="43835" end="43858" title="2005 Kashmir earthquake" label="2005 Kashmir earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q152033" start="44021" end="44044" title="2008 Sichuan earthquake" label="2008 Sichuan earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q39099" start="44097" end="44101" title="renminbi" label="yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15136651" start="44286" end="44300" title="Typhoon Haiyan" label="Typhoon Haiyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743833" start="44341" end="44357" title="American Forests" label="American Forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q132551" start="44455" end="44460" title="UNHCR" label="UNHCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="44514" end="44546" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49330" start="44577" end="44600" title="Médecins Sans Frontières" label="Doctors Without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q116691303" start="44642" end="44670" title="2023 Turkey–Syria earthquake" label="2023 Turkey–Syria earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q215934" start="44935" end="44952" title="Save the Children" label="Save the Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q170075" start="44983" end="44989" title="ECOSOC" label="ECOSOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q215934" start="45269" end="45286" title="Save the Children" label="Save the Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q15297359" start="45422" end="45428" title="Lufsig" label="Lufsig"/>
<link wikidata="Q152314" start="45610" end="45624" title="Cyclone Nargis" label="Cyclone Nargis"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="45914" end="45927" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q215363" start="46106" end="46109" title="Sveriges Television" label="SVT"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="46314" end="46327" title="Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q254799" start="46789" end="46796" title="Älmhult Municipality" label="Älmhult"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426546" start="47182" end="47194" title="loyalty card" label="loyalty card"/>
<link wikidata="Q30136207" start="47866" end="47872" title="iOS 11" label="iOS 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q114240649" start="48050" end="48061" title="Dining Room (advertisement)" label="Dining Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="48294" end="48299" title="LGBTQ" label="LGBTQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="48327" end="48338" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q6482341" start="48441" end="48445" title="Lamp (advertisement)" label="Lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101743" start="48496" end="48506" title="Clio Awards" label="Grand Clio"/>
<link wikidata="Q621422" start="48596" end="48643" title="Cannes Lions International Advertising Festival" label="Cannes Lions International Advertising Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7839055" start="48814" end="48839" title="Beattie McGuinness Bungay" label="Beattie McGuinness Bungay"/>
<link wikidata="Q182771" start="49499" end="49509" title="The Sims 2" label="The Sims 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q182771" start="49526" end="49536" title="The Sims 2 Stuff packs" label="stuff pack"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49750" end="49782" title="The Sims 2 Stuff packs#H&amp;amp;M Fashion Stuff" label="The Sims 2 H&amp;amp;M Fashion Stuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="49831" end="49843" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642547" start="49858" end="49881" title="6abc IKEA Thanksgiving Day Parade" label="Thanksgiving Day parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947190" start="49901" end="49914" title="Boscov&amp;#x27;s" label="Boscov&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q883" start="50035" end="50046" title="Novosibirsk" label="Novosibirsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q50716" start="50293" end="50298" title="Paris Métro" label="Métro"/>
<link wikidata="Q44870931" start="50643" end="50660" title="Yanjaa" label="Yanjaa Wintersoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q266134" start="50923" end="50936" title="Facebook live" label="Facebook Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347009" start="51031" end="51043" title="Steve Harvey" label="Steve Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411891" start="51152" end="51163" title="Webby Award" label="Webby award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937850" start="51204" end="51210" title="Ogilvy &amp;amp; Mather" label="Ogilvy"/>
<link wikidata="Q621422" start="51254" end="51266" title="Cannes Lions International Festival of Creativity" label="Cannes Lions"/>
<link wikidata="Q100300992" start="51509" end="51516" title="GB News" label="GB News"/>
<link wikidata="Q107133815" start="52622" end="52628" title="Blåhaj" label="Blåhaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927074" start="52657" end="52670" title="internet meme" label="internet meme"/>
<link wikidata="Q611179" start="52831" end="52847" title="Jonathan Coulton" label="Jonathan Coulton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52896" end="52922" title="Jonathan Coulton#Discography" label="&amp;quot;Smoking Monkey&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6880802" start="52950" end="52960" title="Mitch Benn" label="Mitch Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730380" start="52975" end="52991" title="The Distractions" label="The Distractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151663" start="53003" end="53015" title="novelty song" label="novelty song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391336" start="53052" end="53064" title="comedy metal" label="comedy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617758" start="53070" end="53086" title="Nanowar of Steel" label="Nanowar of Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="53153" end="53157" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q897611" start="53195" end="53203" title="longship" label="longship"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="53288" end="53297" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q82996" start="53298" end="53303" title="runes" label="runes"/>
<link wikidata="Q190050" start="53448" end="53458" title="Fight Club" label="Fight Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q959790" start="53634" end="53651" title="crime comedy film" label="crime comedy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q6321276" start="53658" end="53685" title="Jönssonligan dyker upp igen" label="Jönssonligan dyker upp igen"/>
<link wikidata="Q925544" start="53739" end="53752" title="Kungens Kurva" label="Kungens Kurva"/>
<link wikidata="Q154935" start="53807" end="53825" title="500 Days of Summer" label="500 Days of Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995166" start="54056" end="54068" title="IKEA Heights" label="IKEA Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q15055012" start="54117" end="54142" title="Guerrilla filmmaking" label="filmed without permission"/>
<link wikidata="Q15407093" start="54282" end="54298" title="Romain Puertolas" label="Romain Puertolas"/>
<link wikidata="Q24806701" start="54387" end="54397" title="Horrorstör" label="Horrorstör"/>
<link wikidata="Q17439649" start="54526" end="54540" title="SCP Foundation" label="SCP Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q333967" start="55228" end="55243" title="survival horror" label="survival horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q110233108" start="55466" end="55483" title="Criticism of IKEA" label="Criticism of IKEA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14752" wikidata="Q877" url="?curid=14752" title="Iridium">
<text>Iridium is a chemical element; it has symbol Ir and atomic number 77. A very hard, brittle, silvery-white transition metal of the platinum group, it is considered the second-densest naturally occurring metal (after osmium) with a density of as defined by experimental X-ray crystallography. 191Ir and 193Ir are the only two naturally occurring isotopes of iridium, as well as the only stable isotopes; the latter is the more abundant. It is one of the most corrosion-resistant metals, even at temperatures as high as .

Iridium was discovered in 1803 in the acid-insoluble residues of platinum ores by the English chemist Smithson Tennant. The name &quot;iridium&quot;, derived from the Greek word &quot;iris&quot; (rainbow), refers to the various colors of its compounds. Iridium is one of the rarest elements in Earth&#x27;s crust, with an estimated annual production of only in 2023.

The dominant uses of iridium are the metal itself and its alloys, as in high-performance spark plugs, crucibles for recrystallization of semiconductors at high temperatures, and electrodes for the production of chlorine in the chloralkali process. Important compounds of iridium are chlorides and iodides in industrial catalysis. Iridium is a component of some OLEDs.

Iridium is found in meteorites in much higher abundance than in the Earth&#x27;s crust. For this reason, the unusually high abundance of iridium in the clay layer at the Cretaceous–Paleogene boundary gave rise to the Alvarez hypothesis that the impact of a massive extraterrestrial object caused the extinction of non-avian dinosaurs and many other species 66 million years ago, now known to be produced by the impact that formed the Chicxulub crater. Similarly, an iridium anomaly in core samples from the Pacific Ocean suggested the Eltanin impact of about 2.5 million years ago.

== Characteristics ==

=== Physical properties ===

A member of the platinum group metals, iridium is white, resembling platinum, but with a slight yellowish cast. Because of its hardness, brittleness, and very high melting point, solid iridium is difficult to machine, form, or work; thus powder metallurgy is commonly employed instead. It is the only metal to maintain good mechanical properties in air at temperatures above . It has the 10th highest boiling point among all elements and becomes a superconductor at temperatures below .

Iridium&#x27;s modulus of elasticity is the second-highest among the metals, being surpassed only by osmium. This, together with a high shear modulus and a very low figure for Poisson&#x27;s ratio (the relationship of longitudinal to lateral strain), indicate the high degree of stiffness and resistance to deformation that have rendered its fabrication into useful components a matter of great difficulty. Despite these limitations and iridium&#x27;s high cost, a number of applications have developed where mechanical strength is an essential factor in some of the extremely severe conditions encountered in modern technology.

The measured density of iridium is only slightly lower (by about 0.12%) than that of osmium, the densest metal known. Some ambiguity occurred regarding which of the two elements was denser, due to the small size of the difference in density and difficulties in measuring it accurately, but, with increased accuracy in factors used for calculating density, X-ray crystallographic data yielded densities of for iridium and for osmium.

Iridium is extremely brittle, to the point of being hard to weld because the heat-affected zone cracks, but it can be made more ductile by addition of small quantities of titanium and zirconium (0.2% of each apparently works well).

The Vickers hardness of pure platinum is 56 HV, whereas platinum with 50% of iridium can reach over 500 HV.

=== Chemical properties ===
Iridium is the most corrosion-resistant metal known. It is not attacked by acids, including aqua regia, but it can be dissolved in concentrated hydrochloric acid in the presence of sodium perchlorate. In the presence of oxygen, it reacts with cyanide salts. Traditional oxidants also react, including the halogens and oxygen at higher temperatures. Iridium also reacts directly with sulfur at atmospheric pressure to yield iridium disulfide.

=== Isotopes ===

Iridium has two naturally occurring stable isotopes, 191Ir and 193Ir, with natural abundances of 37.3% and 62.7%, respectively. At least 37 radioisotopes have also been synthesized, ranging in mass number from 164 to 202. 192Ir, which falls between the two stable isotopes, is the most stable radioisotope, with a half-life of 73.827 days, and finds application in brachytherapy and in industrial radiography, particularly for nondestructive testing of welds in steel in the oil and gas industries; iridium-192 sources have been involved in a number of radiological accidents. Three other isotopes have half-lives of at least a day—188Ir, 189Ir, and 190Ir. Isotopes with masses below 191 decay by some combination of β+ decay, α decay, and (rare) proton emission, with the exception of 189Ir, which decays by electron capture. Synthetic isotopes heavier than 191 decay by β− decay, although 192Ir also has a minor electron capture decay path. All known isotopes of iridium were discovered between 1934 and 2008, with the most recent discoveries being 200–202Ir.

At least 32 metastable isomers have been characterized, ranging in mass number from 164 to 197. The most stable of these is 192m2Ir, which decays by isomeric transition with a half-life of 241 years, making it more stable than any of iridium&#x27;s synthetic isotopes in their ground states. The least stable isomer is 190m3Ir with a half-life of only 2 μs. The isotope 191Ir was the first one of any element to be shown to present a Mössbauer effect. This renders it useful for Mössbauer spectroscopy for research in physics, chemistry, biochemistry, metallurgy, and mineralogy.

== Chemistry ==

=== Oxidation states ===
Iridium forms compounds in oxidation states between −3 and +9, but the most common oxidation states are +1, +2, +3, and +4. Well-characterized compounds containing iridium in the +6 oxidation state include  and the oxides and . iridium(VIII) oxide () was generated under matrix isolation conditions at 6 K in argon. The highest oxidation state (+9), which is also the highest recorded for &quot;any&quot; element, is found in gaseous .

=== Binary compounds ===
Iridium does not form binary hydrides. Only one binary oxide is well-characterized: iridium dioxide, . It is a blue black solid that adopts the fluorite structure. A sesquioxide, , has been described as a blue-black powder, which is oxidized to by . The corresponding disulfides, diselenides, sesquisulfides, and sesquiselenides are known, as well as .

Binary trihalides, , are known for all of the halogens. For oxidation states +4 and above, only the tetrafluoride, pentafluoride and hexafluoride are known. Iridium hexafluoride, , is a volatile yellow solid, composed of octahedral molecules. It decomposes in water and is reduced to . Iridium pentafluoride is also a strong oxidant, but it is a tetramer, , formed by four corner-sharing octahedra.

=== Complexes ===

Iridium has extensive coordination chemistry.

Iridium in its complexes is always low-spin. Ir(III) and Ir(IV) generally form octahedral complexes. Polyhydride complexes are known for the +5 and +3 oxidation states. One example is (iPr = isopropyl). The ternary hydride is believed to contain both the and the 18-electron anion.

Iridium also forms oxyanions with oxidation states +4 and +5. and can be prepared from the reaction of potassium oxide or potassium superoxide with iridium at high temperatures. Such solids are not soluble in conventional solvents.

Just like many elements, iridium forms important chloride complexes. Hexachloroiridic (IV) acid, , and its ammonium salt are common iridium compounds from both industrial and preparative perspectives. They are intermediates in the purification of iridium and used as precursors for most other iridium compounds, as well as in the preparation of anode coatings. The ion has an intense dark brown color, and can be readily reduced to the lighter-colored and vice versa. Iridium trichloride, , which can be obtained in anhydrous form from direct oxidation of iridium powder by chlorine at 650 °C, or in hydrated form by dissolving in hydrochloric acid, is often used as a starting material for the synthesis of other Ir(III) compounds. Another compound used as a starting material is potassium hexachloroiridate(III), .

=== Organoiridium chemistry ===

Organoiridium compounds contain iridium–carbon bonds. Early studies identified the very stable tetrairidium dodecacarbonyl, . In this compound, each of the iridium atoms is bonded to the other three, forming a tetrahedral cluster. The discovery of Vaska&#x27;s complex () opened the door for oxidative addition reactions, a process fundamental to useful reactions. For example, Crabtree&#x27;s catalyst, a homogeneous catalyst for hydrogenation reactions.
Iridium complexes played a pivotal role in the development of Carbon–hydrogen bond activation (C–H activation), which promises to allow functionalization of hydrocarbons, which are traditionally regarded as unreactive.

== History ==
=== Platinum group ===
The discovery of iridium is intertwined with that of platinum and the other metals of the platinum group. The first European reference to platinum appears in 1557 in the writings of the Italian humanist Julius Caesar Scaliger as a description of an unknown noble metal found between Darién and Mexico, &quot;which no fire nor any Spanish artifice has yet been able to liquefy&quot;. From their first encounters with platinum, the Spanish generally saw the metal as a kind of impurity in gold, and it was treated as such. It was often simply thrown away, and there was an official decree forbidding the adulteration of gold with platinum impurities.

In 1735, Antonio de Ulloa and Jorge Juan y Santacilia saw Native Americans mining platinum while the Spaniards were travelling through Colombia and Peru for eight years. Ulloa and Juan found mines with the whitish metal nuggets and took them home to Spain. Ulloa returned to Spain and established the first mineralogy lab in Spain and was the first to systematically study platinum, which was in 1748. His historical account of the expedition included a description of platinum as being neither separable nor calcinable. Ulloa also anticipated the discovery of platinum mines. After publishing the report in 1748, Ulloa did not continue to investigate the new metal. In 1758, he was sent to superintend mercury mining operations in Huancavelica.

In 1741, Charles Wood, a British metallurgist, found various samples of Colombian platinum in Jamaica, which he sent to William Brownrigg for further investigation.

In 1750, after studying the platinum sent to him by Wood, Brownrigg presented a detailed account of the metal to the Royal Society, stating that he had seen no mention of it in any previous accounts of known minerals. Brownrigg also made note of platinum&#x27;s extremely high melting point and refractory metal-like behaviour toward borax. Other chemists across Europe soon began studying platinum, including Andreas Sigismund Marggraf, Torbern Bergman, Jöns Jakob Berzelius, William Lewis, and Pierre Macquer. In 1752, Henrik Scheffer published a detailed scientific description of the metal, which he referred to as &quot;white gold&quot;, including an account of how he succeeded in fusing platinum ore with the aid of arsenic. Scheffer described platinum as being less pliable than gold, but with similar resistance to corrosion.

=== Discovery ===
Chemists who studied platinum dissolved it in aqua regia (a mixture of hydrochloric and nitric acids) to create soluble salts. They always observed a small amount of a dark, insoluble residue. Joseph Louis Proust thought that the residue was graphite. The French chemists Victor Collet-Descotils, Antoine François, comte de Fourcroy, and Louis Nicolas Vauquelin also observed the black residue in 1803, but did not obtain enough for further experiments.

In 1803 British scientist Smithson Tennant (1761–1815) analyzed the insoluble residue and concluded that it must contain a new metal. Vauquelin treated the powder alternately with alkali and acids and obtained a volatile new oxide, which he believed to be of this new metal—which he named &quot;ptene&quot;, from the Greek word &quot;ptēnós&quot;, &quot;winged&quot;. Tennant, who had the advantage of a much greater amount of residue, continued his research and identified the two previously undiscovered elements in the black residue, iridium and osmium. He obtained dark red crystals (probably of ]·&quot;n&quot;) by a sequence of reactions with sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid. He named iridium after Iris (), the Greek winged goddess of the rainbow and the messenger of the Olympian gods, because many of the salts he obtained were strongly colored. Discovery of the new elements was documented in a letter to the Royal Society on June 21, 1804.

=== Metalworking and applications ===
British scientist John George Children was the first to melt a sample of iridium in 1813 with the aid of &quot;the greatest galvanic battery that has ever been constructed&quot; (at that time). The first to obtain high-purity iridium was Robert Hare in 1842. He found it had a density of around and noted the metal is nearly immalleable and very hard. The first melting in appreciable quantity was done by Henri Sainte-Claire Deville and Jules Henri Debray in 1860. They required burning more than of pure and gas for each of iridium.

These extreme difficulties in melting the metal limited the possibilities for handling iridium. John Isaac Hawkins was looking to obtain a fine and hard point for fountain pen nibs, and in 1834 managed to create an iridium-pointed gold pen. In 1880, John Holland and William Lofland Dudley were able to melt iridium by adding phosphorus and patented the process in the United States; British company Johnson Matthey later stated they had been using a similar process since 1837 and had already presented fused iridium at a number of World Fairs. The first use of an alloy of iridium with ruthenium in thermocouples was made by Otto Feussner in 1933. These allowed for the measurement of high temperatures in air up to .

In Munich, Germany in 1957 Rudolf Mössbauer, in what has been called one of the &quot;landmark experiments in twentieth-century physics&quot;, discovered the resonant and recoil-free emission and absorption of gamma rays by atoms in a solid metal sample containing only 191Ir. This phenomenon, known as the Mössbauer effect resulted in the awarding of the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1961, at the age 32, just three years after he published his discovery.

== Occurrence ==

Along with many elements having atomic weights higher than that of iron, iridium is only naturally formed by the r-process (rapid neutron capture) in neutron star mergers and possibly rare types of supernovae.

Iridium is one of the nine least abundant stable elements in Earth&#x27;s crust, having an average mass fraction of 0.001 ppm in crustal rock; gold is 4 times more abundant, platinum is 10 times more abundant, silver and mercury are 80 times more abundant. Osmium, tellurium, ruthenium, rhodium and rhenium are about as abundant as iridium. In contrast to its low abundance in crustal rock, iridium is relatively common in meteorites, with concentrations of 0.5 ppm or more. The overall concentration of iridium on Earth is thought to be much higher than what is observed in crustal rocks, but because of the density and siderophilic (&quot;iron-loving&quot;) character of iridium, it descended below the crust and into Earth&#x27;s core when the planet was still molten.
Iridium is found in nature as an uncombined element or in natural alloys, especially the iridium–osmium alloys osmiridium (osmium-rich) and iridosmium (iridium-rich). In nickel and copper deposits, the platinum group metals occur as sulfides, tellurides, antimonides, and arsenides. In all of these compounds, platinum can be exchanged with a small amount of iridium or osmium. As with all of the platinum group metals, iridium can be found naturally in alloys with raw nickel or raw copper. A number of iridium-dominant minerals, with iridium as the species-forming element, are known. They are exceedingly rare and often represent the iridium analogues of the above-given ones. The examples are irarsite and cuproiridsite, to mention some. Within Earth&#x27;s crust, iridium is found at highest concentrations in three types of geologic structure: igneous deposits (crustal intrusions from below), impact craters, and deposits reworked from one of the former structures. The largest known primary reserves are in the Bushveld igneous complex in South Africa, (near the largest known impact structure, the Vredefort impact structure) though the large copper–nickel deposits near Norilsk in Russia, and the Sudbury Basin (also an impact crater) in Canada are also significant sources of iridium. Smaller reserves are found in the United States. Iridium is also found in secondary deposits, combined with platinum and other platinum group metals in alluvial deposits. The alluvial deposits used by pre-Columbian people in the Chocó Department of Colombia are still a source for platinum-group metals. As of 2003, world reserves have not been estimated.

=== Marine oceanography ===
Iridium is found within marine organisms, sediments, and the water column. The abundance of iridium in seawater and organisms is relatively low, as it does not readily form chloride complexes. The abundance in organisms is about 20 parts per trillion, or about five orders of magnitude less than in sedimentary rocks at the Cretaceous–Paleogene (K–T) boundary. The concentration of iridium in seawater and marine sediment is sensitive to marine oxygenation, seawater temperature, and various geological and biological processes.

Iridium in sediments can come from cosmic dust, volcanoes, precipitation from seawater, microbial processes, or hydrothermal vents, and its abundance can be strongly indicative of the source. It tends to associate with other ferrous metals in manganese nodules. Iridium is one of the characteristic elements of extraterrestrial rocks, and, along with osmium, can be used as a tracer element for meteoritic material in sediment. For example, core samples from the Pacific Ocean with elevated iridium levels suggested the Eltanin impact of about 2.5 million years ago.

Some of the mass extinctions, such as the Cretaceous extinction, can be identified by anomalously high concentrations of iridium in sediment, and these can be linked to major asteroid impacts.

=== Cretaceous–Paleogene boundary presence ===


The Cretaceous–Paleogene boundary of 66 million years ago, marking the temporal border between the Cretaceous and Paleogene periods of geological time, was identified by a thin stratum of iridium-rich clay. A team led by Luis Alvarez proposed in 1980 an extraterrestrial origin for this iridium, attributing it to an asteroid or comet impact. Their theory, known as the Alvarez hypothesis, is now widely accepted to explain the extinction of the non-avian dinosaurs. A large buried impact crater structure with an estimated age of about 66 million years was later identified under what is now the Yucatán Peninsula (the Chicxulub crater). Dewey M. McLean and others argue that the iridium may have been of volcanic origin instead, because Earth&#x27;s core is rich in iridium, and active volcanoes such as Piton de la Fournaise, in the island of Réunion, are still releasing iridium.

== Production ==

Worldwide production of iridium was about in 2018. The price is high and varying (see table). Illustrative factors that affect the price include oversupply of Ir crucibles
and changes in LED technology.

Platinum metals occur together as dilute ores. Iridium is one of the rarer platinum metals: for every 190 tonnes of platinum obtained from ores, only 7.5 tonnes of iridium is isolated. To separate the metals, they must first be brought into solution. Two methods for rendering Ir-containing ores soluble are (i) fusion of the solid with sodium peroxide followed by extraction of the resulting glass in aqua regia and (ii) extraction of the solid with a mixture of chlorine with hydrochloric acid. From soluble extracts, iridium is separated by precipitating solid ammonium hexachloroiridate () or by extracting with organic amines. The first method is similar to the procedure Tennant and Wollaston used for their original separation. The second method can be planned as continuous liquid–liquid extraction and is therefore more suitable for industrial scale production. In either case, the product, an iridium chloride salt, is reduced with hydrogen, yielding the metal as a powder or &quot;sponge&quot;, which is amenable to powder metallurgy techniques. Iridium is also obtained commercially as a by-product from nickel and copper mining and processing. During electrorefining of copper and nickel, noble metals such as silver, gold and the platinum group metals as well as selenium and tellurium settle to the bottom of the cell as &quot;anode mud&quot;, which forms the starting point for their extraction.


== Applications ==
Due to iridium&#x27;s resistance to corrosion it has industrial applications. The main areas of use are electrodes for producing chlorine and other corrosive products, OLEDs, crucibles, catalysts (e.g. acetic acid), and ignition tips for spark plugs.

=== Metal and alloys ===
Resistance to heat and corrosion are the bases for several uses of iridium and its alloys.

Owing to its high melting point, hardness, and corrosion resistance, iridium is used to make crucibles. Such crucibles are used in the Czochralski process to produce oxide single-crystals (such as sapphires) for use in computer memory devices and in solid state lasers. The crystals, such as gadolinium gallium garnet and yttrium gallium garnet, are grown by melting pre-sintered charges of mixed oxides under oxidizing conditions at temperatures up to .

Certain long-life aircraft engine parts are made of an iridium alloy, and an iridium–titanium alloy is used for deep-water pipes because of its corrosion resistance. Iridium is used for multi-pored spinnerets, through which a plastic polymer melt is extruded to form fibers, such as rayon. Osmium–iridium is used for compass bearings and for balances.

Because of their resistance to arc erosion, iridium alloys are used by some manufacturers for the centre electrodes of spark plugs, and iridium-based spark plugs are particularly used in aviation.

===Catalysis===
Iridium compounds are used as catalysts in the Cativa process for carbonylation of methanol to produce acetic acid.

Iridium complexes are often active for asymmetric hydrogenation both by traditional hydrogenation. and transfer hydrogenation. This property is the basis of the industrial route to the chiral herbicide (S)-metolachlor. As practiced by Syngenta on the scale of 10,000 tons/year, the complex [Ir(COD)Cl]2 in the presence of Josiphos ligands.

=== Medical imaging ===
The radioisotope iridium-192 is one of the two most important sources of energy for use in industrial γ-radiography for non-destructive testing of metals. Additionally, is used as a source of gamma radiation for the treatment of cancer using brachytherapy, a form of radiotherapy where a sealed radioactive source is placed inside or next to the area requiring treatment. Specific treatments include high-dose-rate prostate brachytherapy, biliary duct brachytherapy, and intracavitary cervix brachytherapy. Iridium-192 is normally produced by neutron activation of isotope iridium-191 in natural-abundance iridium metal.

=== Photocatalysis and OLEDs ===
Iridium complexes are key components of white OLEDs. Similar complexes are used in photocatalysis.

=== Scientific ===

An alloy of 90% platinum and 10% iridium was used in 1889 to construct the International Prototype Meter and kilogram mass, kept by the International Bureau of Weights and Measures near Paris. The meter bar was replaced as the definition of the fundamental unit of length in 1960 by a line in the atomic spectrum of krypton, but the kilogram prototype remained the international standard of mass until 20 May 2019, when the kilogram was redefined in terms of the Planck constant.
=== Historical ===
Iridium–osmium alloys were used in fountain pen nib tips. The first major use of iridium was in 1834 in nibs mounted on gold. Starting in 1944, the Parker 51 fountain pen was fitted with a nib tipped by a ruthenium and iridium alloy (with 3.8% iridium). The tip material in modern fountain pens is still conventionally called &quot;iridium&quot;, although there is seldom any iridium in it; other metals such as ruthenium, osmium, and tungsten have taken its place.

An iridium–platinum alloy was used for the touch holes or vent pieces of cannon. According to a report of the Paris Exhibition of 1867, one of the pieces being exhibited by Johnson and Matthey &quot;has been used in a Whitworth gun for more than 3000 rounds, and scarcely shows signs of wear yet. Those who know the constant trouble and expense which are occasioned by the wearing of the vent-pieces of cannon when in active service, will appreciate this important adaptation&quot;.

The pigment &quot;iridium black&quot;, which consists of very finely divided iridium, is used for painting porcelain an intense black; it was said that &quot;all other porcelain black colors appear grey by the side of it&quot;.

== Precautions and hazards ==
Iridium in bulk metallic form is not biologically important or hazardous to health due to its lack of reactivity with tissues; there are only about 20 parts per trillion of iridium in human tissue. Like most metals, finely divided iridium powder can be hazardous to handle, as it is an irritant and may ignite in air. Iridium is relatively unhazardous otherwise, with the only effect of Iridium ingestion being irritation of the digestive tract. However, soluble salts, such as the iridium halides, could be hazardous due to elements other than iridium or due to iridium itself. At the same time, most iridium compounds are insoluble, which makes absorption into the body difficult.

A radioisotope of iridium, , is dangerous, like other radioactive isotopes. The only reported injuries related to iridium concern accidental exposure to radiation from used in brachytherapy. High-energy gamma radiation from can increase the risk of cancer. External exposure can cause burns, radiation poisoning, and death. Ingestion of 192Ir can burn the linings of the stomach and the intestines. 192Ir, 192mIr, and 194mIr tend to deposit in the liver, and can pose health hazards from both gamma and beta radiation.

== Notes ==
== References ==

== External links ==
* Iridium at &quot;The Periodic Table of Videos&quot; (University of Nottingham)
* Iridium in Encyclopædia Britannica</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q877" start="0" end="7" title="Iridium" label="Iridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="13" end="29" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q102500" start="38" end="44" title="Symbol (chemistry)" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q877" start="45" end="47" title="Iridium" label="Ir"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="52" end="65" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q19588" start="106" end="122" title="transition metal" label="transition metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q223995" start="130" end="144" title="platinum group" label="platinum group"/>
<link wikidata="Q751" start="215" end="221" title="osmium" label="osmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q826582" start="268" end="289" title="X-ray crystallography" label="X-ray crystallography"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="344" end="351" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q878130" start="385" end="399" title="stable isotope" label="stable isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="457" end="466" title="corrosion" label="corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q880" start="585" end="593" title="platinum" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q377800" start="622" end="638" title="Smithson Tennant" label="Smithson Tennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q24580" start="784" end="810" title="Abundance of elements in Earth&amp;#x27;s crust" label="one of the rarest elements"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="814" end="832" title="Crust (geology)#Earth&amp;#x27;s crust" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q193340" start="977" end="987" title="spark plug" label="spark plug"/>
<link wikidata="Q390417" start="990" end="998" title="crucible" label="crucible"/>
<link wikidata="Q139863" start="1115" end="1134" title="chloralkali process" label="chloralkali process"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="1207" end="1216" title="catalysis" label="catalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q209593" start="1249" end="1253" title="OLED" label="OLED"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="1277" end="1286" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q682871" start="1427" end="1456" title="Cretaceous–Paleogene boundary" label="Cretaceous–Paleogene boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q683975" start="1474" end="1492" title="Alvarez hypothesis" label="Alvarez hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q55811" start="1557" end="1634" title="Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event" label="extinction of non-avian dinosaurs and many other species 66 million years ago"/>
<link wikidata="Q55816" start="1691" end="1707" title="Chicxulub crater" label="Chicxulub crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334017" start="1792" end="1806" title="Eltanin impact" label="Eltanin impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q223995" start="1908" end="1922" title="platinum group" label="platinum group"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="2056" end="2069" title="melting point" label="melting point"/>
<link wikidata="Q726605" start="2130" end="2147" title="powder metallurgy" label="powder metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6102450" start="2293" end="2325" title="List of elements by boiling point" label="boiling point among all elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q124131" start="2340" end="2354" title="superconductor" label="superconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q192005" start="2395" end="2416" title="modulus of elasticity" label="modulus of elasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q751" start="2481" end="2487" title="osmium" label="osmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q461466" start="2516" end="2529" title="shear modulus" label="shear modulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q190453" start="2556" end="2576" title="Poisson&amp;#x27;s ratio" label="Poisson&amp;#x27;s ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307012" start="2622" end="2628" title="strain (chemistry)" label="strain"/>
<link wikidata="Q29539" start="3023" end="3030" title="density" label="density"/>
<link wikidata="Q6102450" start="3107" end="3120" title="List of elements by density" label="densest metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q826582" start="3366" end="3388" title="X-ray crystallography" label="X-ray crystallographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131172" start="3504" end="3508" title="Welding" label="weld"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="3615" end="3623" title="titanium" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038" start="3628" end="3637" title="zirconium" label="zirconium"/>
<link wikidata="Q223404" start="3681" end="3697" title="Vickers hardness" label="Vickers hardness"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="3834" end="3853" title="corrosion-resistant" label="corrosion-resistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="3889" end="3893" title="acid" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q174670" start="3906" end="3916" title="aqua regia" label="aqua regia"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="4034" end="4040" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q55076544" start="4057" end="4064" title="cyanide" label="cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q187689" start="4084" end="4092" title="Oxidizing agent" label="oxidants"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605" start="4119" end="4126" title="halogen" label="halogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="4197" end="4203" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q60723865" start="4237" end="4254" title="iridium disulfide" label="iridium disulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="4318" end="4325" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q659662" start="4350" end="4367" title="natural abundance" label="natural abundance"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="4415" end="4427" title="radioisotope" label="radioisotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q101395" start="4468" end="4479" title="mass number" label="mass number"/>
<link wikidata="Q18883042" start="4497" end="4502" title="iridium-192" label="192Ir"/>
<link wikidata="Q192900" start="4568" end="4580" title="Radionuclide" label="radioisotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="4589" end="4598" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q896687" start="4640" end="4653" title="brachytherapy" label="brachytherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q245341" start="4672" end="4683" title="radiography" label="radiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q626700" start="4702" end="4724" title="nondestructive testing" label="nondestructive testing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4992" end="5000" title="Beta decay#β+ decay" label="β+ decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q179856" start="5002" end="5009" title="alpha decay" label="α decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q902157" start="5022" end="5037" title="proton emission" label="proton emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q109910" start="5084" end="5100" title="electron capture" label="electron capture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5147" end="5155" title="Beta decay#β− decay" label="β− decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q846110" start="5350" end="5368" title="nuclear isomer" label="metastable isomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q846110" start="5487" end="5506" title="isomeric transition" label="isomeric transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q918552" start="5772" end="5788" title="Mössbauer effect" label="Mössbauer effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q899927" start="5817" end="5839" title="Mössbauer spectroscopy" label="Mössbauer spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094" start="5876" end="5888" title="biochemistry" label="biochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="5890" end="5900" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="5906" end="5916" title="mineralogy" label="mineralogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q484152" start="5988" end="6003" title="oxidation state" label="oxidation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q420934" start="6167" end="6167" title="Iridium(VI) fluoride" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q2858011" start="6189" end="6208" title="iridium(VIII) oxide" label="iridium(VIII) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q696" start="6270" end="6275" title="argon" label="argon"/>
<link wikidata="Q66392" start="6445" end="6451" title="binary compound" label="binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q106520" start="6452" end="6459" title="hydride" label="hydride"/>
<link wikidata="Q66392" start="6471" end="6483" title="binary phase" label="binary oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q418812" start="6507" end="6522" title="Iridium(IV) oxide" label="iridium dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359355" start="6567" end="6585" title="fluorite structure" label="fluorite structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q414433" start="6589" end="6600" title="sesquioxide" label="sesquioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230226" start="6691" end="6700" title="disulfide" label="disulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q110886848" start="6703" end="6713" title="diselenide" label="diselenide"/>
<link wikidata="Q124397400" start="6716" end="6729" title="sesquisulfide" label="sesquisulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356808" start="6877" end="6890" title="Iridium(IV) fluoride" label="tetrafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089197" start="6892" end="6905" title="Iridium(V) fluoride" label="pentafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q420934" start="6910" end="6922" title="Iridium hexafluoride" label="hexafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q53832" start="7123" end="7131" title="tetramer" label="tetramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="7218" end="7240" title="coordination chemistry" label="coordination chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577416" start="7278" end="7286" title="low-spin" label="low-spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630364" start="7322" end="7342" title="octahedral molecular geometry" label="octahedral complexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q898637" start="7434" end="7443" title="isopropyl" label="isopropyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269344" start="7545" end="7553" title="oxyanion" label="oxyanion"/>
<link wikidata="Q408880" start="7629" end="7644" title="potassium oxide" label="potassium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q411162" start="7648" end="7668" title="potassium superoxide" label="potassium superoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q190901" start="7866" end="7874" title="ammonium" label="ammonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q181232" start="8104" end="8109" title="anode" label="anode"/>
<link wikidata="Q418647" start="8227" end="8246" title="Iridium(III) chloride" label="Iridium trichloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745207" start="8275" end="8284" title="anhydrous" label="anhydrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="8333" end="8341" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="8390" end="8407" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762415" start="8610" end="8632" title="Organoiridium compound" label="Organoiridium compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="8650" end="8656" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164129" start="8705" end="8732" title="tetrairidium dodecacarbonyl" label="tetrairidium dodecacarbonyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q160003" start="8820" end="8831" title="Tetrahedron" label="tetrahedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q421607" start="8858" end="8878" title="Vaska&amp;#x27;s complex" label="Vaska&amp;#x27;s complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q36794" start="8893" end="8897" title="door" label="door"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123471" start="8902" end="8920" title="oxidative addition" label="oxidative addition"/>
<link wikidata="Q419083" start="8988" end="9012" title="Crabtree&amp;#x27;s catalyst" label="Crabtree&amp;#x27;s catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411716" start="9016" end="9036" title="homogeneous catalyst" label="homogeneous catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q214166" start="9041" end="9054" title="hydrogenation" label="hydrogenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q900254" start="9128" end="9159" title="C-H bond activation" label="Carbon–hydrogen bond activation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="9223" end="9234" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q778774" start="9273" end="9283" title="Reactivity (chemistry)" label="unreactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q223995" start="9413" end="9427" title="platinum group" label="platinum group"/>
<link wikidata="Q441066" start="9526" end="9548" title="Julius Caesar Scaliger" label="Julius Caesar Scaliger"/>
<link wikidata="Q688660" start="9606" end="9612" title="Darién Province" label="Darién"/>
<link wikidata="Q180208" start="9691" end="9698" title="Liquefaction" label="liquefy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7216430" start="9798" end="9806" title="impurity" label="impurity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658591" start="9925" end="9937" title="adulteration" label="adulteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q470306" start="9982" end="9998" title="Antonio de Ulloa" label="Antonio de Ulloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085725" start="10003" end="10026" title="Jorge Juan y Santacilia" label="Jorge Juan y Santacilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="10074" end="10083" title="Spaniards" label="Spaniards"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="10108" end="10116" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="10121" end="10125" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072190" start="10193" end="10200" title="Chicken nugget" label="nuggets"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="10280" end="10290" title="mineralogy" label="mineralogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q898987" start="10468" end="10477" title="Separation process" label="separable"/>
<link wikidata="Q849523" start="10482" end="10492" title="calcination" label="calcinable"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="10676" end="10683" title="Mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000333" start="10705" end="10717" title="Huancavelica" label="Huancavelica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10729" end="10741" title="Charles Wood (metallurgist)" label="Charles Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="10753" end="10765" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039871" start="10840" end="10857" title="William Brownrigg" label="William Brownrigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="11003" end="11016" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319" start="11220" end="11225" title="borax" label="borax"/>
<link wikidata="Q57983" start="11296" end="11322" title="Andreas Sigismund Marggraf" label="Andreas Sigismund Marggraf"/>
<link wikidata="Q201347" start="11324" end="11339" title="Torbern Bergman" label="Torbern Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q151911" start="11341" end="11361" title="Jöns Jakob Berzelius" label="Jöns Jakob Berzelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q903246" start="11363" end="11376" title="William Lewis (scientist)" label="William Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q902205" start="11382" end="11396" title="Pierre Macquer" label="Pierre Macquer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5716569" start="11407" end="11422" title="Henrik Teofilus Scheffer" label="Henrik Scheffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="11609" end="11616" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11660" end="11667" title="pliable" label="pliable"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="11710" end="11719" title="corrosion" label="corrosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="11740" end="11747" title="Chemist" label="Chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q739398" start="11770" end="11779" title="Dissolution (chemistry)" label="dissolved"/>
<link wikidata="Q174670" start="11786" end="11796" title="aqua regia" label="aqua regia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="11811" end="11823" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="11828" end="11839" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q170731" start="11852" end="11859" title="Solubility" label="soluble"/>
<link wikidata="Q170731" start="11914" end="11923" title="Solubility" label="insoluble"/>
<link wikidata="Q159923" start="11933" end="11952" title="Joseph Louis Proust" label="Joseph Louis Proust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309" start="11982" end="11990" title="graphite" label="graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q902153" start="12012" end="12035" title="Victor Collet-Descotils" label="Victor Collet-Descotils"/>
<link wikidata="Q446875" start="12037" end="12072" title="Antoine François, comte de Fourcroy" label="Antoine François, comte de Fourcroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q333438" start="12078" end="12101" title="Louis Nicolas Vauquelin" label="Louis Nicolas Vauquelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q377800" start="12221" end="12237" title="Smithson Tennant" label="Smithson Tennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q485742" start="12375" end="12381" title="alkali" label="alkali"/>
<link wikidata="Q751" start="12490" end="12495" title="Osmium" label="ptene"/>
<link wikidata="Q161358" start="12549" end="12553" title="wing" label="wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q751" start="12744" end="12750" title="osmium" label="osmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q102769" start="12844" end="12860" title="sodium hydroxide" label="sodium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="12865" end="12882" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184570" start="12907" end="12911" title="Iris (mythology)" label="Iris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052" start="12948" end="12955" title="rainbow" label="rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q101609" start="12981" end="12994" title="Twelve Olympians" label="Olympian gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="13016" end="13021" title="Salt (chemistry)" label="salts"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="13121" end="13134" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q520537" start="13210" end="13230" title="John George Children" label="John George Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q904188" start="13430" end="13441" title="Robert Hare (chemist)" label="Robert Hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q211702" start="13517" end="13528" title="Ductility" label="immalleable"/>
<link wikidata="Q905534" start="13598" end="13625" title="Henri Sainte-Claire Deville" label="Henri Sainte-Claire Deville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130927" start="13630" end="13648" title="Jules Henri Debray" label="Jules Henri Debray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6240895" start="13824" end="13842" title="John Isaac Hawkins" label="John Isaac Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q192401" start="13891" end="13903" title="fountain pen" label="fountain pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524064" start="13904" end="13908" title="Nib (pen)" label="nibs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239598" start="13978" end="13990" title="John Holland (pen maker)" label="John Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18149554" start="13995" end="14017" title="William Lofland Dudley" label="William Lofland Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q674" start="14054" end="14064" title="phosphorus" label="phosphorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q502470" start="14128" end="14143" title="Johnson Matthey" label="Johnson Matthey"/>
<link wikidata="Q172754" start="14261" end="14272" title="World&amp;#x27;s fair" label="World Fairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="14294" end="14299" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086" start="14316" end="14325" title="ruthenium" label="ruthenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q190241" start="14329" end="14341" title="thermocouple" label="thermocouple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="14452" end="14458" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q44286" start="14476" end="14492" title="Rudolf Mössbauer" label="Rudolf Mössbauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588960" start="14620" end="14626" title="Atomic Recoil" label="recoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="14659" end="14668" title="gamma ray" label="gamma ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="14673" end="14677" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q918552" start="14756" end="14772" title="Mössbauer effect" label="Mössbauer effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="14805" end="14827" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q41377" start="14954" end="14967" title="atomic weight" label="atomic weight"/>
<link wikidata="Q285033" start="15035" end="15044" title="r-process" label="r-process"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="15052" end="15059" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q42266247" start="15072" end="15091" title="neutron star merger" label="neutron star merger"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="15182" end="15190" title="Periodic table" label="elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q15316" start="15194" end="15212" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q899138" start="15232" end="15245" title="Mass fraction (chemistry)" label="mass fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="15255" end="15258" title="parts per million" label="ppm"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="15276" end="15280" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q880" start="15307" end="15315" title="platinum" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="15343" end="15349" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="15354" end="15361" title="Mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q751" start="15390" end="15396" title="Osmium" label="Osmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100" start="15398" end="15407" title="tellurium" label="tellurium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086" start="15409" end="15418" title="ruthenium" label="ruthenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087" start="15420" end="15427" title="rhodium" label="rhodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q737" start="15432" end="15439" title="rhenium" label="rhenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="15556" end="15565" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q588507" start="15754" end="15766" title="Goldschmidt classification" label="siderophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664027" start="15853" end="15870" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s core" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s core"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="15897" end="15903" title="Lava" label="molten"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="15971" end="15976" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q751" start="16002" end="16008" title="osmium" label="osmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q59094" start="16016" end="16026" title="osmiridium" label="osmiridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q59094" start="16045" end="16055" title="iridosmium" label="iridosmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="16075" end="16081" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q223995" start="16107" end="16121" title="platinum group" label="platinum group"/>
<link wikidata="Q221205" start="16138" end="16145" title="sulfide" label="sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q417116" start="16148" end="16158" title="telluride (chemistry)" label="tellurides"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243177" start="16160" end="16170" title="antimonide" label="antimonide"/>
<link wikidata="Q415296" start="16177" end="16185" title="arsenide" label="arsenide"/>
<link wikidata="Q880" start="16215" end="16223" title="platinum" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q583353" start="16385" end="16395" title="native copper" label="raw copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="16426" end="16433" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="16735" end="16743" title="Geology" label="geologic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="16755" end="16762" title="Igneous rock" label="igneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="16805" end="16818" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017513" start="16924" end="16948" title="Bushveld igneous complex" label="Bushveld igneous complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q330095" start="17012" end="17038" title="Vredefort impact structure" label="Vredefort impact structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="17064" end="17070" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17085" end="17092" title="Norilsk#Norilsk-Talnakh nickel deposits" label="Norilsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q281965" start="17112" end="17125" title="Sudbury Basin" label="Sudbury Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q880" start="17309" end="17317" title="platinum" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q223995" start="17328" end="17342" title="platinum group" label="platinum group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="17353" end="17361" title="alluvium" label="alluvial"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="17402" end="17415" title="pre-Columbian" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q230584" start="17430" end="17446" title="Chocó Department" label="Chocó Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="17450" end="17458" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="17628" end="17636" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q104859435" start="17759" end="17777" title="Transition metal chloride complex" label="chloride complexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q518730" start="17852" end="17871" title="orders of magnitude" label="orders of magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="17885" end="17901" title="sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q682871" start="17910" end="17945" title="Cretaceous–Paleogene boundary" label="Cretaceous–Paleogene (K–T) boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641506" start="18024" end="18042" title="Oxygenation (environmental)" label="marine oxygenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="18151" end="18162" title="cosmic dust" label="cosmic dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q113796" start="18175" end="18188" title="precipitation (chemistry)" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q867648" start="18228" end="18245" title="hydrothermal vent" label="hydrothermal vent"/>
<link wikidata="Q939579" start="18359" end="18375" title="manganese nodule" label="manganese nodule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334017" start="18636" end="18650" title="Eltanin impact" label="Eltanin impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q55814" start="18696" end="18711" title="mass extinction" label="mass extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q55811" start="18726" end="18747" title="Cretaceous extinction" label="Cretaceous extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q463796" start="18859" end="18874" title="asteroid impact" label="asteroid impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q682871" start="18931" end="18960" title="Cretaceous–Paleogene boundary" label="Cretaceous–Paleogene boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="19026" end="19036" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q55810" start="19041" end="19050" title="Paleogene" label="Paleogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="19062" end="19077" title="Geologic time scale" label="geological time"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758989" start="19104" end="19111" title="stratum" label="stratum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276327" start="19115" end="19132" title="iridium anomaly" label="iridium-rich clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q178344" start="19148" end="19160" title="Luis Walter Alvarez" label="Luis Alvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="19244" end="19252" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="19256" end="19261" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q683975" start="19297" end="19315" title="Alvarez hypothesis" label="Alvarez hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q130978" start="19524" end="19541" title="Yucatán Peninsula" label="Yucatán Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q55816" start="19547" end="19563" title="Chicxulub crater" label="Chicxulub crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="19633" end="19641" title="volcano" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049644" start="19733" end="19754" title="Piton de la Fournaise" label="Piton de la Fournaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070" start="19773" end="19780" title="Réunion" label="Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="20017" end="20020" title="LED" label="LED"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447188" start="20275" end="20283" title="Solution (chemistry)" label="solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q205459" start="20371" end="20386" title="sodium peroxide" label="sodium peroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q174670" start="20436" end="20446" title="aqua regia" label="aqua regia"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="20498" end="20506" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="20512" end="20529" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4134945" start="20598" end="20624" title="ammonium hexachloroiridate" label="ammonium hexachloroiridate"/>
<link wikidata="Q780219" start="20816" end="20840" title="liquid–liquid extraction" label="liquid–liquid extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q900548" start="21026" end="21032" title="metal sponge" label="sponge"/>
<link wikidata="Q726605" start="21061" end="21078" title="powder metallurgy" label="powder metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="21150" end="21156" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21198" end="21223" title="Copper extraction techniques#Electrorefining" label="electrorefining of copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q223995" start="21278" end="21298" title="platinum group metal" label="platinum group metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q876" start="21311" end="21319" title="selenium" label="selenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100" start="21324" end="21333" title="tellurium" label="tellurium"/>
<link wikidata="Q209593" start="21635" end="21639" title="OLED" label="OLED"/>
<link wikidata="Q579304" start="21653" end="21662" title="Cativa process" label="catalysts"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="21669" end="21680" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q137056" start="21883" end="21903" title="corrosion resistance" label="corrosion resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q390417" start="21945" end="21953" title="crucible" label="crucible"/>
<link wikidata="Q594666" start="21971" end="21990" title="Czochralski process" label="Czochralski process"/>
<link wikidata="Q127583" start="22033" end="22041" title="sapphire" label="sapphire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516414" start="22128" end="22153" title="gadolinium gallium garnet" label="gadolinium gallium garnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q716" start="22377" end="22385" title="titanium" label="titanium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22478" end="22489" title="multi-pored" label="multi-pored"/>
<link wikidata="Q572296" start="22490" end="22500" title="Spinneret (polymers)" label="spinnerets"/>
<link wikidata="Q910194" start="22575" end="22580" title="rayon" label="rayon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193340" start="22764" end="22774" title="spark plug" label="spark plug"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="22889" end="22898" title="catalysis" label="catalysts"/>
<link wikidata="Q579304" start="22906" end="22920" title="Cativa process" label="Cativa process"/>
<link wikidata="Q900377" start="22925" end="22938" title="carbonylation" label="carbonylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14982" start="22942" end="22950" title="methanol" label="methanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="22962" end="22973" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812077" start="23015" end="23039" title="asymmetric hydrogenation" label="asymmetric hydrogenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q214166" start="23060" end="23073" title="hydrogenation" label="hydrogenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143742" start="23079" end="23101" title="transfer hydrogenation" label="transfer hydrogenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3734365" start="23161" end="23167" title="chiral" label="chiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q178266" start="23168" end="23177" title="herbicide" label="herbicide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23178" end="23193" title="(S)-metolachlor" label="(S)-metolachlor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6290992" start="23298" end="23314" title="Josiphos ligands" label="Josiphos ligands"/>
<link wikidata="Q18883042" start="23358" end="23369" title="iridium-192" label="iridium-192"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23443" end="23456" title="Industrial radiography#Radioisotope sources" label="γ-radiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q626700" start="23461" end="23484" title="non-destructive testing" label="non-destructive testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="23533" end="23548" title="gamma radiation" label="gamma radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q896687" start="23583" end="23596" title="brachytherapy" label="brachytherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18883042" start="23848" end="23859" title="Iridium-192" label="Iridium-192"/>
<link wikidata="Q19529" start="23914" end="23925" title="iridium-191" label="iridium-191"/>
<link wikidata="Q209593" start="24042" end="24046" title="OLED" label="OLED"/>
<link wikidata="Q218831" start="24079" end="24093" title="photocatalysis" label="photocatalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870847" start="24191" end="24220" title="International Prototype Meter" label="International Prototype Meter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24225" end="24233" title="Kilogram#International prototype kilogram" label="kilogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q229478" start="24252" end="24296" title="Bureau International des Poids et Mesures" label="International Bureau of Weights and Measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q216817" start="24413" end="24428" title="atomic spectrum" label="atomic spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24432" end="24439" title="Krypton#Metric role" label="krypton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076763" start="24512" end="24529" title="2019 revision of the SI" label="until 20 May 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q122894" start="24579" end="24594" title="Planck constant" label="Planck constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q192401" start="24650" end="24662" title="fountain pen" label="fountain pen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24663" end="24670" title="Nib (pen)#Nib tipping" label="nib tip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138273" start="24763" end="24772" title="Parker 51" label="Parker 51"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086" start="25027" end="25036" title="ruthenium" label="ruthenium"/>
<link wikidata="Q751" start="25038" end="25044" title="osmium" label="osmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q743" start="25050" end="25058" title="tungsten" label="tungsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q248267" start="25125" end="25135" title="touch hole" label="touch hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="25155" end="25161" title="cannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345539" start="25192" end="25216" title="Exposition Universelle (1867)" label="Paris Exhibition of 1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q502470" start="25255" end="25274" title="Johnson and Matthey" label="Johnson and Matthey"/>
<link wikidata="Q130693" start="25673" end="25682" title="porcelain" label="porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="25976" end="25994" title="parts per notation" label="parts per trillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="26254" end="26269" title="Gastrointestinal tract" label="digestive tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q896687" start="26685" end="26698" title="brachytherapy" label="brachytherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q275459" start="26801" end="26820" title="radiation poisoning" label="radiation poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="26957" end="26962" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q11523" start="27002" end="27007" title="Gamma radiation" label="gamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q103531" start="27012" end="27016" title="Beta particle" label="beta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988689" start="27099" end="27127" title="The Periodic Table of Videos" label="The Periodic Table of Videos"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14753" wikidata="Q251944" url="?curid=14753" title="IOC (disambiguation)">
<text>IOC most commonly refers to the International Olympic Committee.

IOC or IoC may also refer to:
==Computing==
*IBM Open Class, IBM C++ product
*Indicator of compromise, an artifact likely indicating a computer intrusion
*Inversion of control, a software design pattern

==Organizations==
*Indian Ocean Commission
*Indian Oil Corporation, large Indian oil and gas company 
*Indian Orthodox Church, Kerala, India 
*International Olive Council
*Initiative on Cities, urban research institute at Boston University 
*Initiatives of Change, international organisation &quot;building trust across the world&#x27;s divides&quot; (formerly Moral Re-Armament) 
*Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission of Unesco
*International Ornithological Committee, former name of the International Ornithologists&#x27; Union
*International Order of Characters, an organization dedicated to improving the fields of aviation and aerospace
*Iron Ore Company of Canada

==Other uses==
*Icon of Coil, Norwegian electronic music band
*Immediate or cancel, a type of order used on some stock exchanges
*Index of coincidence, the technique in cryptography of counting the number of times that identical letters appear
*Initial operating capability, minimum level of deployment, especially in the US military 
*Intraoral camera, a device used to take photos of the inside of a patient&#x27;s mouth
*Italian organized crime</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q251944" start="0" end="3" title="IOC (disambiguation)" label="IOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="32" end="63" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q251944" start="66" end="69" title="IOC (disambiguation)" label="IOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q251944" start="73" end="76" title="IOC (disambiguation)" label="IoC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968916" start="111" end="125" title="IBM Open Class" label="IBM Open Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024402" start="144" end="167" title="Indicator of compromise" label="Indicator of compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q666438" start="221" end="241" title="Inversion of control" label="Inversion of control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115631" start="289" end="312" title="Indian Ocean Commission" label="Indian Ocean Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289348" start="314" end="336" title="Indian Oil Corporation" label="Indian Oil Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q532662" start="373" end="395" title="Indian Orthodox Church" label="Indian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q13516775" start="413" end="440" title="International Olive Council" label="International Olive Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q22073825" start="442" end="462" title="Initiative on Cities" label="Initiative on Cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080885" start="512" end="533" title="Initiatives of Change" label="Initiatives of Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666085" start="652" end="694" title="Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission" label="Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325616" start="765" end="805" title="International Ornithologists&amp;#x27; Union" label="International Ornithologists&amp;#x27; Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q16237736" start="807" end="840" title="International Order of Characters" label="International Order of Characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989805" start="919" end="945" title="Iron Ore Company of Canada" label="Iron Ore Company of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656463" start="963" end="975" title="Icon of Coil" label="Icon of Coil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6004779" start="1010" end="1029" title="Immediate or cancel" label="Immediate or cancel"/>
<link wikidata="Q925177" start="1077" end="1097" title="Index of coincidence" label="Index of coincidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q951537" start="1192" end="1220" title="Initial operating capability" label="Initial operating capability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822023" start="1283" end="1299" title="Intraoral camera" label="Intraoral camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102072" start="1371" end="1394" title="Italian organized crime" label="Italian organized crime"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14761" wikidata="Q21204" url="?curid=14761" title="International Phonetic Alphabet">
<text>The International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) is an alphabetic system of phonetic notation based primarily on the Latin script. It was devised by the International Phonetic Association in the late 19th century as a standard written representation for the sounds of speech. The IPA is used by lexicographers, foreign language students and teachers, linguists, speech–language pathologists, singers, actors, constructed language creators, and translators.

The IPA is designed to represent those qualities of speech that are part of lexical (and, to a limited extent, prosodic) sounds in oral language: phones, intonation and the separation of syllables. To represent additional qualities of speechsuch as tooth , lisping, and sounds made with a cleft palatean extended set of symbols may be used.

Segments are transcribed by one or more IPA symbols of two basic types: letters and diacritics. For example, the sound of the English digraph may be transcribed in IPA with a single letter: , or with multiple letters plus diacritics: , depending on how precise one wishes to be. Slashes are used to signal phonemic transcription; therefore, is more abstract than either or and might refer to either, depending on the context and language.

Occasionally, letters or diacritics are added, removed, or modified by the International Phonetic Association. As of the most recent change in 2005, there are 107 segmental letters, an indefinitely large number of suprasegmental letters, 44 diacritics (not counting composites), and four extra-lexical prosodic marks in the IPA. These are illustrated in the current IPA chart, posted below in this article and on the International Phonetic Association&#x27;s website.

== History ==

In 1886, a group of French and English language teachers, led by the French linguist Paul Passy, formed what would be known from 1897 onwards as the International Phonetic Association (in French, ). The idea of the alphabet had been suggested to Passy by Otto Jespersen. It was developed by Passy along with other members of the association, principally Daniel Jones.
The original IPA alphabet was based on the Romic alphabet, an English spelling reform created by Henry Sweet that in turn was based on the Palaeotype alphabet of Alexander John Ellis, but to make it usable for other languages the values of the symbols were allowed to vary from language to language. For example, the sound (the &quot;sh&quot; in &quot;shoe&quot;) was originally represented with the letter for English but with for French and German; with German, was used for the sound of &quot;Bach&quot;. With a growing number of transcribed languages this proved impractical, and in 1888 the values of the letters were made uniform across languages. This would provide the base for all future revisions.

Since its creation, the IPA has undergone a number of revisions. After relatively frequent revisions and expansions from the 1890s to the 1940s, the IPA remained nearly static until the Kiel Convention in 1989, which substantially revamped the alphabet. A smaller revision took place in 1993 with the resurrection of letters for mid central vowels and the retirement of letters for voiceless implosives. The alphabet was last revised in May 2005 with the addition of a letter for a labiodental flap. Apart from the addition and removal of symbols, changes to the IPA have consisted largely of renaming symbols and categories and in modifying typefaces.

Extensions to the International Phonetic Alphabet for speech pathology (extIPA) were created in 1990 and were officially adopted by the International Clinical Phonetics and Linguistics Association in 1994.
They were substantially revised in 2015.

== Description ==
The general principle of the IPA is to provide one letter for each distinctive sound (speech segment). This means that:
* It does not normally use combinations of letters to represent single sounds, the way English does with , and , nor single letters to represent multiple sounds, the way represents or in English.
* There are no letters that have context-dependent sound values, the way and in several European languages have a &quot;hard&quot; or &quot;soft&quot; pronunciation.
* The IPA does not usually have separate letters for two sounds if no known language makes a distinction between them, a property known as &quot;selectiveness&quot;. However, if a large number of phonemically distinct letters can be derived with a diacritic, that may be used instead.

The alphabet is designed for transcribing sounds (phones), not phonemes, though it is used for phonemic transcription as well. A few letters that did not indicate specific sounds have been retired, once used for the &quot;compound&quot; tone of Swedish and Norwegian, and , once used for the moraic nasal of Japanesethough one remains: , used for the sj-sound of Swedish. When the IPA is used for broad phonetic or for phonemic transcription, the letter–sound correspondence can be rather loose. The IPA has recommended that more &#x27;familiar&#x27; letters be used when that would not cause ambiguity. For example, and for and , for or , for , etc. Indeed, in the illustration of Hindi in the IPA &quot;Handbook&quot;, the letters and are used for and .

Among the symbols of the IPA, 107 letters represent consonants and vowels, 31 diacritics are used to modify these, and 17 additional signs indicate suprasegmental qualities such as length, tone, stress, and intonation. These are organized into a chart; the chart displayed here is the official chart as posted at the website of the IPA.

=== Letter forms ===

The letters chosen for the IPA are meant to harmonize with the Latin alphabet. For this reason, most letters are either Latin or Greek, or modifications thereof. Some letters are neither: for example, the letter denoting the glottal stop, , originally had the form of a question mark with the dot removed. A few letters, such as that of the voiced pharyngeal fricative, , were inspired by other writing systems (in this case, the Arabic letter ⟨⟩, &quot;&quot;, via the reversed apostrophe).
Some letter forms derive from existing letters:
* The right-swinging tail, as in , indicates retroflex articulation. It originates from the hook of an &quot;r&quot;.
* The top hook, as in , indicates implosion.
* Several nasal consonants are based on the form : . and derive from ligatures of &quot;gn&quot; and &quot;ng,&quot; and is an &quot;ad hoc&quot; imitation of .
* Letters turned 180 degrees for suggestive shapes, such as from . Either the original letter may be reminiscent of the target sound, e.g., or the turned one, e.g., . Rotation was popular in the era of mechanical typesetting, as it had the advantage of not requiring the casting of special type for IPA symbols, much as the sorts had traditionally often pulled double duty for and , and , and , and to reduce cost.
* Among consonant letters, the small capital letters , and also in extIPA, indicate more guttural sounds than their base letters is a late exception. Among vowel letters, small capitals indicate lax vowels. Most of the original small-cap vowel letters have been modified into more distinctive shapese.g. from with only remaining as small capitals.

=== Typography and iconicity ===
The International Phonetic Alphabet is based on the Latin script, and uses as few non-Latin letters as possible. The Association created the IPA so that the sound values of most letters would correspond to &quot;international usage&quot; (approximately Classical Latin). Hence, the consonant letters , , , , , , , , , , , , , , and have more or less their word-initial values in English (&quot;g&quot; as in &quot;gill&quot;, &quot;h&quot; as in &quot;hill&quot;, though &quot;p t k&quot; are unaspirated as in &quot;spill, still, skill&quot;); and the vowel letters , , , , correspond to the (long) sound values of Latin: is like the vowel in &quot;machne&quot;, is as in &quot;rle&quot;, etc. Other Latin letters, particularly , and , differ from English, but have their IPA values in Latin or other European languages.

This basic Latin inventory was extended by adding small-capital and cursive forms, diacritics and rotation. The sound values of these letters are related to those of the original letters, and their derivation may be iconic. For example, letters with a rightward-facing hook at the bottom represent retroflex equivalents of the source letters, and small capital letters usually represent uvular equivalents of their source letters.

There are also several letters from the Greek alphabet, though their sound values may differ from Greek. For most Greek letters, subtly different glyph shapes have been devised for the IPA, specifically , , , , , and , which are encoded in Unicode separately from their parent Greek letters. One, however – – has only its Greek form, while for and , both Greek and Latin forms are in common use.
The tone letters are not derived from an alphabet, but from a pitch trace on a musical scale.

Beyond the letters themselves, there are a variety of secondary symbols which aid in transcription. Diacritic marks can be combined with the letters to add tone and phonetic detail such as secondary articulation. There are also special symbols for prosodic features such as stress and intonation.

=== Brackets and transcription delimiters ===

There are two principal types of brackets used to set off (delimit) IPA transcriptions:
Less common conventions include:
All three of the above are provided by the IPA &quot;Handbook&quot;. The following are not, but may be seen in IPA transcription or in associated material (especially angle brackets):
Some examples of contrasting brackets in the literature:


=== Other representations ===

IPA letters have cursive forms designed for use in manuscripts and when taking field notes, but the &quot;Handbook&quot; recommended against their use, as cursive IPA is &quot;harder for most people to decipher&quot;. A braille representation of the IPA for blind or visually impaired professionals and students has also been developed.

== Modifying the IPA chart ==

The International Phonetic Alphabet is occasionally modified by the Association. After each modification, the Association provides an updated simplified presentation of the alphabet in the form of a chart. (See History of the IPA.) Not all aspects of the alphabet can be accommodated in a chart of the size published by the IPA. The alveolo-palatal and epiglottal consonants, for example, are not included in the consonant chart for reasons of space rather than of theory (two additional columns would be required, one between the retroflex and palatal columns and the other between the pharyngeal and glottal columns), and the lateral flap would require an additional row for that single consonant, so they are listed instead under the catchall block of &quot;other symbols&quot;. The indefinitely large number of tone letters would make a full accounting impractical even on a larger page, and only a few examples are shown, and even the tone diacritics are not complete; the reversed tone letters are not illustrated at all.

The procedure for modifying the alphabet or the chart is to propose the change in the &quot;Journal of the IPA.&quot; (See, for example, December 2008 on an open central unrounded vowel and August 2011 on central approximants.) Reactions to the proposal may be published in the same or subsequent issues of the Journal (as in August 2009 on the open central vowel). A formal proposal is then put to the Council of the IPA – which is elected by the membership – for further discussion and a formal vote.

Many users of the alphabet, including the leadership of the Association itself, deviate from its standardized usage.
The &quot;Journal of the IPA&quot; finds it acceptable to mix IPA and extIPA symbols in consonant charts in their articles. (For instance, including the extIPA letter , rather than , in an illustration of the IPA.)

== Usage ==

Of more than 160 IPA symbols, relatively few will be used to transcribe speech in any one language, with various levels of precision. A precise phonetic transcription, in which sounds are specified in detail, is known as a &quot;narrow transcription&quot;. A coarser transcription with less detail is called a &quot;broad transcription.&quot; Both are relative terms, and both are generally enclosed in square brackets. Broad phonetic transcriptions may restrict themselves to easily heard details, or only to details that are relevant to the discussion at hand, and may differ little if at all from phonemic transcriptions, but they make no theoretical claim that all the distinctions transcribed are necessarily meaningful in the language.
For example, the English word &quot;little&quot; may be transcribed broadly as , approximately describing many pronunciations. A narrower transcription may focus on individual or dialectical details: in General American, in Cockney, or in Southern US English.

Phonemic transcriptions, which express the conceptual counterparts of spoken sounds, are usually enclosed in slashes (/ /) and tend to use simpler letters with few diacritics. The choice of IPA letters may reflect theoretical claims of how speakers conceptualize sounds as phonemes or they may be merely a convenience for typesetting. Phonemic approximations between slashes do not have absolute sound values. For instance, in English, either the vowel of &quot;pick&quot; or the vowel of &quot;peak&quot; may be transcribed as , so that &quot;pick&quot;, &quot;peak&quot; would be transcribed as or as ; and neither is identical to the vowel of the French &quot;&quot;, which would also be transcribed . By contrast, a narrow phonetic transcription of &quot;pick&quot;, &quot;peak&quot;, &quot;pique&quot; could be: , , .

=== Linguists ===
IPA is popular for transcription by linguists. Some American linguists, however, use a mix of IPA with Americanist phonetic notation or Sinological phonetic notation or otherwise use nonstandard symbols for various reasons. Authors who employ such nonstandard use are encouraged to include a chart or other explanation of their choices, which is good practice in general, as linguists differ in their understanding of the exact meaning of IPA symbols and common conventions change over time.

=== Dictionaries ===
==== English ====
Many British dictionaries, including the &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; and some learner&#x27;s dictionaries such as the &quot;Oxford Advanced Learner&#x27;s Dictionary&quot; and the &quot;Cambridge Advanced Learner&#x27;s Dictionary&quot;, now use the International Phonetic Alphabet to represent the pronunciation of words. However, most American (and some British) volumes use one of a variety of pronunciation respelling systems, intended to be more comfortable for readers of English and to be more acceptable across dialects, without the implication of a preferred pronunciation that the IPA might convey. For example, the respelling systems in many American dictionaries (such as &quot;Merriam-Webster&quot;) use for IPA and for IPA , reflecting the usual spelling of those sounds in English.
(In IPA, represents the sound of the French , as in &quot;&quot;, and represents the sequence of consonants in &quot;graopper&quot;.)

==== Other languages ====
The IPA is also not universal among dictionaries in languages other than English. Monolingual dictionaries of languages with phonemic orthographies generally do not bother with indicating the pronunciation of most words, and tend to use respelling systems for words with unexpected pronunciations. Dictionaries produced in Israel use the IPA rarely and sometimes use the Hebrew alphabet for transcription of foreign words. Bilingual dictionaries that translate from foreign languages into Russian usually employ the IPA, but monolingual Russian dictionaries occasionally use pronunciation respelling for foreign words. The IPA is more common in bilingual dictionaries, but there are exceptions here too. Mass-market bilingual Czech dictionaries, for instance, tend to use the IPA only for sounds not found in Czech.

=== Standard orthographies and case variants ===

IPA letters have been incorporated into the alphabets of various languages, notably via the Africa Alphabet in many sub-Saharan languages such as Hausa, Fula, Akan, Gbe languages, Manding languages, Lingala, etc. Capital case variants have been created for use in these languages. For example, Kabiyè of northern Togo has Ɖ ɖ, Ŋ ŋ, Ɣ ɣ, Ɔ ɔ, Ɛ ɛ, Ʋ ʋ. These, and others, are supported by Unicode, but appear in Latin ranges other than the IPA extensions.

In the IPA itself, however, only lower-case letters are used. The 1949 edition of the IPA handbook indicated that an asterisk might be prefixed to indicate that a word was a proper name, but this convention was not included in the 1999 &quot;Handbook&quot;, which notes the contrary use of the asterisk as a placeholder for a sound or feature that does not have a symbol.

=== Classical singing ===
The IPA has widespread use among classical singers during preparation as they are frequently required to sing in a variety of foreign languages. They are also taught by vocal coaches to perfect diction and improve tone quality and tuning. Opera librettos are authoritatively transcribed in IPA, such as Nico Castel&#x27;s volumes and Timothy Cheek&#x27;s book &quot;Singing in Czech&quot;. Opera singers&#x27; ability to read IPA was used by the site &quot;Visual Thesaurus&quot;, which employed several opera singers &quot;to make recordings for the 150,000 words and phrases in VT&#x27;s lexical database ... for their vocal stamina, attention to the details of enunciation, and most of all, knowledge of IPA&quot;.

== Letters ==

The International Phonetic Association organizes the letters of the IPA into three categories: pulmonic consonants, non-pulmonic consonants, and vowels.

Pulmonic consonant letters are arranged singly or in pairs of voiceless (tenuis) and voiced sounds, with these then grouped in columns from front (labial) sounds on the left to back (glottal) sounds on the right. In official publications by the IPA, two columns are omitted to save space, with the letters listed among &quot;other symbols&quot; even though theoretically they belong in the main chart. They are arranged in rows from full closure (occlusives: stops and nasals) at top, to brief closure (vibrants: trills and taps), to partial closure (fricatives), and finally minimal closure (approximants) at bottom, again with a row left out to save space. In the table below, a slightly different arrangement is made: All pulmonic consonants are included in the pulmonic-consonant table, and the vibrants and laterals are separated out so that the rows reflect the common lenition pathway of &quot;stop → fricative → approximant&quot;, as well as the fact that several letters pull double duty as both fricative and approximant; affricates may then be created by joining stops and fricatives from adjacent cells. Shaded cells represent articulations that are judged to be impossible or not distinctive.

Vowel letters are also grouped in pairsof unrounded and rounded vowel soundswith these pairs also arranged from front on the left to back on the right, and from maximal closure at top to minimal closure at bottom. No vowel letters are omitted from the chart, though in the past some of the mid central vowels were listed among the &quot;other symbols&quot;.

=== Consonants ===
==== Pulmonic consonants ====
A pulmonic consonant is a consonant made by obstructing the glottis (the space between the vocal folds) or oral cavity (the mouth) and either simultaneously or subsequently letting out air from the lungs. Pulmonic consonants make up the majority of consonants in the IPA, as well as in human language. All consonants in English fall into this category.

The pulmonic consonant table, which includes most consonants, is arranged in rows that designate manner of articulation, meaning how the consonant is produced, and columns that designate place of articulation, meaning where in the vocal tract the consonant is produced. The main chart includes only consonants with a single place of articulation.
Notes
* In rows where some letters appear in pairs (the &quot;obstruents&quot;), the letter to the right represents a voiced consonant, except breathy-voiced . In the other rows (the &quot;sonorants&quot;), the single letter represents a voiced consonant.
* While IPA provides a single letter for the coronal places of articulation (for all consonants but fricatives), these do not always have to be used exactly. When dealing with a particular language, the letters may be treated as specifically dental, alveolar, or post-alveolar, as appropriate for that language, without diacritics.
* Shaded areas indicate articulations judged to be impossible.
* The letters are canonically voiced fricatives but may be used for approximants.
* In many languages, such as English, and are not actually glottal, fricatives, or approximants. Rather, they are bare phonation.
* It is primarily the shape of the tongue rather than its position that distinguishes the fricatives , , and .
* are defined as epiglottal fricatives under the &quot;Other symbols&quot; section in the official IPA chart, but they may be treated as trills at the same place of articulation as because trilling of the aryepiglottic folds typically co-occurs.
* Some listed phones are not known to exist as phonemes in any language.

==== Non-pulmonic consonants ====
Non-pulmonic consonants are sounds whose airflow is not dependent on the lungs. These include clicks (found in the Khoisan languages and some neighboring Bantu languages of Africa), implosives (found in languages such as Sindhi, Hausa, Swahili and Vietnamese), and ejectives (found in many Amerindian and Caucasian languages).
Notes
* Clicks have traditionally been described as consisting of a forward place of articulation, commonly called the click &quot;type&quot; or historically the &quot;influx&quot;, and a rear place of articulation, which when combined with the quality of the click is commonly called the click &quot;accompaniment&quot; or historically the &quot;efflux&quot;. The IPA click letters indicate only the click type (forward articulation and release). Therefore, all clicks require two letters for proper notation: , etc., or with the order reversed if both the forward and rear releases are audible. The letter for the rear articulation is frequently omitted, in which case a may usually be assumed. However, some researchers dispute the idea that clicks should be analyzed as doubly articulated, as the traditional transcription implies, and analyze the rear occlusion as solely a part of the airstream mechanism. In transcriptions of such approaches, the click letter represents both places of articulation, with the different letters representing the different click types, and diacritics are used for the elements of the accompaniment: , etc.
* Letters for the voiceless implosives are no longer supported by the IPA, though they remain in Unicode. Instead, the IPA typically uses the voiced equivalent with a voiceless diacritic: , etc.
* The letter for the retroflex implosive, , is not &quot;explicitly IPA approved&quot;, but has the expected form if such a symbol were to be approved.
* The ejective diacritic is placed at the right-hand margin of the consonant, rather than immediately after the letter for the stop: , . In imprecise transcription, it often stands in for a superscript glottal stop in glottalized but pulmonic sonorants, such as , , , also transcribable as creaky , , , .

==== Affricates ====
Affricates and co-articulated stops are represented by two letters joined by a tie bar, either above or below the letters with no difference in meaning. Affricates are optionally represented by ligaturese.g. though this is no longer official IPA usage because a great number of ligatures would be required to represent all affricates this way. Alternatively, a superscript notation for a consonant release is sometimes used to transcribe affricates, for example for , paralleling ~ . The letters for the palatal plosives and are often used as a convenience for and or similar affricates, even in official IPA publications, so they must be interpreted with care.
==== Co-articulated consonants ====
Co-articulated consonants are sounds that involve two simultaneous places of articulation (are pronounced using two parts of the vocal tract). In English, the in &quot;went&quot; is a coarticulated consonant, being pronounced by rounding the lips and raising the back of the tongue. Similar sounds are and . In some languages, plosives can be double-articulated, for example in the name of Laurent Gbagbo.
Notes
* , the Swedish &quot;sj&quot;-sound, is described by the IPA as a &quot;simultaneous and &quot;, but it is unlikely such a simultaneous fricative actually exists in any language.
* Multiple tie bars can be used: or . For instance, a pre-voiced velar affricate may be transcribed as 
* If a diacritic needs to be placed on or under a tie bar, the combining grapheme joiner (U+034F) needs to be used, as in &#x27;chewed&#x27; (Margi). Font support is spotty, however.

=== Vowels ===

The IPA defines a vowel as a sound which occurs at a syllable center. Below is a chart depicting the vowels of the IPA. The IPA maps the vowels according to the position of the tongue.
The vertical axis of the chart is mapped by vowel height. Vowels pronounced with the tongue lowered are at the bottom, and vowels pronounced with the tongue raised are at the top. For example, (the first vowel in &quot;father&quot;) is at the bottom because the tongue is lowered in this position. (the vowel in &quot;meet&quot;) is at the top because the sound is said with the tongue raised to the roof of the mouth.

In a similar fashion, the horizontal axis of the chart is determined by vowel backness. Vowels with the tongue moved towards the front of the mouth (such as , the vowel in &quot;met&quot;) are to the left in the chart, while those in which it is moved to the back (such as , the vowel in &quot;but&quot;) are placed to the right in the chart.

In places where vowels are paired, the right represents a rounded vowel (in which the lips are rounded) while the left is its unrounded counterpart.

==== Diphthongs ====
Diphthongs are typically specified with a non-syllabic diacritic, as in or , or with a superscript for the on- or off-glide, as in or . Sometimes a tie bar is used: , especially when it is difficult to tell if the diphthong is characterized by an on-glide or an off-glide or when it is variable.

Notes
* officially represents a front vowel, but there is little if any distinction between front and central open vowels (see ), and is frequently used for an open central vowel. If disambiguation is required, the retraction diacritic or the centralized diacritic may be added to indicate an open central vowel, as in or .

== Diacritics and prosodic notation ==
Diacritics are used for phonetic detail. They are added to IPA letters to indicate a modification or specification of that letter&#x27;s normal pronunciation.

By being made superscript, any IPA letter may function as a diacritic, conferring elements of its articulation to the base letter. Those superscript letters listed below are specifically provided for by the IPA &quot;Handbook&quot;; other uses can be illustrated with ( with fricative release), ( with affricate onset), (prenasalized ), ( with breathy voice), (glottalized ), ( with a flavor of , i.e. a voiceless alveolar retracted sibilant), ( with diphthongization), (compressed ). Superscript diacritics placed after a letter are ambiguous between simultaneous modification of the sound and phonetic detail at the end of the sound. For example, labialized may mean either simultaneous and or else with a labialized release. Superscript diacritics placed before a letter, on the other hand, normally indicate a modification of the onset of the sound ( glottalized , with a glottal onset). (See .)

Notes:
Subdiacritics (diacritics normally placed below a letter) may be moved above a letter to avoid conflict with a descender, as in voiceless . The raising and lowering diacritics have optional spacing forms , that avoid descenders.

The state of the glottis can be finely transcribed with diacritics. A series of alveolar plosives ranging from open-glottis to closed-glottis phonation is:

Additional diacritics are provided by the Extensions to the IPA for speech pathology.

=== Suprasegmentals ===
These symbols describe the features of a language above the level of individual consonants and vowels, that is, at the level of syllable, word or phrase. These include prosody, pitch, length, stress, intensity, tone and gemination of the sounds of a language, as well as the rhythm and intonation of speech. Various ligatures of pitch/tone letters and diacritics are provided for by the Kiel Convention and used in the IPA &quot;Handbook&quot; despite not being found in the summary of the IPA alphabet found on the one-page chart.

Under capital letters below we will see how a carrier letter may be used to indicate suprasegmental features such as labialization or nasalization. Some authors omit the carrier letter, for e.g. suffixed or prefixed , or place a spacing variant of a diacritic such as or at the beginning or end of a word to indicate that it applies to the entire word.

Notes:


The old staveless tone letters, which are effectively obsolete, include high , mid , low , rising , falling , low rising and low falling .

==== Stress ====
Officially, the stress marks appear before the stressed syllable, and thus mark the syllable boundary as well as stress (though the syllable boundary may still be explicitly marked with a period). Occasionally the stress mark is placed immediately before the nucleus of the syllable, after any consonantal onset. In such transcriptions, the stress mark does not mark a syllable boundary. The primary stress mark may be doubled for extra stress (such as prosodic stress). The secondary stress mark is sometimes seen doubled for extra-weak stress, but this convention has not been adopted by the IPA. Some dictionaries place both stress marks before a syllable, , to indicate that pronunciations with either primary or secondary stress are heard, though this is not IPA usage.

==== Boundary markers ====
There are three boundary markers: for a syllable break, for a minor prosodic break and for a major prosodic break. The tags &#x27;minor&#x27; and &#x27;major&#x27; are intentionally ambiguous. Depending on need, &#x27;minor&#x27; may vary from a foot break to a break in list-intonation to a continuing–prosodic unit boundary (equivalent to a comma), and while &#x27;major&#x27; is often any intonation break, it may be restricted to a final–prosodic unit boundary (equivalent to a period). The &#x27;major&#x27; symbol may also be doubled, , for a stronger break.

Although not part of the IPA, the following additional boundary markers are often used in conjunction with the IPA: for a mora or mora boundary, for a syllable or syllable boundary, for a morpheme boundary, for a word boundary (may be doubled, , for e.g. a breath-group boundary), for a phrase or intermediate boundary and for a prosodic boundary. For example, C# is a word-final consonant, %V a post-pausa vowel, and σC a syllable-initial consonant.

==== Pitch and tone ====

 are defined in the &quot;Handbook&quot; as &quot;upstep&quot; and &quot;downstep&quot;, concepts from tonal languages. However, the upstep symbol can also be used for pitch reset, and the IPA &quot;Handbook&quot; uses it for prosody in the illustration for Portuguese, a non-tonal language.

Phonetic pitch and phonemic tone may be indicated by either diacritics placed over the nucleus of the syllablee.g., high-pitch or by Chao tone letters placed either before or after the word or syllable. There are three graphic variants of the tone letters: with or without a stave, and facing left or facing right from the stave. The stave was introduced with the 1989 Kiel Convention, as was the option of placing a staved letter after the word or syllable, while retaining the older conventions. There are therefore six ways to transcribe pitch/tone in the IPA: i.e., , , , , and for a high pitch/tone. Of the tone letters, only left-facing staved letters and a few representative combinations are shown in the summary on the &quot;Chart&quot;, and in practice it is currently more common for tone letters to occur after the syllable/word than before, as in the Chao tradition. Placement before the word is a carry-over from the pre-Kiel IPA convention, as is still the case for the stress and upstep/downstep marks. The IPA endorses the Chao tradition of using the left-facing tone letters, , for underlying tone, and the right-facing letters, , for surface tone, as occurs in tone sandhi, and for the intonation of non-tonal languages. In the Portuguese illustration in the 1999 &quot;Handbook&quot;, tone letters are placed before a word or syllable to indicate prosodic pitch (equivalent to global rise and global fall, but allowing more precision), and in the Cantonese illustration they are placed after a word/syllable to indicate lexical tone. Theoretically therefore prosodic pitch and lexical tone could be simultaneously transcribed in a single text, though this is not a formalized distinction.

Rising and falling pitch, as in contour tones, are indicated by combining the pitch diacritics and letters in the table, such as grave plus acute for rising and acute plus grave for falling . Only six combinations of two diacritics are supported, and only across three levels (high, mid, low), despite the diacritics supporting five levels of pitch in isolation. The four other explicitly approved rising and falling diacritic combinations are high/mid rising , low rising , high falling , and low/mid falling .

The Chao tone letters, on the other hand, may be combined in any pattern, and are therefore used for more complex contours and finer distinctions than the diacritics allow, such as mid-rising , extra-high falling , etc. There are 20 such possibilities. However, in Chao&#x27;s original proposal, which was adopted by the IPA in 1989, he stipulated that the half-high and half-low letters may be combined with each other, but not with the other three tone letters, so as not to create spuriously precise distinctions. With this restriction, there are 8 possibilities.

The old staveless tone letters tend to be more restricted than the staved letters, though not as restricted as the diacritics. Officially, they support as many distinctions as the staved letters, but typically only three pitch levels are distinguished. Unicode supports default or high-pitch and low-pitch . Only a few mid-pitch tones are supportedsuch as and then only accidentally.

Although tone diacritics and tone letters are presented as equivalent on the chart, &quot;this was done only to simplify the layout of the chart. The two sets of symbols are not comparable in this way.&quot; Using diacritics, a high tone is and a low tone is ; in tone letters, these are and . One can double the diacritics for extra-high and extra-low ; there is no parallel to this using tone letters. Instead, tone letters have mid-high and mid-low ; again, there is no equivalent among the diacritics. Thus in a three-register tone system, are equivalent to , while in a four-register system, may be equivalent to .

The correspondence breaks down even further once they start combining. For more complex tones, one may combine three or four tone diacritics in any permutation, though in practice only generic peaking (rising-falling) and dipping (falling-rising) combinations are used. Chao tone letters are required for finer detail (, etc.). Although only 10 peaking and dipping tones were proposed in Chao&#x27;s original, limited set of tone letters, phoneticians often make finer distinctions, and indeed an example is found on the IPA Chart. The system allows the transcription of 112 peaking and dipping pitch contours, including tones that are level for part of their length.

More complex contours are possible. Chao gave an example of (mid-high-low-mid) from English prosody.

Chao tone letters generally appear after each syllable, for a language with syllable toneor after the phonological word, for a language with word tone (). The IPA gives the option of placing the tone letters before the word or syllable, but this is rare for lexical tone. Reversed tone letters may be used to clarify that they apply to the following rather than to the preceding syllable, . The staveless letters are not directly supported by Unicode, but some fonts allow the stave in Chao tone letters to be suppressed.

=== Comparative degree ===
IPA diacritics may be doubled to indicate an extra degree (greater intensity) of the feature indicated. This is a productive process, but apart from extra-high and extra-low tones being marked by doubled high- and low-tone diacritics, , the major prosodic break being marked as a doubled minor break , and a couple other instances, such usage is not enumerated by the IPA.

For example, the stress mark may be doubled (or even tripled, etc.) to indicate an extra degree of stress, such as prosodic stress in English. An example in French, with a single stress mark for normal prosodic stress at the end of each prosodic unit (marked as a minor prosodic break), and a double or even triple stress mark for contrastive/emphatic stress: &quot;.&quot; Similarly, a doubled secondary stress mark is commonly used for tertiary (extra-light) stress, though a proposal to officially adopt this was rejected. In a similar vein, the effectively obsolete staveless tone letters were once doubled for an emphatic rising intonation and an emphatic falling intonation .

Length is commonly extended by repeating the length mark, which may be phonetic, as in etc., as in English &quot;shhh!&quot; , or phonemic, as in the &quot;overlong&quot; segments of Estonian:
* &quot;vere&quot; &#x27;blood [gen.sg.]&#x27;, &quot;veere&quot; &#x27;edge [gen.sg.]&#x27;, &quot;veere&quot; &#x27;roll [imp. 2nd sg.]&#x27;
* &quot;lina&quot; &#x27;sheet&#x27;, &quot;linna&quot; &#x27;town [gen. sg.]&#x27;, &quot;linna&quot; &#x27;town [ill. sg.]&#x27;
(Normally additional phonemic degrees of length are handled by the extra-short or half-long diacritic, i.e. or , but the first two words in each of the Estonian examples are analyzed as typically short and long, and , requiring a different remedy for the additional words.)

Delimiters are similar: double slashes indicate extra phonemic (morpho-phonemic), double square brackets especially precise transcription, and double parentheses especially unintelligible.

Occasionally other diacritics are doubled:
* Rhoticity in Badaga &quot;mouth&quot;, &quot;bangle&quot;, and &quot;crop&quot;.
* Mild and strong aspiration, , .
* Nasalization, as in Palantla Chinantec lightly nasalized vs heavily nasalized , though some care can be needed to distinguish this from the extIPA diacritic for velopharyngeal frication in disordered speech, , which has also been analyzed as extreme nasalization.
* Weak vs strong ejectives, , .
* Especially lowered, e.g. (or , if the former symbol does not display properly) for as a weak fricative in some pronunciations of &quot;register&quot;.
* Especially retracted, e.g. or , though some care might be needed to distinguish this from indications of alveolar or alveolarized articulation in extIPA, e.g. .
* Especially guttural, e.g. (velarized l), (pharyngealized l).
* The transcription of strident and harsh voice as extra-creaky may be motivated by the similarities of these phonations.

The extIPA provides combining parentheses for weak intensity, which when combined with a doubled diacritic indicate an intermediate degree. For instance, increasing degrees of nasalization of the vowel might be written .

== Ambiguous letters ==
As noted above, IPA letters are often used quite loosely in broad transcription if no ambiguity would arise in a particular language. Because of that, IPA letters have not generally been created for sounds that are not distinguished in individual languages. A distinction between voiced fricatives and approximants is only partially implemented by the IPA, for example. Even with the relatively recent addition of the palatal fricative and the velar approximant to the alphabet, other letters, though defined as fricatives, are often ambiguous between fricative and approximant. For forward places, and can generally be assumed to be fricatives unless they carry a lowering diacritic. Rearward, however, and are perhaps more commonly intended to be approximants even without a lowering diacritic. and are similarly either fricatives or approximants, depending on the language, or even glottal &quot;transitions&quot;, without that often being specified in the transcription.

Another common ambiguity is among the letters for palatal consonants. and are not uncommonly used as a typographic convenience for affricates, typically and , while and are commonly used for palatalized alveolar and . To some extent this may be an effect of analysis, but it is common to match up single IPA letters to the phonemes of a language, without overly worrying about phonetic precision.

It has been argued that the lower-pharyngeal (epiglottal) fricatives and are better characterized as trills, rather than as fricatives that have incidental trilling. This has the advantage of merging the upper-pharyngeal fricatives together with the epiglottal plosive and trills into a single pharyngeal column in the consonant chart. However, in Shilha Berber the epiglottal fricatives are not trilled. Although they might be transcribed to indicate this, the far more common transcription is , which is therefore ambiguous between languages.

Among vowels, is officially a front vowel, but is more commonly treated as a central vowel. The difference, to the extent it is even possible, is not phonemic in any language.

For all phonetic notation, it is good practice for an author to specify exactly what they mean by the symbols that they use.

== Superscript letters ==

Superscript IPA letters are used to indicate secondary aspects of articulation. These may be aspects of simultaneous articulation that are considered to be in some sense less dominant than the basic sound, or may be transitional articulations that are interpreted as secondary elements. Examples include secondary articulation; onsets, releases, aspiration and other transitions; shades of sound; light epenthetic sounds and incompletely articulated sounds. Morphophonemically, superscripts may be used for assimilation, e.g. for the effect of labialization on a vowel , which may be realized as phonemic . The IPA and ICPLA endorse Unicode encoding of superscript variants of all contemporary segmental letters in the IPA proper and of all additional fricatives in extIPA, including the &quot;implicit&quot; IPA retroflex letters .

Superscripts are often used as a substitute for the tie bar, for example for and or for . However, in precise notation there is a difference between a fricative release in and the affricate , between a velar onset in and doubly articulated .

Superscript letters can be meaningfully modified by combining diacritics, just as baseline letters can. For example, a superscript dental nasal in , a superscript voiceless velar nasal in , and labial-velar prenasalization in . Although the diacritic may seem a bit oversized compared to the superscript letter it modifies, e.g. , this can be an aid to legibility, just as it is with the composite superscript c-cedilla and rhotic vowels . Superscript length marks can be used to indicate the length of aspiration of a consonant, e.g. . Another option is to use extIPA parentheses and a doubled diacritic: .

== Obsolete and nonstandard symbols ==
A number of IPA letters and diacritics have been retired or replaced over the years. This number includes duplicate symbols, symbols that were replaced due to user preference, and unitary symbols that were rendered with diacritics or digraphs to reduce the inventory of the IPA. The rejected symbols are now considered obsolete, though some are still seen in the literature.

The IPA once had several pairs of duplicate symbols from alternative proposals, but eventually settled on one or the other. An example is the vowel letter , rejected in favor of . Affricates were once transcribed with ligatures, such as (and others, some of which not found in Unicode). These have been officially retired but are still used. Letters for specific combinations of primary and secondary articulation have also been mostly retired, with the idea that such features should be indicated with tie bars or diacritics: for is one. In addition, the rare voiceless implosives, , were dropped soon after their introduction and are now usually written . The original set of click letters, , was retired but is still sometimes seen, as the current pipe letters can cause problems with legibility, especially when used with brackets ([ ] or / /), the letter (small L), or the prosodic marks . (For this reason, some publications which use the current IPA pipe letters disallow IPA brackets.)

Individual non-IPA letters may find their way into publications that otherwise use the standard IPA. This is especially common with:
* Affricates, such as the Americanist barred lambda for or for .
* The Karlgren letters for Chinese vowels, .
* Digits for tonal phonemes that have conventional numbers in a local tradition, such as the four tones of Standard Chinese. This may be more convenient for comparison between related languages and dialects than a phonetic transcription would be, because tones vary more unpredictably than segmental phonemes do.
* Digits for tone levels, which are simpler to typeset, though the lack of standardization can cause confusion (e.g. is high tone in some languages but low tone in others; may be high, medium or low tone, depending on the local convention).
* Iconic extensions of standard IPA letters that are implicit in the alphabet, such as retroflex  and . These are referred to in the &quot;Handbook&quot; and have been included in Unicode at IPA request.
* Even presidents of the IPA have used para-IPA notation, such as resurrecting the old diacritic for purely labialized sounds (not simultaneously velarized), the lateral fricative letter , and either the old dot diacritic or the novel letters for the not-quite-retroflex fricatives of Polish &quot;sz, ż&quot; and of Russian &quot;ш ж&quot;.

In addition, it is common to see &quot;ad hoc&quot; typewriter substitutions, generally capital letters, for when IPA support is not available, e.g. S for . (See also SAMPA and X-SAMPA substitute notation.)

== Extensions ==
The Extensions to the International Phonetic Alphabet for Disordered Speech, commonly abbreviated &quot;extIPA&quot; and sometimes called &quot;Extended IPA&quot;, are symbols whose original purpose was to accurately transcribe disordered speech. At the Kiel Convention in 1989, a group of linguists drew up the initial extensions, which were based on the previous work of the PRDS (Phonetic Representation of Disordered Speech) Group in the early 1980s. The extensions were first published in 1990, then modified, and published again in 1994 in the &quot;Journal of the International Phonetic Association&quot;, when they were officially adopted by the ICPLA. While the original purpose was to transcribe disordered speech, linguists have used the extensions to designate a number of sounds within standard communication, such as hushing, gnashing teeth, and smacking lips, as well as regular lexical sounds such as lateral fricatives that do not have standard IPA symbols.

In addition to the Extensions to the IPA for disordered speech, there are the conventions of the Voice Quality Symbols, which include a number of symbols for additional airstream mechanisms and secondary articulations in what they call &quot;voice quality&quot;.

== Associated notation ==
Capital letters and various characters on the number row of the keyboard are commonly used to extend the alphabet in various ways.

=== Associated symbols ===
There are various punctuation-like conventions for linguistic transcription that are commonly used together with IPA. Some of the more common are:
:(a) A reconstructed form.
:(b) An ungrammatical form (including an unphonemic form).
:(a) A reconstructed form, deeper (more ancient) than a single , used when reconstructing even further back from already-starred forms.
:(b) An ungrammatical form. A less common convention than (b), this is sometimes used when reconstructed and ungrammatical forms occur in the same text.

;, : An ungrammatical form. A less common convention than (b), this is sometimes used when reconstructed and ungrammatical forms occur in the same text.

;: A doubtfully grammatical form.

;: A generalized form, such as a typical shape of a wanderwort that has not actually been reconstructed.

;: A word boundary – e.g. for a word-initial vowel.

;: A phonological word boundary; e.g. for a high tone that occurs in such a position.

;: A morpheme boundary; e.g. for English &quot;knelt&quot;.

;: The location of a segment – e.g. for an intervocalic position, or for word-final position.

;: Alternation or contrast – e.g. or for variation between and , noting that a contrast is maintained or lost, or indicating the change of a root in e.g. for English &quot;kneel&quot; ~ &quot;knelt&quot;.

;: A null segment or morpheme. This may indicate the absence of an affix, e.g. for where an affix might appear but does not (&quot;cat&quot; instead of &quot;cats&quot;), or a deleted segment that leaves a feature behind, such as for an theoretical labialized segment that is only realized as labialization on adjacent segments.

=== Capital letters ===
Full capital letters are not used as IPA symbols, except as typewriter substitutes (e.g. N for , S for , O for – see SAMPA). They are, however, often used in conjunction with the IPA in two cases:
# for (archi)phonemes and for natural classes of sounds (that is, as wildcards). The extIPA chart, for example, uses capital letters as wildcards in its illustrations.
# as carrying letters for the Voice Quality Symbols.

Wildcards are commonly used in phonology to summarize syllable or word shapes, or to show the evolution of classes of sounds. For example, the possible syllable shapes of Mandarin can be abstracted as ranging from (an atonic vowel) to (a consonant-glide-vowel-nasal syllable with tone), and word-final devoicing may be schematized as → /_#. They are also used in historical linguistics for a sound that is posited but whose nature has not been determined beyond some generic category such as {nasal} or {uvular}. In speech pathology, capital letters represent indeterminate sounds, and may be superscripted to indicate they are weakly articulated: e.g. is a weak indeterminate alveolar, a weak indeterminate velar.

There is a degree of variation between authors as to the capital letters used, but for {consonant}, for {vowel} and for {nasal} are ubiquitous in English-language material. Other common conventions are for {tone/accent} (tonicity), for {plosive}, for {fricative}, for {sibilant}, for {glide/semivowel}, for {lateral} or {liquid}, for {rhotic} or {resonant/sonorant}, for {obstruent}, for {click}, for {open, front, back, close, rounded vowel} and for {labial, alveolar, post-alveolar/palatal, velar, uvular, pharyngeal, glottal consonant}, respectively, and for {any sound}, as in for a heavy syllable {, , }. The letters can be modified with IPA diacritics, for example for {ejective}, for {implosive}, or for {prenasalized consonant}, for {nasal vowel}, for {aspirated CV syllable with high tone}, for {voiced sibilant}, for {voiceless nasal}, or for {affricate}, for a consonant with a glide as secondary articulation (e.g. for {palatalized consonant} and for {labialized consonant}) and for {dental consonant}. , , are also commonly used for high, mid and low tone, with for rising tone and for falling tone, rather than transcribing them overly precisely with IPA tone letters or with ambiguous digits.

Typical examples of archiphonemic use of capital letters are for the Turkish harmonic vowel set }; for the conflated flapped middle consonant of American English &quot;writer&quot; and &quot;rider&quot;; for the homorganic syllable-coda nasal of languages such as Spanish and Japanese (essentially equivalent to the wild-card usage of the letter); and in cases where a phonemic distinction between trill and flap is conflated, as in Spanish &quot;enrejar&quot; (the &quot;n&quot; is homorganic and the first &quot;r&quot; is a trill, but the second &quot;r&quot; is variable). Similar usage is found for &quot;phonemic&quot; analysis, where a language does not distinguish sounds that have separate letters in the IPA. For instance, Castillian Spanish has been analyzed as having phonemes and , which surface as and in voiceless environments and as and in voiced environments (e.g. &quot;hazte&quot; → , vs &quot;hazme&quot; → , or &quot;las manos&quot; → ).

, and have completely different meanings as Voice Quality Symbols, where they stand for &quot;voice&quot; (VoQS jargon for secondary articulation), &quot;falsetto&quot; and &quot;creak&quot;. These three letters may take diacritics to indicate what kind of voice quality an utterance has, and may be used as carrier letters to extract a suprasegmental feature that occurs on all susceptible segments in a stretch of IPA. For instance, the transcription of Scottish Gaelic &#x27;cat&#x27; and &#x27;cats&#x27; (Islay dialect) can be made more economical by extracting the suprasegmental labialization of the words: and . The conventional wildcards or might be used instead of VoQS so that the reader does not misinterpret as meaning that only vowels are labialized (i.e. for all segments labialized, for all consonants labialized), or the carrier letter may be omitted altogether (e.g. , or ). (See for other transcription conventions.)

This summary is to some extent valid internationally, but linguistic material written in other languages may have different associations with capital letters used as wildcards. For example, in German and are used for &quot;Konsonant&quot; (consonant) and &quot;Vokal&quot; (vowel); in Russian, and are used for &quot;согласный&quot; (&quot;soglasnyj&quot;, consonant) and &quot;гласный&quot; (&quot;glasnyj&quot;, vowel). In French, tone may be transcribed with and for &quot;haut&quot; (high) and &quot;bas&quot; (low).

== Segments without letters ==
The blank cells on the summary IPA chart can be filled without much difficulty if the need arises.

The missing retroflex letters, namely , are &quot;implicit&quot; in the alphabet, and the IPA supported their adoption into Unicode. Attested in the literature are the retroflex implosive , the voiceless retroflex lateral fricative , the retroflex lateral flap and the retroflex click ; the first is also mentioned in the IPA &quot;Handbook&quot;, and the lateral fricatives are provided for by the extIPA.

The epiglottal trill is arguably covered by the generally trilled epiglottal &quot;fricatives&quot; . Ad hoc letters for near-close central vowels, , are used in some descriptions of English, though those are specifically reduced vowelsforming a set with the IPA reduced vowels and the simple points in vowel space are easily transcribed with diacritics: or . Diacritics are able to fill in most of the remainder of the charts. If a sound cannot be transcribed, an asterisk may be used, either as a letter or as a diacritic (as in sometimes seen for the Korean &quot;fortis&quot; velar).

=== Consonants ===
Representations of consonant sounds outside of the core set are created by adding diacritics to letters with similar sound values. The Spanish bilabial and dental approximants are commonly written as lowered fricatives, and respectively. Similarly, voiced lateral fricatives can be written as raised lateral approximants, , though the extIPA also provides for the first of these. A few languages such as Banda have a bilabial flap as the preferred allophone of what is elsewhere a labiodental flap. It has been suggested that this be written with the labiodental flap letter and the advanced diacritic, .
Similarly, a labiodental trill would be written (bilabial trill and the dental sign), and the labiodental plosives are now universally rather than the &quot;ad hoc&quot; letters once found in Bantuist literature. Other taps can be written as extra-short plosives or laterals, e.g. , though in some cases the diacritic would need to be written below the letter. A retroflex trill can be written as a retracted , just as non-subapical retroflex fricatives sometimes are. The remaining pulmonic consonants – the uvular laterals () and the palatal trill – while not strictly impossible, are very difficult to pronounce and are unlikely to occur even as allophones in the world&#x27;s languages.

=== Vowels ===
The vowels are similarly manageable by using diacritics for raising, lowering, fronting, backing, centering, and mid-centering. For example, the unrounded equivalent of can be transcribed as mid-centered , and the rounded equivalent of as raised or lowered (though for those who conceive of vowel space as a triangle, simple already is the rounded equivalent of ). True mid vowels are lowered or raised , while centered and (or, less commonly, ) are near-close and open central vowels, respectively.

The only known vowels that cannot be represented in this scheme are vowels with unexpected roundedness. For unambiguous transcription, such sounds would require dedicated diacritics. Possibilities include or for protrusion and (or VoQS ) for compression. However, these transcriptions suggest that the sounds are diphthongs, and so while they may be clear for a language like Swedish where they are diphthongs, they may be misleading for languages such as Japanese where they are monophthongs.
The extIPA &#x27;spread&#x27; diacritic is sometimes seen for compressed , , , , though again the intended meaning would need to be explained or they would be interpreted as being spread the way that cardinal is. For protrusion (&quot;w&quot;-like labialization without velarization), Ladefoged &amp; Maddieson use the old IPA omega diacritic for labialization, , for protruded , , , . This is an adaptation of an old IPA convention of rounding an unrounded vowel letter like &quot;i&quot; with a subscript omega () and unrounding a rounded letter like &quot;u&quot; with a subscript turned omega.
, the turned omega diacritic is in the pipeline for Unicode, and is under consideration for compression in extIPA.
Kelly &amp; Local use a combining &quot;w&quot; diacritic for protrusion (e.g. ) and a combining &quot;ʍ&quot; diacritic for compression (e.g. ). Because their transcriptions are manuscript, these are effectively the same symbols as the old IPA diacritics, which indeed are historically cursive &quot;w&quot; and &quot;ʍ&quot;. However, the more angular of typescript might misleadingly suggest the vowel is protruded and voiceless (like ) rather than compressed and voiced.

== Symbol names ==

In both print and speech, an IPA symbol is often distinguished from the sound it transcribes because IPA letters very often do not have their cardinal IPA values in practice. This is commonly the case in phonemic and broad phonetic transcription, making articulatory descriptions of IPA letters, such as &quot;mid front rounded vowel&quot; or &quot;voiced velar stop&quot;, inappropriate as names for those letters. While the &quot;Handbook of the International Phonetic Association&quot; states that no official names exist for its symbols, it admits the presence of one or two common names for each. The symbols also have nonce names in the Unicode standard. In many cases, the names in Unicode and the IPA &quot;Handbook&quot; differ. For example, the &quot;Handbook&quot; calls &quot;epsilon&quot;, while Unicode calls it &quot;small letter open e&quot;.

The traditional names of the Latin and Greek letters are usually used for unmodified letters. Letters which are not directly derived from these alphabets, such as , may have a variety of names, sometimes based on the appearance of the symbol or on the sound that it represents. In Unicode, some of the letters of Greek origin have Latin forms for use in IPA; the others use the characters from the Greek block.

For diacritics, there are two methods of naming. For traditional diacritics, the IPA notes the name in a well known language; for example, is &quot;e-acute&quot;, based on the name of the diacritic in English and French. Non-traditional diacritics are often named after objects they resemble, so is called &quot;d-bridge&quot;.

Geoffrey Pullum and list a variety of names in use for both current and retired IPA symbols in their &quot;Phonetic Symbol Guide&quot;. Many of them found their way into Unicode.

== Computer support ==
=== Unicode ===
Unicode supports nearly all of the IPA. Apart from basic Latin and Greek and general punctuation, the primary blocks are IPA Extensions, Spacing Modifier Letters and Combining Diacritical Marks, with lesser support from Phonetic Extensions, Phonetic Extensions Supplement, Combining Diacritical Marks Supplement, and scattered characters elsewhere. The extended IPA is supported primarily by those blocks and Latin Extended-G.

=== IPA numbers ===

After the Kiel Convention in 1989, most IPA symbols were assigned an identifying number to prevent confusion between similar characters during the printing of manuscripts. The codes were never much used and have been superseded by Unicode.

=== Typefaces ===

Many typefaces have support for IPA characters, but good diacritic rendering remains rare. Web browsers generally do not need any configuration to display IPA characters, provided that a typeface capable of doing so is available to the operating system.

==== Free fonts ====
Typefaces that provide full IPA and nearly full extIPA support, including properly rendering the diacritics, include Gentium Plus, Charis SIL, Doulos SIL, and Andika developed by SIL International. Indeed, the IPA chose Doulos to publish their chart in Unicode format.
In addition to the level of support found in commercial and system fonts, these fonts support the full range of old-style (pre-Kiel) staveless tone letters, through a character variant option that suppresses the stave of the Chao tone letters. They also have an option to maintain the ~ vowel distinction in italics. The only notable gaps are with the extIPA: the combining parentheses, which enclose diacritics, are not supported, nor is the enclosing circle that marks unidentified sounds, and which Unicode considers to be a copy-edit mark and thus not eligible for Unicode support.

The basic Latin Noto fonts commissioned by Google also have significant IPA support, including diacritic placement, only failing with the more obscure IPA and extIPA characters and superscripts of the Latin Extended-F and Latin Extended-G blocks. The extIPA parentheses are included, but they do not enclose diacritics as they are supposed to.

DejaVu is the second free Unicode font chosen by the IPA to publish their chart. It was last updated in 2016 and so does not support the Latin F or G blocks. Stacked diacritics tend to overstrike each other.

, the IPA was developing their own font, &quot;unitipa&quot;, based on TIPA.

==== Proprietary system fonts ====
Calibri, the default font of Microsoft Office, has nearly complete IPA support with good diacritic rendering, though it is not as complete as some free fonts (see image at right). Other widespread Microsoft fonts, such as Arial and Times New Roman, have poor support.

The Apple system fonts Geneva, Lucida Grande and Hiragino (certain weights) have only basic IPA support.

==== Notable commercial fonts ====

Brill has complete IPA and extIPA coverage of characters added to Unicode by 2020, with good diacritic and tone-letter support. It is a commercial font but is freely available for non-commercial use.

=== ASCII and keyboard transliterations ===

Several systems have been developed that map the IPA symbols to ASCII characters. Notable systems include SAMPA and X-SAMPA. The usage of mapping systems in on-line text has to some extent been adopted in the context input methods, allowing convenient keying of IPA characters that would be otherwise unavailable on standard keyboard layouts.

=== IETF language tags ===
IETF language tags have registered as a variant subtag identifying text as written in IPA.
Thus, an IPA transcription of English could be tagged as .
For the use of IPA without attribution to a concrete language, is available.

=== Computer input using on-screen keyboard ===
Online IPA keyboard utilities are available, though none of them cover the complete range of IPA symbols and diacritics. Examples are the &quot;IPA 2018 i-charts&quot; hosted by the IPA, &quot;IPA character picker&quot; by Richard Ishida at GitHub, &quot;Type IPA phonetic symbols&quot; at TypeIt.org, and an &quot;IPA Chart keyboard&quot; by Weston Ruter also at GitHub. In April 2019, Google&#x27;s Gboard for Android added an IPA keyboard to its platform. For iOS there are multiple free keyboard layouts available, such as the &quot;IPA Phonetic Keyboard&quot;.

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 
* Index of phonetics articles
* 
* List of international common standards
* 
* 
* – inventor of IPA-based Yakut scripts
* provides IPA support for LaTeX
* 
* 
== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Footnotes ===
=== Works cited ===

* (hb); (pb).
* 
* 
* (hb); (pb).


== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==
* Interactive IPA chart</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21204" start="4" end="35" title="International Phonetic Alphabet" label="International Phonetic Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q21204" start="37" end="40" title="International Phonetic Alphabet" label="IPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q9779" start="48" end="56" title="alphabet" label="alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q743569" start="69" end="86" title="phonetic notation" label="phonetic notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="110" end="122" title="Latin script" label="Latin script"/>
<link wikidata="Q846513" start="146" end="180" title="International Phonetic Association" label="International Phonetic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q52946" start="261" end="267" title="speech" label="speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q184524" start="288" end="302" title="lexicography" label="lexicographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q150352" start="304" end="320" title="foreign language" label="foreign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="344" end="353" title="linguists" label="linguists"/>
<link wikidata="Q33226" start="355" end="383" title="speech–language pathology" label="speech–language pathologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q33215" start="402" end="422" title="constructed language" label="constructed language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553" start="437" end="448" title="translators" label="translators"/>
<link wikidata="Q52946" start="503" end="509" title="speech" label="speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944660" start="527" end="534" title="lexical item" label="lexical"/>
<link wikidata="Q10880526" start="562" end="570" title="prosodic" label="prosodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322198" start="582" end="595" title="oral language" label="oral language"/>
<link wikidata="Q202064" start="597" end="603" title="phone (phonetics)" label="phones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576720" start="605" end="615" title="Intonation (linguistics)" label="intonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188" start="638" end="646" title="syllable" label="syllable"/>
<link wikidata="Q527892" start="708" end="712" title="lisp" label="lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q222634" start="740" end="752" title="cleft lip and cleft palate" label="cleft palate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421964" start="755" end="778" title="extensions to the International Phonetic Alphabet" label="extended set of symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q207714" start="806" end="817" title="Transcription (linguistics)" label="transcribed"/>
<link wikidata="Q9788" start="865" end="872" title="letter (alphabet)" label="letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="877" end="886" title="diacritic" label="diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191494" start="927" end="934" title="Digraph (orthography)" label="digraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="1099" end="1121" title="phonemic transcription" label="phonemic transcription"/>
<link wikidata="Q10880526" start="1535" end="1543" title="prosodic" label="prosodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40888453" start="1599" end="1608" title="IPA chart" label="IPA chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q736598" start="1802" end="1812" title="Paul Passy" label="Paul Passy"/>
<link wikidata="Q846513" start="1866" end="1900" title="International Phonetic Association" label="International Phonetic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q23870" start="1972" end="1986" title="Otto Jespersen" label="Otto Jespersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q706648" start="2071" end="2083" title="Daniel Jones (phonetician)" label="Daniel Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839610" start="2128" end="2142" title="Romic alphabet" label="Romic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172021" start="2155" end="2170" title="spelling reform" label="spelling reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q636326" start="2182" end="2193" title="Henry Sweet" label="Henry Sweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304887" start="2224" end="2243" title="Palaeotype alphabet" label="Palaeotype alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q621776" start="2247" end="2267" title="Alexander John Ellis" label="Alexander John Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="2581" end="2585" title="Bach" label="Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136933" start="2980" end="2995" title="Kiel Convention" label="Kiel Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154123" start="3123" end="3140" title="mid central vowel" label="mid central vowel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3176" end="3196" title="implosive consonant#Voiceless implosives" label="voiceless implosives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973022" start="3276" end="3292" title="labiodental flap" label="labiodental flap"/>
<link wikidata="Q17451" start="3436" end="3444" title="typeface" label="typeface"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421964" start="3448" end="3497" title="Extensions to the International Phonetic Alphabet" label="Extensions to the International Phonetic Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q33226" start="3502" end="3518" title="speech pathology" label="speech pathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049290" start="3584" end="3644" title="International Clinical Phonetics and Linguistics Association" label="International Clinical Phonetics and Linguistics Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q602418" start="3800" end="3814" title="speech segment" label="speech segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q15139721" start="3861" end="3884" title="multigraph (orthography)" label="combinations of letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="4545" end="4552" title="phoneme" label="phoneme"/>
<link wikidata="Q521164" start="4774" end="4780" title="moraic" label="moraic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464518" start="4833" end="4841" title="sj-sound" label="sj-sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q38035" start="5291" end="5300" title="consonant" label="consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="5306" end="5311" title="vowel" label="vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="5317" end="5326" title="diacritic" label="diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q602418" start="5387" end="5401" title="Segment (linguistics)" label="suprasegmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412962" start="5420" end="5426" title="length (phonetics)" label="length"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="5428" end="5432" title="Tone (linguistics)" label="tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q181767" start="5434" end="5440" title="Stress (linguistics)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576720" start="5446" end="5456" title="Intonation (linguistics)" label="intonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="5662" end="5676" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="5719" end="5724" title="Latin script" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="5728" end="5733" title="Greek alphabet" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q178034" start="5824" end="5836" title="glottal stop" label="glottal stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11169" start="5869" end="5882" title="question mark" label="question mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q49751" start="5940" end="5967" title="voiced pharyngeal fricative" label="voiced pharyngeal fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828555" start="6029" end="6035" title="Arabic script" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q267753" start="6184" end="6193" title="retroflex" label="retroflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663284" start="6291" end="6300" title="glottalic ingressive" label="implosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q51593" start="6312" end="6327" title="nasal consonant" label="nasal consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q188725" start="6371" end="6380" title="Typographic ligature" label="ligatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q883672" start="6665" end="6687" title="mechanical typesetting" label="mechanical typesetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163271" start="6909" end="6922" title="small capital" label="small capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421964" start="6945" end="6951" title="extIPA" label="extIPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534578" start="6967" end="6975" title="guttural" label="guttural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143169" start="7073" end="7082" title="lax vowel" label="lax vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="7312" end="7324" title="Latin script" label="Latin script"/>
<link wikidata="Q253854" start="7513" end="7528" title="Classical Latin" label="Classical Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q267753" start="8381" end="8390" title="retroflex" label="retroflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q623772" start="8470" end="8476" title="uvular" label="uvular"/>
<link wikidata="Q36975" start="8661" end="8666" title="glyph" label="glyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="8755" end="8762" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8915" end="8927" title="tone letter#IPA" label="tone letters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8973" end="8984" title="pitch trace" label="pitch trace"/>
<link wikidata="Q179651" start="8990" end="9003" title="musical scale" label="musical scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="9106" end="9115" title="Diacritic" label="Diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443805" start="9195" end="9217" title="secondary articulation" label="secondary articulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q174565" start="9384" end="9391" title="bracket" label="bracket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079418" start="9763" end="9770" title="cursive" label="cursive"/>
<link wikidata="Q79894" start="9966" end="9973" title="braille" label="braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136933" start="10326" end="10344" title="History of the IPA" label="History of the IPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q448789" start="10448" end="10463" title="alveolo-palatal" label="alveolo-palatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q252321" start="10468" end="10478" title="epiglottal" label="epiglottal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398385" start="10743" end="10755" title="lateral flap" label="lateral flap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051422" start="10930" end="10942" title="Chao tone letter" label="tone letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186961" start="11236" end="11254" title="Journal of the IPA" label="Journal of the IPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493584" start="11301" end="11329" title="open central unrounded vowel" label="open central unrounded vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421964" start="11835" end="11841" title="extIPA" label="extIPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994691" start="11932" end="11932" title="voiceless palatal lateral fricative" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q3308526" start="12939" end="12955" title="General American" label="General American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992" start="12960" end="12967" title="Cockney" label="Cockney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144345" start="12975" end="12994" title="Southern US English" label="Southern US English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075747" start="13942" end="13971" title="Americanist phonetic notation" label="Americanist phonetic notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q104858267" start="13975" end="14004" title="Sinological phonetic notation" label="Sinological phonetic notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862127" start="14022" end="14041" title="Obsolete and nonstandard symbols in the International Phonetic Alphabet" label="nonstandard symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="14418" end="14443" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901667" start="14459" end="14486" title="Monolingual learner&amp;#x27;s dictionary" label="learner&amp;#x27;s dictionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399559" start="14505" end="14546" title="Oxford Advanced Learner&amp;#x27;s Dictionary" label="Oxford Advanced Learner&amp;#x27;s Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025348" start="14567" end="14611" title="Cambridge Advanced Learner&amp;#x27;s Dictionary" label="Cambridge Advanced Learner&amp;#x27;s Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14627" end="14662" title="Pronunciation respelling for English#International Phonetic Alphabet" label="the International Phonetic Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249972" start="14778" end="14802" title="Pronunciation respelling for English" label="pronunciation respelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858336" start="15071" end="15086" title="Merriam-Webster Dictionary" label="Merriam-Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033526" start="15464" end="15486" title="phonemic orthographies" label="phonemic orthographies"/>
<link wikidata="Q33513" start="15710" end="15725" title="Hebrew alphabet" label="Hebrew alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="16148" end="16153" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q384749" start="16298" end="16313" title="Africa Alphabet" label="Africa Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q56475" start="16352" end="16357" title="Hausa language" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q33454" start="16359" end="16363" title="Fula language" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q28026" start="16365" end="16369" title="Akan language" label="Akan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668284" start="16371" end="16384" title="Gbe languages" label="Gbe languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q35772" start="16386" end="16403" title="Manding languages" label="Manding languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q36217" start="16405" end="16412" title="Lingala" label="Lingala"/>
<link wikidata="Q35475" start="16500" end="16506" title="Kabiyé language" label="Kabiyè"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="16519" end="16523" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q429421" start="16528" end="16531" title="African D" label="Ɖ ɖ"/>
<link wikidata="Q384696" start="16533" end="16536" title="Eng (letter)" label="Ŋ ŋ"/>
<link wikidata="Q374797" start="16538" end="16541" title="Latin gamma" label="Ɣ ɣ"/>
<link wikidata="Q394560" start="16543" end="16546" title="Open O" label="Ɔ ɔ"/>
<link wikidata="Q394629" start="16548" end="16551" title="Latin epsilon" label="Ɛ ɛ"/>
<link wikidata="Q394731" start="16553" end="16554" title="Ʋ" label="Ʋ"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="16594" end="16601" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q842393" start="16645" end="16659" title="IPA Extensions (Unicode block)" label="IPA extensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="17306" end="17314" title="libretto" label="libretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7028767" start="17364" end="17375" title="Nico Castel" label="Nico Castel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910701" start="17890" end="17898" title="pulmonic" label="pulmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q838797" start="18022" end="18028" title="tenuis consonant" label="tenuis"/>
<link wikidata="Q935716" start="18824" end="18832" title="lenition" label="lenition"/>
<link wikidata="Q17582" start="18981" end="18990" title="affricate" label="affricate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299085" start="19566" end="19574" title="Egressive" label="pulmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q374418" start="19624" end="19631" title="glottis" label="glottis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370895" start="19671" end="19682" title="Human mouth" label="oral cavity"/>
<link wikidata="Q210847" start="20015" end="20037" title="manner of articulation" label="manner of articulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q214090" start="20105" end="20126" title="place of articulation" label="place of articulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148563" start="20327" end="20336" title="obstruent" label="obstruent"/>
<link wikidata="Q494510" start="20383" end="20399" title="voiced consonant" label="voiced consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328163" start="20408" end="20422" title="breathy-voiced" label="breathy-voiced"/>
<link wikidata="Q31627" start="20454" end="20462" title="sonorant" label="sonorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q678132" start="21117" end="21126" title="phonation" label="phonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q718035" start="21444" end="21462" title="aryepiglottic fold" label="aryepiglottic fold"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="21532" end="21539" title="phoneme" label="phoneme"/>
<link wikidata="Q427013" start="21687" end="21693" title="click consonant" label="clicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q33614" start="21708" end="21725" title="Khoisan languages" label="Khoisan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33146" start="21747" end="21762" title="Bantu languages" label="Bantu languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q849417" start="21775" end="21785" title="implosives" label="implosives"/>
<link wikidata="Q33997" start="21814" end="21820" title="Sindhi language" label="Sindhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q56475" start="21822" end="21827" title="Hausa language" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="21829" end="21836" title="Swahili language" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="21841" end="21851" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q827454" start="21858" end="21867" title="ejectives" label="ejectives"/>
<link wikidata="Q51739" start="21883" end="21893" title="Indigenous languages of the Americas" label="Amerindian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12237297" start="21898" end="21917" title="Caucasian languages" label="Caucasian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q19773264" start="23082" end="23091" title="voiceless" label="voiceless"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994708" start="23280" end="23299" title="retroflex implosive" label="retroflex implosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484361" start="23629" end="23640" title="glottalized" label="glottalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q31627" start="23654" end="23662" title="sonorant" label="sonorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q17582" start="23738" end="23748" title="Affricates" label="Affricates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655585" start="23753" end="23767" title="Doubly articulated consonant" label="co-articulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q188725" start="23932" end="23941" title="Typographic ligature" label="ligatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374953" start="24436" end="24460" title="Co-articulated consonant" label="Co-articulated consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q214090" start="24503" end="24525" title="places of articulation" label="places of articulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q748953" start="24565" end="24576" title="vocal tract" label="vocal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q179242" start="24826" end="24840" title="Laurent Gbagbo" label="Laurent Gbagbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464518" start="24856" end="24884" title="sj-sound" label="Swedish &amp;quot;sj&amp;quot;-sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113676" start="25195" end="25220" title="combining grapheme joiner" label="combining grapheme joiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q56241" start="25274" end="25279" title="Margi language" label="Margi"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="25561" end="25573" title="vowel height" label="vowel height"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="26009" end="26023" title="vowel backness" label="vowel backness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425556" start="26339" end="26352" title="rounded vowel" label="rounded vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q102532" start="26452" end="26461" title="Diphthong" label="Diphthong"/>
<link wikidata="Q190627" start="26964" end="26984" title="Retraction (phonetics)" label="retraction diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26992" end="27013" title="Relative articulation#Centralized vowels" label="centralized diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="27113" end="27122" title="Diacritic" label="Diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q334723" start="27677" end="27714" title="voiceless alveolar retracted sibilant" label="voiceless alveolar retracted sibilant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665529" start="27724" end="27740" title="diphthongization" label="diphthongization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425556" start="27744" end="27754" title="compressed vowel" label="compressed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045635" start="28292" end="28301" title="descender" label="descender"/>
<link wikidata="Q374418" start="28428" end="28435" title="glottis" label="glottis"/>
<link wikidata="Q678132" start="28553" end="28562" title="phonation" label="phonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421964" start="28610" end="28631" title="Extensions to the IPA" label="Extensions to the IPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117308" start="28739" end="28744" title="Phonological hierarchy" label="level"/>
<link wikidata="Q187931" start="28825" end="28831" title="phrase" label="phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q10880526" start="28847" end="28854" title="prosody (linguistics)" label="prosody"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412962" start="28863" end="28869" title="length (phonetics)" label="length"/>
<link wikidata="Q181767" start="28871" end="28877" title="stress (linguistics)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="28890" end="28894" title="tone (linguistics)" label="tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q170406" start="28954" end="28960" title="rhythm" label="rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576720" start="28965" end="28975" title="Intonation (linguistics)" label="intonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136933" start="29066" end="29081" title="Kiel Convention" label="Kiel Convention"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29218" end="29233" title="#Capital letters" label="capital letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q181767" start="29748" end="29760" title="Stress (linguistics)" label="stress marks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30151" end="30158" title="#Comparative degree" label="doubled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651051" start="30781" end="30785" title="foot (prosody)" label="foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q521164" start="31223" end="31227" title="mora (linguistics)" label="mora"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115257" start="31502" end="31507" title="pausa" label="pausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198862" start="31747" end="31758" title="pitch reset" label="pitch reset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051422" start="32005" end="32021" title="Chao tone letter" label="Chao tone letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577090" start="33052" end="33063" title="tone sandhi" label="tone sandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182402" start="33614" end="33626" title="contour tone" label="contour tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="36581" end="36590" title="word tone" label="word tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118172" start="37237" end="37251" title="prosodic unit" label="prosodic break"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118172" start="37601" end="37614" title="prosodic unit" label="prosodic unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412962" start="38047" end="38053" title="Length (phonetics)" label="Length"/>
<link wikidata="Q20552901" start="38230" end="38238" title="Estonian phonology" label="Estonian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38790" end="38800" title="#Delimiters" label="Delimiters"/>
<link wikidata="Q843029" start="39025" end="39034" title="R-colored vowel" label="Rhoticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q33205" start="39038" end="39044" title="Badaga language" label="Badaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q320433" start="39124" end="39134" title="Aspiration (phonetics)" label="aspiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321760" start="39142" end="39154" title="Nasal vowel" label="Nasalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100112" start="39162" end="39180" title="Palantla Chinantec" label="Palantla Chinantec"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421964" start="39282" end="39288" title="extIPA" label="extIPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q25053245" start="39303" end="39327" title="velopharyngeal frication" label="velopharyngeal frication"/>
<link wikidata="Q827454" start="39423" end="39431" title="ejective" label="ejective"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421964" start="39739" end="39745" title="extIPA" label="extIPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027400" start="39840" end="39848" title="strident vowel" label="strident"/>
<link wikidata="Q17134607" start="39853" end="39864" title="harsh voice" label="harsh voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421964" start="39944" end="39950" title="extIPA" label="extIPA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40195" end="40200" title="#Description" label="above"/>
<link wikidata="Q34152" start="41908" end="41921" title="Shilha language" label="Shilha Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443805" start="42740" end="42762" title="secondary articulation" label="secondary articulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049290" start="43055" end="43060" title="ICPLA" label="ICPLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q685216" start="43565" end="43585" title="combining diacritics" label="combining diacritics"/>
<link wikidata="Q10880526" start="45415" end="45423" title="prosodic" label="prosodic"/>
<link wikidata="Q394671" start="45703" end="45716" title="barred lambda" label="barred lambda"/>
<link wikidata="Q167112" start="45736" end="45744" title="Karlgren" label="Karlgren"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45868" end="45898" title="Standard Chinese phonology#Tones" label="four tones of Standard Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994708" start="46426" end="46426" title="voiced retroflex implosive" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q2501294" start="46431" end="46431" title="voiceless retroflex lateral fricative" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q588064" start="47043" end="47048" title="SAMPA" label="SAMPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q614484" start="47053" end="47060" title="X-SAMPA" label="X-SAMPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421964" start="47105" end="47176" title="Extensions to the International Phonetic Alphabet for Disordered Speech" label="Extensions to the International Phonetic Alphabet for Disordered Speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282114" start="47329" end="47346" title="disordered speech" label="disordered speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136933" start="47355" end="47370" title="Kiel Convention" label="Kiel Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049290" start="47755" end="47760" title="ICPLA" label="ICPLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q223714" start="48018" end="48035" title="lateral fricative" label="lateral fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312997" start="48174" end="48195" title="Voice Quality Symbols" label="Voice Quality Symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q878226" start="48680" end="48698" title="Comparative linguistics" label="reconstructed form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187300" start="48708" end="48726" title="Grammaticality" label="ungrammatical form"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097227" start="49290" end="49300" title="wanderwort" label="wanderwort"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117835" start="49402" end="49419" title="phonological word" label="phonological word"/>
<link wikidata="Q43249" start="49489" end="49497" title="morpheme" label="morpheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q15709485" start="50317" end="50322" title="SAMPA chart for English" label="SAMPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="50403" end="50418" title="archiphoneme" label="(archi)phonemes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980663" start="50427" end="50440" title="natural class" label="natural class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421964" start="50482" end="50488" title="extIPA" label="extIPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312997" start="50595" end="50616" title="Voice Quality Symbols" label="Voice Quality Symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q779384" start="50910" end="50930" title="word-final devoicing" label="word-final devoicing"/>
<link wikidata="Q190375" start="50982" end="51004" title="historical linguistics" label="historical linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321760" start="52077" end="52088" title="nasal vowel" label="nasal vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891600" start="52756" end="52766" title="homorganic" label="homorganic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312997" start="53548" end="53569" title="Voice Quality Symbols" label="Voice Quality Symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443805" start="53627" end="53649" title="secondary articulation" label="secondary articulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="53960" end="53975" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q273" start="54014" end="54019" title="Islay" label="Islay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994708" start="55262" end="55281" title="retroflex implosive" label="retroflex implosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501294" start="55288" end="55325" title="voiceless retroflex lateral fricative" label="voiceless retroflex lateral fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994690" start="55332" end="55354" title="retroflex lateral flap" label="retroflex lateral flap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317016" start="55363" end="55378" title="retroflex click" label="retroflex click"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421964" start="55493" end="55499" title="extIPA" label="extIPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412778" start="55724" end="55738" title="reduced vowels" label="reduced vowels"/>
<link wikidata="Q716510" start="56056" end="56062" title="Korean phonology" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q806234" start="56514" end="56519" title="Banda languages" label="Banda"/>
<link wikidata="Q685771" start="57078" end="57093" title="retroflex trill" label="retroflex trill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425556" start="58014" end="58025" title="roundedness" label="roundedness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421964" start="58421" end="58427" title="extIPA" label="extIPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499602" start="60250" end="60261" title="Nonce word" label="nonce names"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="60269" end="60276" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q216042" start="61048" end="61053" title="Acute accent" label="acute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503035" start="61227" end="61242" title="Geoffrey Pullum" label="Geoffrey Pullum"/>
<link wikidata="Q23307338" start="61334" end="61355" title="Phonetic Symbol Guide" label="Phonetic Symbol Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="61446" end="61453" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q842393" start="61567" end="61581" title="IPA Extensions" label="IPA Extensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494064" start="61583" end="61607" title="Spacing Modifier Letters" label="Spacing Modifier Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244582" start="61612" end="61639" title="Combining Diacritical Marks" label="Combining Diacritical Marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803866" start="61666" end="61685" title="Phonetic Extensions" label="Phonetic Extensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805689" start="61687" end="61717" title="Phonetic Extensions Supplement" label="Phonetic Extensions Supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1596227" start="61719" end="61757" title="Combining Diacritical Marks Supplement" label="Combining Diacritical Marks Supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421964" start="61799" end="61811" title="extended IPA" label="extended IPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q108749862" start="61855" end="61871" title="Latin Extended-G" label="Latin Extended-G"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136933" start="61905" end="61920" title="Kiel Convention" label="Kiel Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q6368" start="62246" end="62257" title="Web browser" label="Web browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502659" start="62548" end="62555" title="Gentium" label="Gentium"/>
<link wikidata="Q856924" start="62562" end="62572" title="Charis SIL" label="Charis SIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714659" start="62574" end="62584" title="Doulos SIL" label="Doulos SIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q78328987" start="62590" end="62596" title="Andika (font)" label="Andika"/>
<link wikidata="Q14793" start="62610" end="62627" title="SIL International" label="SIL International"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868296" start="62867" end="62884" title="character variant" label="character variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q117915789" start="63228" end="63242" title="List of proofreader&amp;#x27;s marks" label="copy-edit mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q16948181" start="63303" end="63313" title="Noto fonts" label="Noto fonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="63330" end="63336" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q108546199" start="63488" end="63504" title="Latin Extended-F" label="Latin Extended-F"/>
<link wikidata="Q108749862" start="63509" end="63525" title="Latin Extended-G" label="Latin Extended-G"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183463" start="63632" end="63638" title="DejaVu" label="DejaVu"/>
<link wikidata="Q383938" start="63912" end="63916" title="TIPA (software)" label="TIPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q246937" start="63954" end="63961" title="Calibri" label="Calibri"/>
<link wikidata="Q11255" start="63983" end="63999" title="Microsoft Office" label="Microsoft Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q653123" start="64176" end="64181" title="Arial" label="Arial"/>
<link wikidata="Q213048" start="64186" end="64201" title="Times New Roman" label="Times New Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q622571" start="64246" end="64252" title="Geneva (typeface)" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560024" start="64254" end="64267" title="Lucida Grande" label="Lucida Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q4399673" start="64272" end="64280" title="Hiragino" label="Hiragino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64365" end="64370" title="Brill Publishers#Brill Typeface" label="Brill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="64675" end="64680" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q588064" start="64717" end="64722" title="SAMPA" label="SAMPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q614484" start="64727" end="64734" title="X-SAMPA" label="X-SAMPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059900" start="64982" end="64999" title="IETF language tag" label="IETF language tag"/>
<link wikidata="Q15893711" start="65659" end="65665" title="Gboard" label="Gboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="65670" end="65677" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156280" start="65851" end="65878" title="Index of phonetics articles" label="Index of phonetics articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624155" start="65884" end="65922" title="List of international common standards" label="List of international common standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q846875" start="65955" end="65968" title="Yakut scripts" label="Yakut scripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310" start="65996" end="66001" title="LaTeX" label="LaTeX"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14762" wikidata="Q1065888" url="?curid=14762" title="Inspector Morse">
<text>Endeavour Morse, GM, is the namesake character of the series of &quot;Morse&quot; detective novels by British author Colin Dexter, a Detective Chief Inspector in the Thames Valley Police in Oxford, England.

On television he was portrayed by John Thaw in a 33-episode drama series, &quot;Inspector Morse&quot; (1987–2000), and by Shaun Evans in the (2012–2023) prequel series &quot;Endeavour&quot;. The older Morse is a senior Criminal Investigation Department (CID) officer, while the younger is a detective constable rising through the ranks with the Oxford City Police and, in later seasons, the Thames Valley Police.

Morse presents, to some, a reasonably sympathetic personality, despite his sullen and snobbish temperament. He is known for his classic Jaguar Mark 2 (a Lancia in the early novels), thirst for English real ale, and love of classical music (especially opera and Wagner), poetry, art and cryptic crossword puzzles. In his later career he is usually assisted by Sergeant Robbie Lewis, a partnership and formal friendship which is fundamental to the series.

==Biography==

===Family===
Morse&#x27;s father was a taxi driver. In the episode of the television adaptation &quot;Cherubim and Seraphim&quot;, it is revealed that Morse&#x27;s parents divorced when he was 12. He remained with his mother until her death three years later, upon which he had to return to his father. Morse had a dreadful relationship with his stepmother Gwen. He claims that he only read poetry to annoy her, and that her petty bullying almost drove him to suicide. He has a half-sister named Joyce with whom he is on better terms. Morse was devastated when Joyce&#x27;s daughter Marilyn took her own life.

Morse prefers to use only his surname, and is generally evasive when asked about his first name, sometimes joking that it is &quot;Inspector&quot;. In &quot;The Dead of Jericho&quot; and &quot;The Wench Is Dead&quot; it is noted that his initial is E. At the end of &quot;Death Is Now My Neighbour&quot;, his name is revealed to be Endeavour. Two-thirds of the way through the television episode based on the book, he gives the cryptic clue &quot;My whole life&#x27;s effort has revolved around Eve, nine letters&quot;. In the series, it is noted that Morse&#x27;s reluctance to use his Christian name led to his receiving the nickname &quot;Pagan&quot; while at Stamford School (which Colin Dexter, the author of the Morse novels, attended). In the novels, Morse&#x27;s first name came from the vessel HMS &quot;Endeavour&quot;; his mother was a member of the Religious Society of Friends (Quakers) who have a tradition of &quot;virtue names&quot;, and his father admired Captain James Cook.

Dexter was a fan of cryptic crosswords and named Morse after champion setter Jeremy Morse, one of Dexter&#x27;s arch-rivals in writing crossword clues. Dexter used to walk along the bank of the River Thames at Oxford, opposite the boathouse belonging to 22nd Oxford Sea Scout Group; the building is named &quot;T.S. Endeavour&quot;.

===Education===
Although details of Morse&#x27;s education are kept vague, it is hinted that he won a scholarship to study at St John&#x27;s College, Oxford. He lost the scholarship as the result of poor academic performance stemming from a failed love affair, which is mentioned in the second episode of the third series, &quot;The Last Enemy&quot;, and recounted in detail in the novel &quot;The Riddle of the Third Mile&quot;, Chapter 7. Further details are revealed piece-by-piece in the prequel series. He often reflects on such renowned scholars as A. E. Housman who, like himself, failed to get an academic degree from Oxford.

===Career===
After university, he entered the army on National Service. This included serving in West Germany with the Royal Corps of Signals as a cipher clerk. Upon leaving, he joined the police at Carshall-Newtown, before being posted to Oxford with the Oxford City Police. He was awarded the George Medal in the last episode of &quot;Endeavour&quot; Series 4, which he refrains from wearing on his uniform. He is assigned to a uniformed position in Series 6 despite having his opinions and observations disregarded by CID.

===Habits and personality===
Morse is the embodiment of middle-class Englishness, with a set of prejudices and assumptions to match, although his background, being the son of a taxi driver, might be considered working class. He claims to have a private income from his father driving for the Aga Khan, but this may be a joke. Due to his manners and bearing, he is sometimes considered gentleman detective, the staple of British detective fiction, in contrast to the working-class lifestyle of his assistant Lewis. In the novels, Lewis is Welsh, but in the TV series this is altered to a Tyneside (Geordie) background, appropriately for the actor Kevin Whately. Morse is in his forties at the start of the books (&quot;Service of all the Dead&quot;, Chapter Six: &quot;… a bachelor still, forty-seven years old …&quot;), and Lewis slightly younger (e.g. &quot;The Secret of Annexe 3&quot;, Chapter Twenty-Six: &quot;a slightly younger man – another policeman, and one also in plain clothes&quot;). John Thaw was 45 at the beginning of shooting the TV series and Kevin Whately was 36.

Morse&#x27;s relationships with authority, the establishment, bastions of power and the status quo, are markedly ambiguous, as are some of his relations with women. He is frequently portrayed as patronising female characters, and once stereotyped the female sex as not naturally prone to crime, being caring and non-violent, but also often empathises with women. He is not shy to show his liking for attractive women and often dates those involved in cases. Indeed, a woman he falls in love with sometimes turns out to be the culprit.

Morse is highly intelligent. He is a crossword addict and dislikes grammatical and spelling errors; in every personal or private document that he receives, he manages to point out at least one mistake. He claims that his approach to crime-solving is deductive, and one of his key tenets is that &quot;there is a 50 per cent chance that the person who finds the body is the murderer&quot;. Morse uses immense intuition and his fantastic memory to apprehend the perpetrator.

Among Morse&#x27;s conservative tastes are that he likes to drink real ale and whisky, and in the early novels, drives a Lancia. In the television and radio productions (and reprints of the novels), this is altered to a Jaguar Mark 2. His favourite music is opera, which is echoed in the soundtracks to the television series. The original music is by Barrington Pheloung.

His dying words, said to Jim Strange, are &quot;Thank Lewis for me.&quot;

Morse is portrayed as being an atheist. However, in some scenes, he does entertain the possibility of God and/or quote the Bible from memory, agreeing with the phrases, as he does with lines from various literary books/texts.

==Novels==
The novels in the series are:
* &quot;Last Bus to Woodstock&quot; (1975)
* &quot;Last Seen Wearing&quot; (1976)
* &quot;The Silent World of Nicholas Quinn&quot; (1977)
* &quot;Service of All the Dead&quot; (1979)
* &quot;The Dead of Jericho&quot; (1981)
* &quot;The Riddle of the Third Mile&quot; (1983)
* &quot;The Secret of Annexe 3&quot; (1986)
* &quot;The Wench is Dead&quot; (1989)
* &quot;The Jewel That Was Ours&quot; (1991)
* &quot;The Way Through the Woods&quot; (1992)
* &quot;The Daughters of Cain&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Death Is Now My Neighbour&quot; (1996)
* &quot;The Remorseful Day&quot; (1999)

Inspector Morse also appears in several stories in Dexter&#x27;s short story collection, &quot;Morse&#x27;s Greatest Mystery and Other Stories&quot; (1993, expanded edition 1994).

==In other media==

===Television===
====&quot;Inspector Morse&quot; (1987–2000)====
The Inspector Morse novels were made into a TV series (also called &quot;Inspector Morse&quot;) for the British commercial TV network ITV. The series was made by Zenith Productions for Central (a company later acquired by Carlton) and comprised 33 two-hour episodes (100 minutes excluding commercials)—20 more episodes than there are novels—produced between 6 January 1987 and 15 November 2000. The last episode was adapted from the final novel &quot;The Remorseful Day&quot;, in which Morse dies from a heart attack. Morse was played by John Thaw and Lewis by Kevin Whateley.

====&quot;Lewis&quot; (2006–2015)====
A spin-off series, similarly comprising 33 two-hour episodes and based on the television incarnation of Lewis, was titled &quot;Lewis&quot;; it first aired on 29 January 2006 and last showed on 10 November 2015. The spin-off consisted the following cast members: Kevin Whately as DI Robbie Lewis, Laurence Fox as DS James Hathaway, Clare Holman as Dr Laura Hobson and Rebecca Front as CS Jean Innocent.

====&quot;Endeavour&quot; (2012–2023)====
In August 2011, ITV announced plans to film a prequel drama called &quot;Endeavour&quot;, with author Colin Dexter&#x27;s participation. English actor Shaun Evans was cast as a young Morse in his early career. The pilot episode was broadcast on 2 January 2012 on ITV. The prequel was made by Mammoth Screen. Four new episodes were televised from 14 April 2013, showing Morse&#x27;s early cases working for DI Fred Thursday (Roger Allam) and with Jim Strange (Sean Rigby), initially as PC Jim Strange, later DS Jim Strange, and pathologist Max De Bryn (James Bradshaw), plus Chief Superintendent Reginald Bright (Anton Lesser), DS Peter Jakes (Jack Laskey), WPC Shirley Trewlove (Dakota Blue Richards), DC George Fancy (Lewis Peek), DI Ronnie Box (Simon Harrison) and DS Alan Jago (Richard Riddell). Alongside the police department, the prequel also consisted of Fred Thursday’s family members: Win Thursday, (Caroline O’Neill), Sam Thursday (Jack Bannon), Joan Thursday (Sara Vickers) and the newspaper editor Dorothea Frazil (Abigail Thaw). A second series of four episodes followed, screening between 30 March 2014 and 20 April 2014. On 3 January 2016, the third series aired, also containing four episodes. A fourth series was aired, once again with four episodes, on 8 January 2017. Filming of a fifth series of six episodes began in early 2017 with the first episode of the fifth series aired on 4 February 2018. On 10 February 2019 the sixth series aired, which comprises four 1-hour-30-minute episodes. A seventh series of three episodes was filmed in late 2019, aired on 9 February 2020 and in August 2019 ITV announced that the series has been recommissioned for an eighth series, screened on 12 September 2021, also containing three episodes. Morse was voted number two on the top 25 list in ITV&#x27;s Britain&#x27;s Favourite Detective first broadcast on 30 August 2020.

On 23 May 2022, a day after filming began for the ninth series, ITV announced that &quot;Endeavour&quot; would end production after a decade on air at the conclusion of the ninth series, bringing the total number of &quot;Endeavour&quot; episodes to 36. The ninth and final series comprised the final three episodes, which aired from 26 February 2023 to 12 March 2023.

===Radio===
An adaptation by Melville Jones of &quot;Last Bus to Woodstock&quot; featured in BBC Radio 4&#x27;s &quot;Saturday Night Theatre&quot; series in June 1985, with Andrew Burt as Morse and Christopher Douglas as Lewis.

In the 1990s, an occasional BBC Radio 4 series (for &quot;The Saturday Play&quot;) was made starring the voices of John Shrapnel as Morse and Robert Glenister as Lewis. The series was written by Guy Meredith and directed by Ned Chaillet. Episodes included: &quot;The Wench is Dead&quot; (23 March 1992); &quot;Last Seen Wearing&quot; (28 May 1994); and &quot;The Silent World of Nicholas Quinn&quot; (10 February 1996).

In 2017, Alma Cullen dramatised her 2010 Morse stage play &quot;House of Ghosts&quot; as a Radio 4 production starring Neil Pearson as Morse, and Lee Ingleby as Lewis. A year later, Cullen penned an original drama entitled &quot;Morse: In The Shallows&quot;, with Pearson and Ingleby reprising their roles.

===Theatre===
An Inspector Morse stage play appeared in 2010, written by Alma Cullen (writer of four Morse screenplays for ITV). The part of Morse was played by Colin Baker. The play, entitled &quot;Morse—House of Ghosts&quot;, saw DCI Morse looking to his past, when an old acquaintance becomes the lead suspect in a murder case that involves the on-stage death of a young actress. The play toured the UK from August to December 2010. Subsequent stagings include Weymouth, Dorset in 2015 with Nigel Fairs, and an upcoming touring production starring Tom Chambers.

==References==
==Further reading==
* Allen, Paul and Jan, &quot;Endeavouring to Crack the Morse Code (Inspector Morse)&quot; Exposure Publishing (2006)
* Bishop, David, &quot;The Complete Inspector Morse: From the Original Novels to the TV Series&quot; London: Reynolds &amp; Hearn (2006) 
* Bird, Christopher, &quot;The World of Inspector Morse: A Complete A–Z Reference for the Morse Enthusiast &quot; Foreword by Colin Dexter London: Boxtree (1998) 
* Goodwin, Cliff, &quot;Inspector Morse Country : An Illustrated Guide to the World of Oxford&#x27;s famous detective&quot; London: Headline (2002) 
* Leonard, Bill, &quot;The Oxford of Inspector Morse: Films Locations History&quot; Location Guides, Oxford (2004) 
* Richards, Anthony, &quot;Inspector Morse on Location.&quot; Irregular Special Press (2007)
* Richards, Anthony, and Philip Attwell, &quot;The Oxford of Inspector Morse&quot; (2012) 
* Sanderson, Mark, &quot;The Making of Inspector Morse&quot; Pan Macmillan (1995) 
* Sýkora, Michal, The Skeptical Poetics of Colin Dexter&#x27;s Morse Novels, &quot;Clues: A Journal of Detection&quot;, vol. 40, no. 2 (2022), pp. 49–58.
* Wright, Matthew, Colin Dexter&#x27;s Classicism, &quot;Clues: A Journal of Detection&quot;, vol. 40, no. 2 (2022), pp. 59–68.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1065888" start="0" end="15" title="Inspector Morse" label="Endeavour Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507907" start="17" end="19" title="George Medal" label="GM"/>
<link wikidata="Q186424" start="82" end="97" title="detective novel" label="detective novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q457092" start="117" end="129" title="Colin Dexter" label="Colin Dexter"/>
<link wikidata="Q842782" start="133" end="142" title="Detective" label="Detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589524" start="143" end="158" title="Chief Inspector" label="Chief Inspector"/>
<link wikidata="Q8578453" start="166" end="186" title="Thames Valley Police" label="Thames Valley Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="190" end="196" title="Oxford, England" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="198" end="205" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446852" start="242" end="251" title="John Thaw" label="John Thaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685847" start="288" end="303" title="Inspector Morse (TV series)" label="Inspector Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q785482" start="330" end="341" title="Shaun Evans" label="Shaun Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q678345" start="361" end="368" title="prequel" label="prequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151914" start="382" end="391" title="Endeavour (TV series)" label="Endeavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q18197265" start="427" end="460" title="Criminal Investigation Department" label="Criminal Investigation Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q29379137" start="553" end="571" title="Oxford City Police" label="Oxford City Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678503" start="758" end="771" title="Jaguar Mark 2" label="Jaguar Mark 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q35896" start="775" end="781" title="Lancia" label="Lancia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751476" start="823" end="831" title="real ale" label="real ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="883" end="889" title="Richard Wagner" label="Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6038439" start="981" end="1002" title="Inspector Lewis" label="Sergeant Robbie Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2231741" start="1194" end="1215" title="Cherubim and Seraphim (Inspector Morse episode)" label="Cherubim and Seraphim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247148" start="1975" end="2000" title="Death Is Now My Neighbour" label="Death Is Now My Neighbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597409" start="2366" end="2381" title="Stamford School" label="Stamford School"/>
<link wikidata="Q457092" start="2389" end="2401" title="Colin Dexter" label="Colin Dexter"/>
<link wikidata="Q312224" start="2506" end="2531" title="HMS Endeavour" label="HMS &amp;quot;Endeavour&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="2594" end="2601" title="Quakers" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808118" start="2633" end="2644" title="virtue name" label="virtue name"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="2676" end="2694" title="James Cook" label="Captain James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687611" start="2774" end="2786" title="Jeremy Morse" label="Jeremy Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="2891" end="2903" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q660668" start="3008" end="3012" title="Training ship" label="T.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q609646" start="3157" end="3187" title="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford" label="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760686" start="3425" end="3453" title="The Riddle of the Third Mile" label="The Riddle of the Third Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q351410" start="3586" end="3599" title="Alfred Edward Housman" label="A. E. Housman"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089965" start="3720" end="3736" title="National Service" label="National Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="3763" end="3775" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322747" start="3785" end="3807" title="Royal Corps of Signals" label="Royal Corps of Signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681865" start="3813" end="3819" title="cipher" label="cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q29379137" start="3922" end="3940" title="Oxford City Police" label="Oxford City Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507907" start="3961" end="3973" title="George Medal" label="George Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151914" start="4003" end="4012" title="Endeavour (TV series)" label="Endeavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q393440" start="4485" end="4493" title="Aga Khan" label="Aga Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533732" start="4578" end="4597" title="gentleman detective" label="gentleman detective"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4621" end="4638" title="Detective fiction#Famous fictional detectives" label="detective fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6038439" start="4700" end="4705" title="Inspector Lewis" label="Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188353" start="4731" end="4736" title="Welsh people" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578988" start="4780" end="4788" title="Tyneside" label="Tyneside"/>
<link wikidata="Q653421" start="4790" end="4797" title="Geordie" label="Geordie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896166" start="4839" end="4852" title="Kevin Whately" label="Kevin Whately"/>
<link wikidata="Q83207" start="5850" end="5859" title="crossword" label="crossword"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751476" start="6353" end="6361" title="real ale" label="real ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q281" start="6366" end="6372" title="whisky" label="whisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q35896" start="6408" end="6414" title="Lancia" label="Lancia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678503" start="6507" end="6520" title="Jaguar Mark 2" label="Jaguar Mark 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q717964" start="6638" end="6657" title="Barrington Pheloung" label="Barrington Pheloung"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="6766" end="6773" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6494140" start="7011" end="7032" title="Last Bus to Woodstock" label="Last Bus to Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203455" start="7054" end="7071" title="Last Seen Wearing (Dexter novel)" label="Last Seen Wearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7764249" start="7093" end="7127" title="The Silent World of Nicholas Quinn" label="The Silent World of Nicholas Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455781" start="7149" end="7172" title="Service of All the Dead" label="Service of All the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729331" start="7194" end="7213" title="The Dead of Jericho" label="The Dead of Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760686" start="7235" end="7263" title="The Riddle of the Third Mile" label="The Riddle of the Third Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763124" start="7285" end="7307" title="The Secret of Annexe 3" label="The Secret of Annexe 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774236" start="7329" end="7346" title="The Wench is Dead" label="The Wench is Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743186" start="7368" end="7391" title="The Jewel That Was Ours" label="The Jewel That Was Ours"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773851" start="7413" end="7438" title="The Way Through the Woods" label="The Way Through the Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729085" start="7460" end="7481" title="The Daughters of Cain" label="The Daughters of Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247148" start="7503" end="7528" title="Death Is Now My Neighbour" label="Death Is Now My Neighbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760174" start="7550" end="7568" title="The Remorseful Day" label="The Remorseful Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914231" start="7678" end="7725" title="Morse&amp;#x27;s Greatest Mystery" label="Morse&amp;#x27;s Greatest Mystery and Other Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q15416" start="7893" end="7902" title="TV series" label="TV series"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="7983" end="7986" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069122" start="8011" end="8029" title="Zenith Productions" label="Zenith Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q10444865" start="8034" end="8041" title="Central Independent Television" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043061" start="8071" end="8078" title="Carlton Television" label="Carlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446852" start="8387" end="8396" title="John Thaw" label="John Thaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896166" start="8410" end="8424" title="Kevin Whately" label="Kevin Whateley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6038439" start="8569" end="8574" title="Sergeant Lewis" label="Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2523064" start="8593" end="8598" title="Lewis (TV series)" label="Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896166" start="8728" end="8741" title="Kevin Whately" label="Kevin Whately"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189353" start="8762" end="8774" title="Laurence Fox" label="Laurence Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q209107" start="8797" end="8809" title="Clare Holman" label="Clare Holman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944303" start="8833" end="8846" title="Rebecca Front" label="Rebecca Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q678345" start="8957" end="8964" title="prequel" label="prequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151914" start="8984" end="8993" title="Endeavour (TV series)" label="Endeavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q785482" start="9062" end="9073" title="Shaun Evans" label="Shaun Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6745872" start="9203" end="9217" title="Mammoth Screen" label="Mammoth Screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424994" start="9335" end="9346" title="Roger Allam" label="Roger Allam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096941" start="9357" end="9368" title="Chief Superintendent Strange" label="Jim Strange"/>
<link wikidata="Q59733770" start="9370" end="9380" title="Sean Rigby" label="Sean Rigby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130140" start="9463" end="9477" title="James Bradshaw (actor)" label="James Bradshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q591515" start="9523" end="9535" title="Anton Lesser" label="Anton Lesser"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113593" start="9554" end="9565" title="Jack Laskey" label="Jack Laskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q234585" start="9590" end="9610" title="Dakota Blue Richards" label="Dakota Blue Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q21693662" start="9853" end="9864" title="Jack Bannon (English actor)" label="Jack Bannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q28155259" start="9882" end="9894" title="Sara Vickers" label="Sara Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485790" start="9938" end="9950" title="Abigail Thaw" label="Abigail Thaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="10713" end="10716" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6494140" start="11218" end="11239" title="Last Bus to Woodstock" label="Last Bus to Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="11258" end="11269" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426728" start="11283" end="11305" title="Saturday Night Theatre" label="Saturday Night Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846576" start="11338" end="11349" title="Andrew Burt" label="Andrew Burt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112238" start="11363" end="11382" title="Christopher Douglas (British actor)" label="Christopher Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375689" start="11509" end="11522" title="John Shrapnel" label="John Shrapnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q388204" start="11536" end="11552" title="Robert Glenister" label="Robert Glenister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6985950" start="11618" end="11630" title="Ned Chaillet" label="Ned Chaillet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11657" end="11674" title="The Wench is Dead#Television and radio adaptations" label="The Wench is Dead"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11704" end="11721" title="Last Seen Wearing (Dexter novel)#Radio play" label="Last Seen Wearing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11753" end="11787" title="The Silent World of Nicholas Quinn#Radio play" label="The Silent World of Nicholas Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q109750892" start="11824" end="11835" title="Alma Cullen" label="Alma Cullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874313" start="11934" end="11946" title="Neil Pearson" label="Neil Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811844" start="11961" end="11972" title="Lee Ingleby" label="Lee Ingleby"/>
<link wikidata="Q109750892" start="12196" end="12207" title="Alma Cullen" label="Alma Cullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q440963" start="12284" end="12295" title="Colin Baker" label="Colin Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q661619" start="12587" end="12603" title="Weymouth, Dorset" label="Weymouth, Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207670" start="12617" end="12628" title="Nigel Fairs" label="Nigel Fairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815252" start="12674" end="12686" title="Tom Chambers (actor)" label="Tom Chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q457092" start="13105" end="13117" title="Colin Dexter" label="Colin Dexter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14763" wikidata="Q459160" url="?curid=14763" title="History of the Isle of Man">
<text>The Isle of Man had become physically separated from Great Britain and Ireland by 6500 BC. It appears that colonisation took place by sea sometime during the Mesolithic era (about 6500 BC). The island has been visited by various raiders and trading peoples over the years. After being settled by people from Ireland in the first millennium AD, the Isle of Man was converted to Christianity and then suffered raids by Vikings from Norway. After becoming subject to Norwegian suzerainty as part of the Kingdom of Mann and the Isles, the Isle of Man later became a possession of the Scottish and then the English crowns.

Since 1866, the Isle of Man has been a Crown Dependency and democratic self-government.
==Prehistory==

===Mesolithic===
The Isle of Man effectively became an island around 8,500 years ago at around the time when rising sea levels caused by the melting glaciers cut Mesolithic Britain off from continental Europe for the last time. There had earlier been a land bridge between the Isle of Man and Cumbria, but the location and opening of the land bridge remain poorly understood.

The earliest traces of people on the Isle of Man date back to the Mesolithic Period (Middle Stone Age, 8000 BC - 4000 BC). The first residents lived in small natural shelters, hunting, gathering and fishing for their food. They used small tools made of flint or bone, examples of which have been found near the coast. Examples of these artifacts are kept at the Manx National Heritage museum.

===Neolithic to Bronze Age===
The Neolithic Period marked the coming of farming, improved stone tools and pottery. During this period megalithic monuments began to appear around the island. Examples are found at Cashtal yn Ard near Maughold, King Orry&#x27;s Grave in Laxey, Meayll Circle near Cregneash, and Ballaharra Stones in St John&#x27;s. The builders of the megaliths were not the only culture during this time; there are also remains of the local Ronaldsway culture (lasting from the late Neolithic into the Bronze Age).

===Iron Age===
The Iron Age marked the beginning of Celtic cultural influence. Large hill forts appeared on hill summits and smaller promontory forts along the coastal cliffs, while large timber-framed roundhouses were built.

It is likely that the first Celts to inhabit the Island were Brythonic tribes from mainland Britain. The secular history of the Isle of Man during the Brythonic period remains mysterious. It is not known if the Romans ever made a landing on the island and if they did, little evidence has been discovered. There is evidence for contact with Roman Britain as an amphora was discovered at the settlement on the South Barrule; it is hypothesised this may have been trade goods or plunder.

It is generally assumed that Irish invasion or immigration formed the basis of the modern Manx language; Irish migration to the island probably began in the 5th century AD. This is evident in the change in language used in Ogham inscriptions. The transition between &quot;Manx Brythonic&quot; (a Brythonic language like modern Welsh) and &quot;Manx Gaelic&quot; (a Goidelic language like modern Scottish Gaelic and Irish) may have been gradual. One question is whether the present-day Manx language survives from pre-Norse days or reflects a linguistic reintroduction after the Norse invasion. The island lends its name to &quot;Manannán&quot;, the Brythonic and Gaelic sea god who is said in myth to have once ruled the island.

==Middle Ages==

===Early Middle Ages===
Tradition attributes the island&#x27;s conversion to Christianity to St Maughold (Maccul), an Irish missionary who gives his name to a parish. There are the remains of around 200 tiny early chapels called keeils scattered across the island. Evidence such as radiocarbon dating and magnetic drift points to many of these being built around AD 550–600.

The Brythonic culture of &quot;Manaw&quot; appears throughout early British tradition and later Welsh writings. The family origins of Gwriad ap Elidyr (father of Merfyn Frych and grandfather of Rhodri the Great) are attributed to a &quot;Manaw&quot; and he is sometimes named as &quot;Gwriad Manaw&quot;. The 1896 discovery of a cross inscribed &quot;Crux Guriat&quot; (Cross of Gwriad) and dated to the 8th or 9th century greatly supports this theory.

The best record of any event before the incursions of the Northmen is attributed to Báetán mac Cairill, king of Ulster, who (according to the &quot;Annals of Ulster&quot;) led an expedition to Man in 577–578, imposing his authority on the island (though some have thought this event may refer to Manau Gododdin between the Firths of Clyde and Forth, rather than the Isle of Man). After Báetán&#x27;s death in 581, his rival Áedán mac Gabráin, king of Dál Riata, is said to have taken the island in 582.

Even if the supposed conquest of the Menavian islands – Mann and Anglesey – by Edwin of Northumbria, in 616, did take place, it could not have led to any permanent results, for when the English were driven from the coasts of Cumberland and Lancashire soon afterwards, they could not well have retained their hold on the island to the west of these coasts. One can speculate, however, that when Ecgfrið&#x27;s Northumbrians laid Ireland waste from Dublin to Drogheda in 684, they temporarily occupied Mann.

===Viking Age and Norse kingdom===

The period of Scandinavian domination is divided into two main epochs – before and after the conquest of Mann by Godred Crovan in 1079. Warfare and unsettled rule characterise the earlier epoch, the later saw comparatively more peace.

Between about AD 800 and 815 the Vikings came to Mann chiefly for plunder. Between about 850 and 990, when they settled, the island fell under the rule of the Scandinavian Kings of Dublin and between 990 and 1079, it became subject to the powerful Earls of Orkney.

There was a mint producing coins on Mann between c. 1025 and c. 1065. These Manx coins were minted from an imported type 2 Hiberno-Norse penny die from Dublin. Hiberno-Norse coins were first minted under Sihtric, King of Dublin. This illustrates that Mann may have been under the thumb of Dublin at this time.

Little is known about the conqueror, Godred Crovan. According to the &quot;Chronicon Manniae&quot; he subdued Dublin, and a great part of Leinster, and held the Scots in such subjection that supposedly no one who set out to build a vessel dared to insert more than three bolts. The memory of such a ruler would be likely to survive in tradition, and it seems probable therefore that he is the person commemorated in Manx legend under the name of King Gorse or Orry. He created the Kingdom of Mann and the Isles in around 1079 including the south-western islands of Scotland until 1164, when two separate kingdoms were formed from it. In 1154, later known as the Diocese of Sodor and Man, was formed by the Catholic Church.

The islands under his rule were called the &quot;Suðr-eyjar&quot; (South isles, in contrast to the &quot;Norðr-eyjar&quot; North isles&quot;, i.e. Orkney and Shetland), consisting of the Hebrides, all the smaller western islands of Scotland, and Mann. At a later date his successors took the title of (King of Mann and of the Isles). The kingdom&#x27;s capital was on St Patrick&#x27;s Isle, where Peel Castle was built on the site of a Celtic monastery.

Olaf, Godred&#x27;s son, exercised considerable power and according to the Chronicle, maintained such close alliance with the kings of Ireland and Scotland that no one ventured to disturb the Isles during his time (1113–1152). In 1156 his son Godred (reigned 1153–1158), who for a short period also ruled over Dublin, lost the smaller islands off the coast of Argyll as a result of a quarrel with Somerled (the ruler of Argyll). An independent sovereignty thus appeared between the two divisions of his kingdom.

In the 1130s the Catholic Church sent a small mission to establish the first bishopric on the Isle of Man, and appointed Wimund as the first bishop. He soon afterwards embarked with a band of followers on a career of murder and looting throughout Scotland and the surrounding islands.

During the whole of the Scandinavian period, the Isles remained nominally under the suzerainty of the Kings of Norway but the Norwegians only occasionally asserted it with any vigour. The first such king to assert control over the region was likely Magnus Barelegs, at the turn of the 12th century. It was not until Hakon Hakonarson&#x27;s 1263 expedition that another king returned to the Isles.

===Decline of Norse rule===
From the middle of the 12th century until 1217 the suzerainty had remained of a very shadowy character; Norway had become a prey to civil dissensions. But after that date it became a reality, and Norway consequently came into collision with the growing power of the kingdom of Scotland.

Early in the 13th century, when Ragnald (reigned 1187–1229) paid homage to King John of England (reigned 1199–1216), we hear for the first time of English intervention in the affairs of Mann. But a period of Scots domination would precede the establishment of full English control.

Finally, in 1261, Alexander III of Scotland sent envoys to Norway to negotiate for the cession of the isles, but their efforts led to no result. He therefore initiated a war, which ended in the indecisive Battle of Largs against the Norwegian fleet in 1263. However, the Norwegian king Haakon Haakonsson died the following winter, and this allowed King Alexander to bring the war to a successful conclusion. Magnus Olafsson, King of Mann and the Isles (reigned 1252–1265), who had campaigned on the Norwegian side, had to surrender all the islands over which he had ruled, except Mann, for which he did homage. Two years later Magnus died and in 1266 King Magnus VI of Norway ceded the islands, including Mann, to Scotland in the Treaty of Perth in consideration of the sum of 4,000 marks (known as in Scotland) and an annuity of 100 marks. But Scotland&#x27;s rule over Mann did not become firmly established until 1275, when the Manx suffered defeat in the decisive Battle of Ronaldsway, near Castletown.

===English dominance===
In 1290 King Edward I of England sent Walter de Huntercombe to seize possession of Mann, and it remained in English hands until 1313, when Robert Bruce took it after besieging Castle Rushen for five weeks. In about 1333 King Edward III of England granted Mann to William de Montacute, 3rd Baron Montacute (later the 1st Earl of Salisbury), as his absolute possession, without reserving any service to be rendered to him.

Then, in 1346, the Battle of Neville&#x27;s Cross decided the long struggle between England and Scotland in England&#x27;s favour. King David II of Scotland, Robert Bruce&#x27;s last male heir, had been captured in the Battle of Neville&#x27;s Cross and ransomed; however, when Scotland was unable to raise one of the ransom instalments, David made a secret agreement with King Edward III of England to cancel it, in return for transferring the Scottish kingdom to an English prince.

Following the secret agreement, there followed a confused period when Mann sometimes experienced English rule and sometimes Scottish. In 1388 the island was &quot;ravaged&quot; by Sir William Douglas of Nithsdale on his way home from the destruction of the town of Carlingford.

In 1392 William de Montacute&#x27;s son sold the island, including sovereignty, to Sir William le Scrope. In 1399 Henry Bolinbroke brought about the beheading of Le Scrope, who had taken the side of Richard II when Bolinbroke usurped the throne and appointed himself Henry IV. The island then came into the de facto possession of Henry, who granted it to Henry Percy, 1st Earl of Northumberland; but following the latter&#x27;s later attainder, Henry IV, in 1405, made a lifetime grant of it, with the patronage of the bishopric, to Sir John Stanley. In 1406 this grant was extended – on a feudatory basis under the English Crown – to Sir John&#x27;s heirs and assigns, the feudal fee being the service of rendering homage and two falcons to all future Kings of England on their coronations.

==Early Modern period==
With the accession of the Stanleys to the throne there begins a more settled epoch in Manx history. Though the island&#x27;s new rulers rarely visited its shores, they placed it under governors, who, in the main, seem to have treated it with the justice of the time. Of the thirteen members of the family who ruled in Mann, the second Sir John Stanley (1414–1432), James, the 7th Earl (1627–1651), and the 10th Earl of the same name (1702–1736) had the most important influence on it. They first curbed the power of the spiritual barons, introduced trial by jury, which superseded trial by battle, and ordered the laws to be written. The second, known as the Great Stanley, and his wife, Charlotte de la Tremoille (or Tremouille), are probably the most striking figures in Manx history.

===Wars of the Three Kingdoms and Interregnum; 1642 to 1660===

Shortly after the Wars of the Three Kingdoms began in June 1643, James Stanley, 7th Earl of Derby returned to Mann to find the island on the brink of rebellion. Among the causes were complaints at the level of tithes payable to the Church of England, and Derby&#x27;s attempts to replace the Manx ‘tenure of straw’ by which many of his tenants held their lands, a customary tenure akin to freehold, with commercial leases. He managed to restore the situation through a series of meetings, but made minimal concessions.

Six months after Charles I was executed on 30 January 1649, Derby received a summons from General Ireton to surrender the island, but declined to do so. In August 1651, he and 300 Manxmen landed in Lancashire to take part in the Third English Civil War; defeated at Wigan Lane on 25 August 1651, Derby escaped with only 30 troops to join Charles II. Captured after the Battle of Worcester in September, he was imprisoned in Chester Castle, tried by court-martial and executed at Bolton on 15 October.

Soon after Stanley&#x27;s death, the Manx Militia, under the command of William Christian (known by his Manx name of Illiam Dhone), rose against the Countess and captured all the insular forts except Rushen and Peel. They were then joined by a Parliamentarian force sent from the mainland, led by Colonels Thomas Birch and Robert Duckenfield, to whom the Countess surrendered after a brief resistance.

Oliver Cromwell had appointed Thomas Fairfax &quot;Lord of Mann and the Isles&quot; in September 1651, so that Mann continued under a monarchical government and remained in the same relation to England as before.

===1660 Restoration===
The restoration of Stanley government in 1660 therefore caused as little friction and alteration as its temporary cessation had. One of the first acts of the new Lord, Charles Stanley, 8th Earl of Derby, was to order Christian to be tried. He was found guilty and executed. Of the other persons implicated in the rebellion only three were excepted from the general amnesty. But by Order in Council, Charles II pardoned them, and the judges responsible for the sentence on Christian were punished.

Charles Stanley&#x27;s next act was to dispute the permanency of the tenants&#x27; holdings, which they had not at first regarded as being affected by the acceptance of leases, a proceeding which led to an almost open rebellion against his authority and to the neglect of agriculture, in lieu of which the people devoted themselves to the fisheries and to contraband trade.

Charles Stanley, who died in 1672, was succeeded first by his son William Richard George Stanley, 9th Earl of Derby until his death in 1702.

The agrarian question subsided only in 1704, when James Stanley, 10th Earl of Derby, William&#x27;s brother and successor, largely through the influence of Bishop Wilson, entered into a compact with his tenants, which became embodied in an Act, called the Act of Settlement. Their compact secured the tenants in the possession of their estates in perpetuity subject only to a fixed rent, and a small fine on succession or alienation. From the great importance of this act to the Manx people it has been called their &quot;Magna Carta&quot;. As time went on, and the value of the estates increased, the rent payable to the Lord became so small in proportion as to be almost nominal, being extinguished by purchase in 1916.

===Revestment===
James died in 1736, and the suzerainty of the isle passed to James Murray, 2nd Duke of Atholl, his first cousin and heir general. In 1764 he was succeeded by his only surviving child Charlotte, Baroness Strange, and her husband, John Murray, who (in right of his wife) became Lord of Mann. In about 1720 the contraband trade had greatly increased. In 1726 Parliament had checked it somewhat for a time, but during the last ten years of the Atholl regime (1756–1765) it assumed such proportions that, in the interests of the Imperial revenue, it became necessary to suppress it. With a view to so doing, Parliament passed the Isle of Man Purchase Act 1765 (commonly called the &quot;Revestment Act&quot; by the Manx), under which it purchased the rights of the Atholls as Lords of Mann, including the customs revenues of the island, for the sum of £70,000 sterling, and granted an annuity to the Duke and Duchess. The Atholls still retained their manorial rights, the patronage of the bishopric, and certain other , until they sold them for the sum of £417,144 in 1828.
Up to the time of the revestment, Tynwald had passed laws concerning the government of the island in all respects and had control over its finances, subject to the approval of the Lord of Mann. After the revestment, or rather after the passage of the Smuggling Act 1765 (commonly called the&quot; Mischief Act&quot; by the Manx), the Parliament at Westminster legislated with respect to customs, harbours and merchant shipping, and, in measures of a general character, it occasionally inserted clauses permitting the enforcement in the island of penalties in contravention of the Acts of which they formed part. It also assumed the control of the insular customs duties. Such changes, rather than the transference of the full suzerainty to the King of Great Britain and Ireland, modified the (unwritten) constitution of the Isle of Man. Its ancient laws and tenures remained untouched, but in many ways the revestment affected it adversely. The hereditary Lords of Mann had seldom, if ever, functioned as model rulers, but most of them had taken some personal share in its government, and had interested themselves in the well-being of the inhabitants. But now the whole direction of its affairs became the work of officials who regarded the island as a pestilent nest of smugglers, from which it seemed their duty to extract as much revenue as possible.

There was some alleviation of this state of things between 1793 and 1826, when John Murray, 4th Duke of Atholl served as governor, since, though he quarrelled with the House of Keys and unduly cared for his own pecuniary interests, he did occasionally exert himself to promote the welfare of the island. After his departure the English officials resumed their sway, but they showed more consideration than before. Moreover, since smuggling, which the Isle of Man Purchase Act had only checked – not suppressed – had by that time almost disappeared, and since the Manx revenue had started to produce a large and increasing surplus, the authorities looked more favourably on the Isle of Man, and, thanks to this fact and to the representations of the Manx people to British ministers in 1837, 1844 and 1853, it obtained a somewhat less stringent customs tariff and an occasional towards erecting its much neglected public works.

==Modern period==
Since 1866, when the Isle of Man obtained a nominal measure of Home Rule, the Manx people have made remarkable progress, and currently form a prosperous community, with a thriving offshore financial centre, a tourist industry (albeit smaller than in the past) and a variety of other industries.

The Isle of Man was a base for alien civilian internment camps in both the First World War (1914–18) and the Second World War (1939–45). During the First World War there were two camps: one a requisitioned holiday camp in Douglas and the other the purpose-built Knockaloe camp near Peel in the parish of Patrick. During the Second World War there were a number of smaller camps in Douglas, Peel, Port Erin and Ramsey. The (now disbanded) Manx Regiment was raised in 1938 and saw action during the Second World War.

On 2 August 1973, a flash fire killed between 50 and 53 people at the Summerland amusement centre in Douglas.

===Greater autonomy===
The early 20th century saw a revival of music and dance, and a limited revival of the Manx language – although the last &quot;native&quot; speaker of Manx Gaelic died in the 1970s. In July 1947 the Taoiseach of the Republic of Ireland, Éamon de Valera, visited, and was so dissatisfied with the lack of support for Manx that he immediately had two recording vans sent over.

During the 20th century the Manx tourist economy declined, as the English and Irish started flying to Spain for package holidays. The Manx Government responded to this by successfully promoting the island, with its low tax rates, as an offshore financial centre, although Man has avoided a place on a 2009 UK blacklist of tax havens. The financial centre has had its detractors who have pointed to the potential for money laundering.

In 1949 an Executive Council, chaired by the Lieutenant-Governor and including members of Tynwald, was established. This marked the start of a transfer of executive power from the unelected Lieutenant-Governor to democratically elected Manx politicians. Finance and the police passed to Manx control between 1958 and 1976. In 1980 a chairman elected by Tynwald replaced the Lieutenant-Governor as Chairman of the Executive Council. Following legislation in 1984, the Executive Council was reconstituted in 1985 to include the chairmen of the eight principal Boards; in 1986 they were given the title of Minister and the chairman was re-titled &quot;Chief Minister&quot;. In 1986 Sir Miles Walker CBE became the first Chief Minister of the Isle of Man. In 1990 the Executive Council was renamed the &quot;Council of Ministers&quot;.

The 1960s also saw a rise in Manx nationalism, spawning the parties Mec Vannin and the Manx National Party, as well as the now defunct (literally &quot;Underground&quot;), which mounted a direct-action campaign of spray-painting and attempted house-burning.

On 5 July 1973 control of the postal service passed from the UK General Post Office to the new Isle of Man Post, which began to issue its own postage stamps.

The 1990s and early 21st century have seen a greater recognition of indigenous Manx culture, including the opening of the first Manx-language primary school.

Since 1983 the Isle of Man government has designated more than 250 historic structures as Registered Buildings of the Isle of Man.

==See also==
* King of Mann (1164–1504)
* Internment camps in the Isle of Man
* Extinct animals from the Isle of Man
* Registered Buildings of the Isle of Man

==References==
===Sources===
*
* 

==Bibliography==
** 
** 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* The Story of Mann – Government site with a collections of links on Isle of Man history.
* The History of the Courts on the Isle of Man – Government site with a summary on the history of rulers on the Isle of Man.
* Isle of Man Genealogy – information about the genealogy of the Isle of Man from isleofman.com
* The Manx Notebook – A vast electronic compendium of all matters, past and present regarding the Isle of Man at isleofman.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="4" end="15" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="53" end="66" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="71" end="78" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="158" end="168" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q476807" start="229" end="236" title="Raid (military)" label="raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q601401" start="241" end="256" title="trade" label="trading peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="340" end="342" title="Anno Domini" label="AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="417" end="423" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="430" end="436" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q463573" start="474" end="484" title="suzerainty" label="suzerainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q459188" start="500" end="529" title="Kingdom of Mann and the Isles" label="Kingdom of Mann and the Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="658" end="674" title="Crown Dependency" label="Crown Dependency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="679" end="689" title="Democracy" label="democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q417633" start="690" end="705" title="self-government" label="self-government"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="885" end="895" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="1276" end="1306" title="Hunter-gatherer" label="hunting, gathering and fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q83087" start="1353" end="1358" title="flint" label="flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001380" start="1462" end="1484" title="Manx National Heritage" label="Manx National Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="1528" end="1537" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="1566" end="1573" title="farming" label="farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q479257" start="1584" end="1594" title="stone tool" label="stone tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="1600" end="1607" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q164240" start="1628" end="1648" title="Megalith" label="megalithic monuments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047413" start="1706" end="1720" title="Cashtal yn Ard" label="Cashtal yn Ard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912909" start="1726" end="1734" title="Maughold" label="Maughold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742056" start="1736" end="1758" title="King Orry&amp;#x27;s Grave" label="King Orry&amp;#x27;s Grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026205" start="1762" end="1767" title="Laxey" label="Laxey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750807" start="1788" end="1797" title="Cregneash" label="Cregneash"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107375" start="1824" end="1838" title="St John&amp;#x27;s, Isle of Man" label="St John&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932366" start="1950" end="1968" title="Ronaldsway culture" label="Ronaldsway culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="2044" end="2052" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="2077" end="2083" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q744099" start="2110" end="2119" title="hill fort" label="hill fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432586" start="2227" end="2238" title="roundhouse (dwelling)" label="roundhouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="2313" end="2322" title="Britons (historical)" label="Brythonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="2463" end="2469" title="Roman Britain" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q178401" start="2613" end="2620" title="amphora" label="amphora"/>
<link wikidata="Q147437" start="2661" end="2674" title="South Barrule" label="South Barrule"/>
<link wikidata="Q184661" start="2962" end="2967" title="Ogham" label="Ogham"/>
<link wikidata="Q156877" start="3035" end="3053" title="Brythonic languages" label="Brythonic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="3066" end="3071" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12175" start="3083" end="3094" title="Manx Gaelic" label="Manx Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56433" start="3104" end="3121" title="Goidelic languages" label="Goidelic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="3134" end="3149" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="3154" end="3159" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888724" start="3368" end="3376" title="Manannán mac Lir" label="Manannán"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912909" start="3579" end="3590" title="St Maughold" label="St Maughold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737708" start="3715" end="3721" title="keeill" label="keeils"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="3768" end="3786" title="radiocarbon dating" label="radiocarbon dating"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3791" end="3805" title="magnetic drift" label="magnetic drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="3866" end="3875" title="Britons (historical)" label="Brythonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17035409" start="3958" end="3972" title="Medieval Welsh literature" label="Welsh writings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5623736" start="3996" end="4012" title="Gwriad ap Elidyr" label="Gwriad ap Elidyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q886414" start="4024" end="4036" title="Merfyn Frych" label="Merfyn Frych"/>
<link wikidata="Q470862" start="4056" end="4072" title="Rhodri the Great" label="Rhodri the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q369471" start="4400" end="4418" title="Báetán mac Cairill" label="Báetán mac Cairill"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="4428" end="4434" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q564325" start="4464" end="4480" title="Annals of Ulster" label="Annals of Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366803" start="4612" end="4626" title="Manaw Gododdin" label="Manau Gododdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35654" start="4649" end="4654" title="Firth of Clyde" label="Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q202083" start="4659" end="4664" title="Firth of Forth" label="Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q378755" start="4740" end="4757" title="Áedán mac Gabráin" label="Áedán mac Gabráin"/>
<link wikidata="Q111471" start="4767" end="4776" title="Dál Riata" label="Dál Riata"/>
<link wikidata="Q168159" start="4885" end="4893" title="Anglesey" label="Anglesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q348955" start="4899" end="4919" title="Edwin of Northumbria" label="Edwin of Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q23360" start="5045" end="5055" title="Cumberland" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23077" start="5060" end="5070" title="Lancashire" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q453676" start="5214" end="5221" title="Ecgfrith of Northumbria" label="Ecgfrið"/>
<link wikidata="Q207223" start="5277" end="5285" title="Drogheda" label="Drogheda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718796" start="5476" end="5489" title="Godred Crovan" label="Godred Crovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q436994" start="5771" end="5786" title="Kings of Dublin" label="Kings of Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564297" start="5847" end="5862" title="Earl of Orkney" label="Earls of Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293452" start="5988" end="6001" title="Hiberno-Norse" label="Hiberno-Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="6017" end="6023" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q436994" start="6078" end="6092" title="King of Dublin" label="King of Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718796" start="6213" end="6226" title="Godred Crovan" label="Godred Crovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159736" start="6314" end="6322" title="Leinster" label="Leinster"/>
<link wikidata="Q459188" start="6657" end="6686" title="Kingdom of Mann and the Isles" label="Kingdom of Mann and the Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q280768" start="6838" end="6862" title="Diocese of Sodor and Man" label="Diocese of Sodor and Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="6882" end="6897" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="7058" end="7066" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q123377" start="7087" end="7095" title="Hebrides" label="Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="7132" end="7140" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q459188" start="7202" end="7231" title="King of Mann and the Isles" label="King of Mann and of the Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q158142" start="7268" end="7290" title="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s Isle" label="St Patrick&amp;#x27;s Isle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660524" start="7298" end="7309" title="Peel Castle" label="Peel Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008316" start="7356" end="7360" title="Olaf I Godredsson" label="Olaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109749" start="7599" end="7605" title="Godred II Olafsson" label="Godred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781786" start="7753" end="7761" title="Somerled" label="Somerled"/>
<link wikidata="Q652539" start="7776" end="7782" title="Argyll" label="Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="7946" end="7955" title="Diocese" label="bishopric"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023575" start="7990" end="7996" title="Wimund" label="Wimund"/>
<link wikidata="Q189955" start="8257" end="8272" title="Kings of Norway" label="Kings of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q311996" start="8404" end="8419" title="Magnus III of Norway" label="Magnus Barelegs"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="8847" end="8866" title="kingdom of Scotland" label="kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087519" start="8901" end="8908" title="Ragnald IV of the Isle of Man" label="Ragnald"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="8949" end="8964" title="John of England" label="John of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q211109" start="9170" end="9195" title="Alexander III of Scotland" label="Alexander III of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2097266" start="9357" end="9372" title="Battle of Largs" label="Battle of Largs"/>
<link wikidata="Q316039" start="9438" end="9455" title="Haakon IV of Norway" label="Haakon Haakonsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q266044" start="9560" end="9603" title="Magnus Olafsson" label="Magnus Olafsson, King of Mann and the Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187484" start="9755" end="9761" title="homage (feudal)" label="homage"/>
<link wikidata="Q334673" start="9808" end="9827" title="Magnus VI of Norway" label="Magnus VI of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456646" start="9882" end="9897" title="Treaty of Perth" label="Treaty of Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4281830" start="9935" end="9940" title="Mark (money)" label="marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q215579" start="9971" end="9978" title="annuity" label="annuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497690" start="10120" end="10140" title="Battle of Ronaldsway" label="Battle of Ronaldsway"/>
<link wikidata="Q158530" start="10147" end="10157" title="Castletown, Isle of Man" label="Castletown"/>
<link wikidata="Q57798" start="10197" end="10216" title="Edward I of England" label="Edward I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q16863370" start="10222" end="10243" title="Walter de Huntercombe, 1st Baron Huntercombe" label="Walter de Huntercombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="10323" end="10335" title="Robert I of Scotland" label="Robert Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967821" start="10360" end="10373" title="Castle Rushen" label="Castle Rushen"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="10409" end="10430" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481359" start="10447" end="10467" title="William Montacute, 1st Earl of Salisbury" label="William de Montacute"/>
<link wikidata="Q165503" start="10473" end="10478" title="Baron" label="Baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996518" start="10504" end="10521" title="Earl of Salisbury" label="Earl of Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204399" start="10625" end="10655" title="Battle of Neville&amp;#x27;s Cross" label="Battle of Neville&amp;#x27;s Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q239486" start="10742" end="10762" title="David II of Scotland" label="David II of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="10984" end="11005" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007952" start="11271" end="11303" title="Sir William Douglas of Nithsdale" label="Sir William Douglas of Nithsdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669915" start="11356" end="11367" title="Carlingford, County Louth" label="Carlingford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042185" start="11457" end="11474" title="William le Scrope" label="William le Scrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q161866" start="11484" end="11500" title="Henry IV of England" label="Henry Bolinbroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q81000" start="11569" end="11579" title="Richard II of England" label="Richard II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398378" start="11725" end="11764" title="Henry Percy, 1st Earl of Northumberland" label="Henry Percy, 1st Earl of Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181800" start="11907" end="11919" title="John I Stanley of the Isle of Man" label="John Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q223266" start="11960" end="11969" title="feudatory" label="feudatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187484" start="12086" end="12092" title="Homage (medieval)" label="homage"/>
<link wikidata="Q748289" start="12097" end="12108" title="tribute" label="two falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q209715" start="12149" end="12159" title="coronation" label="coronation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181798" start="12522" end="12538" title="John II Stanley of the Isle of Man" label="Sir John Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q336721" start="12552" end="12571" title="James Stanley, 7th Earl of Derby" label="James, the 7th Earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143497" start="12593" end="12619" title="James Stanley, 10th Earl of Derby" label="10th Earl of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q788874" start="12768" end="12783" title="trial by battle" label="trial by battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q459412" start="12875" end="12900" title="Charlotte Stanley, Countess of Derby" label="Charlotte de la Tremoille"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577772" start="13057" end="13083" title="Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="Wars of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q336721" start="13104" end="13136" title="James Stanley, 7th Earl of Derby" label="James Stanley, 7th Earl of Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q184664" start="13249" end="13255" title="tithes" label="tithes"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="13271" end="13288" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="13576" end="13585" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q719724" start="13649" end="13663" title="Henry Ireton" label="General Ireton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540197" start="13788" end="13811" title="Third English Civil War" label="Third English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q675324" start="13825" end="13835" title="Battle of Wigan Lane" label="Wigan Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="13897" end="13907" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116626" start="13928" end="13947" title="Battle of Worcester" label="Battle of Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q505858" start="13983" end="13997" title="Chester Castle" label="Chester Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q752080" start="14008" end="14021" title="court-martial" label="court-martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q184579" start="14038" end="14044" title="Bolton" label="Bolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12175" start="14165" end="14169" title="Manx language" label="Manx"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148711" start="14178" end="14190" title="Illiam Dhone" label="Illiam Dhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787640" start="14367" end="14379" title="Thomas Birch (English Parliamentarian)" label="Thomas Birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11800756" start="14384" end="14402" title="Robert Duckenfield" label="Robert Duckenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="14464" end="14479" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q550612" start="14494" end="14508" title="Thomas Fairfax, 3rd Lord Fairfax of Cameron" label="Thomas Fairfax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082632" start="14869" end="14903" title="Charles Stanley, 8th Earl of Derby" label="Charles Stanley, 8th Earl of Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q899485" start="15082" end="15098" title="Order in Council" label="Order in Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143497" start="15766" end="15799" title="James Stanley, 10th Earl of Derby" label="James Stanley, 10th Earl of Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2128534" start="15872" end="15885" title="Thomas Wilson (bishop)" label="Bishop Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676699" start="15972" end="15989" title="Act of Settlement 1704" label="Act of Settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519156" start="16138" end="16148" title="Alienation (property law)" label="alienation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="16238" end="16249" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q463573" start="16484" end="16494" title="suzerainty" label="suzerainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q347266" start="16517" end="16549" title="James Murray, 2nd Duke of Atholl" label="James Murray, 2nd Duke of Atholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q347300" start="16639" end="16666" title="Charlotte Murray, Duchess of Atholl" label="Charlotte, Baroness Strange"/>
<link wikidata="Q390420" start="16685" end="16696" title="John Murray, 3rd Duke of Atholl" label="John Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q728870" start="16703" end="16714" title="Jure uxoris" label="in right of"/>
<link wikidata="Q280751" start="16732" end="16744" title="Lord of Mann" label="Lord of Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q184840" start="16764" end="16780" title="smuggling" label="contraband trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="16812" end="16822" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084001" start="17081" end="17110" title="Isle of Man Purchase Act 1765" label="Isle of Man Purchase Act 1765"/>
<link wikidata="Q280751" start="17227" end="17240" title="Lord of Mann" label="Lords of Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="17311" end="17319" title="pound sterling" label="sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510714" start="17336" end="17343" title="annuity (financial contracts)" label="annuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="17402" end="17410" title="manorialism" label="manorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837404" start="17440" end="17449" title="Bishop of Sodor and Man" label="bishopric"/>
<link wikidata="Q827704" start="17559" end="17566" title="Tynwald" label="Tynwald"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17776" end="17794" title="Smuggling Act 1765" label="Smuggling Act 1765"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="17859" end="17869" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q463573" start="18251" end="18261" title="suzerainty" label="suzerainty"/>
<link wikidata="Q280751" start="18481" end="18494" title="Lord of Mann" label="Lords of Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q390589" start="18960" end="18991" title="John Murray, 4th Duke of Atholl" label="John Murray, 4th Duke of Atholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154759" start="19002" end="19010" title="Governor of the Isle of Man" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516957" start="19049" end="19062" title="House of Keys" label="House of Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084001" start="19332" end="19356" title="Isle of Man Purchase Act 1765" label="Isle of Man Purchase Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="19733" end="19739" title="tariff" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191952" start="19890" end="19899" title="home rule" label="Home Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q205181" start="20007" end="20032" title="offshore financial centre" label="offshore financial centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="20036" end="20043" title="tourism" label="tourist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668049" start="20169" end="20179" title="internment" label="internment"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="20198" end="20213" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="20232" end="20248" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q18569" start="20345" end="20352" title="Douglas, Isle of Man" label="Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q65090917" start="20385" end="20399" title="Knockaloe internment camp" label="Knockaloe camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q147524" start="20405" end="20409" title="Peel, Isle of Man" label="Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369173" start="20427" end="20434" title="Patrick (parish)" label="Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q520798" start="20519" end="20528" title="Port Erin" label="Port Erin"/>
<link wikidata="Q150106" start="20533" end="20539" title="Ramsey, Isle of Man" label="Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932339" start="20561" end="20574" title="Manx Regiment" label="Manx Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045041" start="20659" end="20701" title="Summerland disaster" label="flash fire killed between 50 and 53 people"/>
<link wikidata="Q18569" start="20740" end="20747" title="Douglas, Isle of Man" label="Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12175" start="20859" end="20872" title="Manx language" label="Manx language"/>
<link wikidata="Q191827" start="20971" end="20980" title="Taoiseach" label="Taoiseach"/>
<link wikidata="Q173347" start="21009" end="21024" title="Éamon de Valera" label="Éamon de Valera"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="21250" end="21255" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q926780" start="21260" end="21275" title="package holiday" label="package holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q111658718" start="21457" end="21466" title="blacklist" label="blacklist"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="21564" end="21580" title="money laundering" label="money laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419836" start="21594" end="21611" title="Executive Council of the Isle of Man" label="Executive Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790061" start="21628" end="21647" title="Lieutenant Governor of the Isle of Man" label="Lieutenant-Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q827704" start="21673" end="21680" title="Tynwald" label="Tynwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314091" start="22262" end="22282" title="Miles Walker" label="Sir Miles Walker CBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072343" start="22300" end="22333" title="Chief Minister of the Isle of Man" label="Chief Minister of the Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q125564" start="22445" end="22461" title="Manx nationalism" label="Manx nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735875" start="22484" end="22494" title="Mec Vannin" label="Mec Vannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753302" start="22503" end="22522" title="Manx National Party" label="Manx National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325334" start="22739" end="22758" title="General Post Office" label="General Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432267" start="22770" end="22786" title="Isle of Man Post" label="Isle of Man Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="22817" end="22830" title="postage stamp" label="postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193673" start="22913" end="22925" title="Manx culture" label="Manx culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q55631388" start="23083" end="23122" title="Registered Buildings of the Isle of Man" label="Registered Buildings of the Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q304551" start="23140" end="23152" title="King of Mann" label="King of Mann"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23167" end="23202" title="List of concentration and internment camps#Isle of Man" label="Internment camps in the Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270708" start="23205" end="23241" title="Extinct animals from the Isle of Man" label="Extinct animals from the Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q55631388" start="23244" end="23283" title="Registered Buildings of the Isle of Man" label="Registered Buildings of the Isle of Man"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14764" wikidata="Q2719128" url="?curid=14764" title="Geography of the Isle of Man">
<text>The Isle of Man is an island in the Irish Sea, between Great Britain and Ireland in Northern Europe, with a population of almost 85,000. It is a British Crown dependency. It has a small islet, the Calf of Man, to its south. It is located at .

==Dimensions==

Area:

&quot;Land:&quot;

&quot;Water:&quot;
 (100 ha)
&quot;Total:&quot;
This makes it:
*slightly more than three times the size of Washington, D.C.
*slightly more than one-third the size of Hertfordshire
*slightly smaller than Saint Lucia.

==Coast and territorial sea==
The Isle of Man has a coastline of , and a territorial sea extending to a maximum of 12 nm from the coast, or the midpoint between it and other countries. The total territorial sea area is about 4000 km2 or 1500 sq miles, which is about 87% of the total area of the jurisdiction of the Isle of Man. The Isle of Man only holds exclusive fishing rights in the first 3 nm. The territorial sea is managed by the Isle of Man Government Department of Infrastructure.

The Raad ny Foillan long-distance footpath runs around the Manx coast.

==Climate==
The Isle of Man enjoys a temperate climate, with cool summers and mild winters. Average rainfall is high compared to the majority of the British Isles, due to its location to the western side of Great Britain and sufficient distance from Ireland for moisture to be accumulated by the prevailing south-westerly winds. Average rainfall is highest at Snaefell, where it is around a year. At lower levels, it can fall to around a year.

Temperatures remain fairly cool, with the recorded maximum being at Ronaldsway.

== Terrain ==


The island&#x27;s terrain is varied. There are two mountainous areas divided by a central valley which runs between Douglas and Peel. The highest point in the Isle of Man, Snaefell, is in the northern area and reaches above sea level. The northern end of the island is a flat plain, consisting of glacial tills and marine sediments. To the south, the island is more hilly, with distinct valleys. There is no land below sea level.

== Land use ==
*Arable land: 43.86%
*Permanent crops: 0%
*Other: 56.14% (includes permanent pastures, forests, mountain and heathland) (2011)

==Natural hazards and environmental issues==
There are few severe natural hazards, the most common being high winds, rough seas and dense fog. In recent years there has been a marked increase in the frequency of high winds, heavy rains, summer droughts and flooding both from heavy rain and from high seas. Snow fall has decreased significantly over the past century while temperatures are increasing year-round with rainfall decreasing.

Air pollution, marine pollution and waste disposal are issues in the Isle of Man.

==Protected or recognised sites for nature conservation==
In order of importance, international first, non-statutory last. Note that ASSIs and MNRs have equal levels of statutory protection under the Wildlife Act 1990.

=== UNESCO Biosphere Reserves ===
*The entire territory of the Isle of Man, including all land, sea, freshwater, airspace and seabed is a UNESCO Biosphere Reserve

=== Ramsar sites ===
Designated:
*Ballaugh Curraghs UK21001 (2006, 193.4 ha). Has the same boundaries as the Ballaugh Curraghs ASSI.

Candidate:
*The Ayres UK21002 (Proposed in 2004 &amp; 2005, 600 ha)
*Southern Coasts &amp; Calf of Man UK21003 (Proposed in 2004 &amp; 2005, 2326 ha) 
*Central Valley Curragh UK21004 (Proposed in 2004 &amp; 2005, 164 ha)
*Gob ny Rona, Maughold Head &amp; Port Cornaa UK21005 (Proposed in 2004 &amp; 2005, 209 ha)
*Dalby Peatlands UK21006 (Proposed in 2004 &amp; 2005, 58 ha)

=== Important Marine Mammal Areas ===

In 2024, the IUCN Marine Mammal Protected Areas Task Force recognised that 17,610km2 of the central Irish Sea as being of global importance for marine mammals, known as the Central Irish Sea Important Marine Mammal Area. This includes about half of Manx marine territorial waters.

=== Important Bird Areas ===

The UK RSPB and UK JNCC have designated five areas of the Isle of Man which are of global significance to birdlife.

*Isle of Man Sea Cliffs – 97 km of the east and west coasts
*Calf of Man – 250 ha
*The Ayres – c. 800ha
*Ballaugh Curraghs – 374 ha
*Isle of Man Hills – 8650 ha

=== National Nature Reserves ===
*The Ayres (2000, 272 ha)

=== Areas of Special Scientific Importance ===
There are 25 ASSIs on the Isle of Man as of November 2022. One additional ASSI has been designated but later rescinded (Ramsey Estuary). Dates below refer to year of formal confirmation.

*Ballachurry Meadows (2010, 11.9 ha)
*Ballacrye Meadow (2005, 0.55 ha)
*Ballateare Meadow (2014, 0.96 ha)
*Ballaugh Curraghs (2005, 193.4 ha)
*Central Ayres (1996, 259.66 ha, extended 2008 by 98.68 ha, total 358.35 ha)
*Cronk y Bing (2006, 17.71 ha)
*Cronk y King (2014, extended in 2021 to 3.02 ha)
*Curragh Pharrick (2022, 4.02 ha)
*Dalby Coast (2010, 62.1 ha)
*Dhoon Glen (2007, 20.92 ha)
*Douglas Head (2022)
*Eary Vane (2007, 3.96 ha)
*Glen Maye (2008, 15.92 ha)
*Glen Rushen (2007, 12.27 ha)
*Greeba Mountain &amp; Central Hills (2009, 1,080.95 ha)
*Grenaby Gareys (2021, 74.82 ha)
*Jurby Airfield (2005, 63.04 ha)
*Langness, Derbyhaven &amp; Sandwick (2001, 310 ha)
*Marine Drive (2021, 82.35 ha)
*Maughold Cliffs &amp; Brooghs (2011, 53.63 ha)
*Port St Mary Ledges &amp; Kallow Point (2011, 14.79 ha)
*Poyll Vaaish Coast (2007, 44.76 ha) 
*Ramsey Estuary (designated but later rescinded in 2010; 15.8 ha)
*Ramsey Mooragh Shore (2006, 2.65 ha)
*Rosehill Quarry, Billown (2006, 1.37 ha)
*Santon Gorge &amp; Port Soldrick (2012, 24.35 ha)

=== Marine Nature Reserves ===
The Island&#x27;s first marine nature reserve was designated in Ramsey Bay in October 2011. In 2018, nine further Marine Nature Reserves were given statutory protection. The ten Marine Nature Reserves around the Isle of Man cover over 10% of the country&#x27;s territorial waters, in accordance with international requirements.
*Ramsey Bay 2011
*Baie ny Carrickey 2018
*Calf and Wart Bank 2018
*Douglas Bay 2018
*Langness 2018
*Laxey Bay 2018
*Little Ness 2018
*Niarbyl Bay 2018
*Port Erin Bay 2018
*West Coast 2018

==== Eelgrass Conservation Zones (Statutory – within MNRs) ====
Eelgrass &quot;Zostera marina&quot; is a legally protected species on the Isle of Man. Between 2011 and 2018, four strictly protected Eelgrass Conservation Zones have been designated to protect this important species.
*Ramsey Bay MNR - Port Lewaigue &amp; Ballure area (2011)
*Baie ny Carrickey MNR - east of Gansey Point (2018)
*Langness MNR - Fort Island Gully (2018) 
*Laxey Bay MNR - east of Gob ny Silvas (2018)

==== Eelgrass Voluntary Zones (Non-statutory – both in and outside MNRs) ====
In 2023, three existing statutory Eelgrass Conservation Zones were expanded on a voluntary basis (noting that, regardless of this &#x27;voluntary&#x27; status, the species is still legally fully protected from reckless disturbance), with a further new site identified. 
*Ramsey Bay - a considerably larger area than the statutory zone (2023)
*Langness - Derbyhaven Bay, northwest of Fort Island, separate from the Fort Island Gully statutory site (2023)
*Laxey Bay - a considerably larger area than the statutory zone (2023)
*Bulgham Bay - discovered in 2021, the only Eelgrass Voluntary Zone outside of an MNR (2023)

=== Areas of Special Protection ===
*Ayres Gravel Pit designated 2001, 41 hectares. In 2019 this became a nature reserve managed by Manx BirdLife.

=== Bird Sanctuaries ===
Bird sanctuaries were formerly designated by that name under the Wild Birds Protection Act 1932. This designation was superseded by &quot;Areas of Special Protection for Birds&quot; under the Wildlife Act 1990; however, the following formerly designated Bird Sanctuaries remain protected:

*Barnell Reservoir (Patrick) (1979) 0.02 km2
*Tynwald National Park and Arboretum (1982)
*Derbyhaven, Langness and Fort Island and foreshores adjoining (1936)
*Renscault and Ballachrink (West Baldwin) (1978) 0.18 km2
*The Willows (Ballamodha, Malew) (1984) 0.01 km2

=== Registered Heathland ===
Protected from unlicensed burning or destruction by the Heath Burning Act 2003.

*Ballacowin (part DEFA, part private: Glen Ruy, Slieau Lhost Area) 
*Ballaugh Mountain (DEFA)
*Beary Mountain (including the Twelve Shares; private, multiple owners)
*Bienn y Phott (DEFA)
*Bradda (part DEFA, part private) 
*Calf of Man (MNH)
*Carraghyn (Private)
*Central Hills ASSI (DEFA)
*Creg ny Baa (part DEFA, part private Slieau Lhost and Slieau Meayl) 
*Cringle Great Park (DEFA)
*Cronk ny Arrey Laa (DEFA)
*Cross Vein, Watertrough Park and Glen Rushen (DEFA)
*Dalby Mountain (Private, multiple owners) 
*Glen Auldyn (Private)
*Greeba Mountain (DEFA)
*Injebreck (Private)
*Lanagore and Eary Cushlin (DEFA and MNH) 
*Maughold Mountain (DEFA)
*Michael Hills (DEFA)
*Mull (Meayll) Hill (Private)
*Mullagh Ouyr (Private)
*North Barrule (MUA)
*Peel Hill (Private and Peel Commissioners) 
*Slieau Lhean (DEFA)
*Slieau Lhost and Slieau Ree (DEFA)
*Slieau Managh (DEFA)
*Slieau Whallian (Private)
*Snaefell (DEFA)
*South Barrule (DEFA)
*Surby (DEFA)
*Chasms and Spanish Head (MNH)
*The Rheast (DEFA)
*Windy Common (DEFA)

=== Nature Reserves and Wildlife Sites ===

====Manx Wildlife Trust Reserves====
Manx Wildlife Trust was founded on 6 March 1973 and manages 32 nature reserves, including the Calf of Man which is managed in conjunction with the landowner Manx National Trust. As of December2024, these reserves total , or around 1% of the Isle of Man and include:

====Designated Wildlife Sites====
The Isle of Man has (as of March 2023) 92 non-statutory &#x27;Wildlife Sites&#x27; covering in addition to the 10.4 km of coastline. As of 30 January 2009 this total was 45 wildlife sites, covering about 195 ha of land and an additional of inter-tidal coast. Wildlife Sites are not recognised in law, but are recognised in terms of Government policy, including planning and zonation (by the Isle of Man Strategic Plan) and agricultural policy (under Cross Compliance regulations). Wildlife Sites are shown on the MANNGIS Island Environment map.

====Other Nature Reserves====
*Ballalough Reedbeds: managed by Castletown Commissioners
*Ballanette and Clay Head Brooghs: nature reserve, private but open to the public
*Snaefell Valley: nature reserve, private but open to the public
*Manx BirdLife Ayres National Reserve

===Manx National Trust Landholdings===
The following properties are under the protection of Manx National Heritage. The Manx National Trust owns properties in 15 of the 17 Manx parishes (all except Jurby and Michael).

*Andreas: Ballakeil, Kerroogarroo
*Arbory: Ballayack, building at the Friary
*Ballaugh: Ballaugh Curragh
*Braddan: Marine Drive, Braddan Pinfold
*Bride: The Ayres: Ballakesh, Ballawhannel
*Lezayre: Vollan Fort, The Grove, Killabrega, Sulby Glen
*Lonan: Ballacowle, Bulgham, Laxey Wheel, Gretch Veg, King Orry&#x27;s Grave, Laxey Head, Cronk y Chule
*Malew: Silverdale Glen, Hango Hill, St Michael&#x27;s Isle, Rushen Abbey, Castle Rushen
*Marown: Upper Ballaharry, The Braid
*Maughold: Maughold Head, Maughold Brooghs, Gob ny Rona, Maughold Green, Baldromma, Port Lewaigue, Ballaterson, Dhoon, Port e Vullen
*Onchan: Scollag Road
*Patrick: Eary Cushily, Ennin Moar, Creggan Mooar, Peel Castle, Niarbyl, Doarlish Mooar, Knockuskey
*Rushen: Cregneash, Chasms, Kitterland, Shenvalley, Meayll Hill, Sugarloaf, Calf of Man, Church Farm, Glen Chass, Rheast Mooar, Fistard, The Sound
*Santon: The Broogh Fort

== Geology ==
The majority of the island is formed from highly faulted and folded sedimentary rocks of the Ordovician period. There is a belt of younger Silurian rocks along the west coast between Niarbyl and Peel, and a small area of Devonian sandstones around Peel. A band of Carboniferous period rocks underlies part of the northern plain, but is nowhere seen at the surface; however similar age rocks do outcrop in the south between Castletown, Silverdale and Port St Mary. Permo- Triassic age rocks are known to lie beneath the Point of Ayre but, as with the rest of the northern plain, these rocks are concealed by substantial thicknesses of superficial deposits.

The island has significant deposits of copper, lead and silver, zinc, iron, and plumbago (a mix of graphite and clay). There are also quarries of black marble, limestone flags, clay schist, and granite. These are all modern, and there was no noticeable exploitation of metals or minerals before the modern era.

== Demographics ==

The island has a census-estimated population of 84,497 according to the most recent 2011 census: up from 79,805 in 2006 and 76,315 in 2001.

The island&#x27;s largest town and administrative centre is Douglas, whose population is 23,000 – over a quarter of the population of the island. Neighbouring Onchan, Ramsey in the north, Peel in the west and the three southern ports of Castletown, Port Erin and Port St Mary are the island&#x27;s other main settlements. Almost all its population lives on or very near the coast.

== See also ==
* Towns in the Isle of Man
* List of rivers of the Isle of Man

==Citations==
==References==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="4" end="15" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="22" end="28" title="island" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q41735" start="36" end="45" title="Irish Sea" label="Irish Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="55" end="68" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="73" end="80" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="84" end="99" title="Northern Europe" label="Northern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="153" end="169" title="Crown dependency" label="Crown dependency"/>
<link wikidata="Q207524" start="186" end="191" title="islet" label="islet"/>
<link wikidata="Q125389" start="197" end="208" title="Calf of Man" label="Calf of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="393" end="409" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="452" end="465" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q760" start="489" end="500" title="Saint Lucia" label="Saint Lucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213204" start="576" end="591" title="territorial sea" label="territorial sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q93318" start="621" end="623" title="Nautical mile" label="nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q93318" start="899" end="901" title="Nautical mile" label="nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112593" start="941" end="963" title="Isle of Man Government" label="Isle of Man Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260355" start="964" end="992" title="Department of Infrastructure (Isle of Man)" label="Department of Infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042833" start="999" end="1014" title="Raad ny Foillan" label="Raad ny Foillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="1054" end="1058" title="Isle of Man" label="Manx"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="1104" end="1113" title="temperate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="1216" end="1229" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="1317" end="1324" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q147557" start="1427" end="1435" title="Snaefell" label="Snaefell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292403" start="1580" end="1590" title="Ronaldsway" label="Ronaldsway"/>
<link wikidata="Q18569" start="1725" end="1732" title="Douglas, Isle of Man" label="Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q147524" start="1737" end="1741" title="Peel, Isle of Man" label="Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q147557" start="1781" end="1789" title="Snaefell" label="Snaefell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="1827" end="1842" title="Above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q427711" start="1914" end="1918" title="till" label="till"/>
<link wikidata="Q37477" start="2321" end="2324" title="fog" label="fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="2440" end="2445" title="flood" label="flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561" start="2490" end="2494" title="Snow" label="Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925" start="2600" end="2608" title="rainfall" label="rainfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="2622" end="2635" title="Air pollution" label="Air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058325" start="2637" end="2653" title="marine pollution" label="marine pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q180388" start="2658" end="2672" title="waste disposal" label="waste disposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q14018439" start="2929" end="2954" title="Man and the Biosphere Programme" label="UNESCO Biosphere Reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="2988" end="2999" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q14018439" start="3070" end="3087" title="Biosphere Reserve" label="Biosphere Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q170170" start="3093" end="3105" title="Ramsar Convention" label="Ramsar sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194934" start="3123" end="3140" title="Ballaugh Curraghs" label="Ballaugh Curraghs"/>
<link wikidata="Q125363" start="3235" end="3244" title="Point of Ayre" label="The Ayres"/>
<link wikidata="Q125389" start="3292" end="3325" title="Calf of Man" label="Southern Coasts &amp;amp; Calf of Man"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3375" end="3397" title="Central Valley Curragh" label="Central Valley Curragh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912909" start="3445" end="3489" title="Maughold" label="Gob ny Rona, Maughold Head &amp;amp; Port Cornaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5210270" start="3537" end="3552" title="Dalby, Isle of Man" label="Dalby Peatlands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3603" end="3632" title="Important Marine Mammal Areas" label="Important Marine Mammal Areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="3651" end="3655" title="IUCN" label="IUCN"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3656" end="3696" title="Marine Mammal Protected Areas Task Force" label="Marine Mammal Protected Areas Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q41735" start="3738" end="3747" title="Irish Sea" label="Irish Sea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3811" end="3857" title="Central Irish Sea Important Marine Mammal Area" label="Central Irish Sea Important Marine Mammal Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139892" start="3924" end="3944" title="Important Bird Areas" label="Important Bird Areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892802" start="3957" end="3961" title="RSPB" label="RSPB"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269293" start="3969" end="3973" title="JNCC" label="JNCC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4068" end="4090" title="Isle of Man Sea Cliffs" label="Isle of Man Sea Cliffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q125389" start="4128" end="4139" title="Calf of Man" label="Calf of Man"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4150" end="4159" title="The Ayres" label="The Ayres"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194934" start="4172" end="4189" title="Ballaugh Curraghs" label="Ballaugh Curraghs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4200" end="4217" title="Isle of Man Hills" label="Isle of Man Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q132196958" start="4233" end="4256" title="National Nature Reserve" label="National Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q125363" start="4263" end="4272" title="Point of Ayre" label="The Ayres"/>
<link wikidata="Q422211" start="4293" end="4331" title="SSSI" label="Areas of Special Scientific Importance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4525" end="4544" title="Ballachurry Meadows" label="Ballachurry Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4562" end="4578" title="Ballacrye Meadow" label="Ballacrye Meadow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4596" end="4613" title="Ballateare Meadow" label="Ballateare Meadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194934" start="4631" end="4648" title="Ballaugh Curraghs" label="Ballaugh Curraghs"/>
<link wikidata="Q125363" start="4667" end="4680" title="Point of Ayre" label="Central Ayres"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4744" end="4756" title="Cronk y Bing" label="Cronk y Bing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4775" end="4787" title="Cronk y King" label="Cronk y King"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4825" end="4841" title="Curragh Pharrick" label="Curragh Pharrick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4859" end="4870" title="Dalby Coast" label="Dalby Coast"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4888" end="4898" title="Dhoon Glen" label="Dhoon Glen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301580" start="4917" end="4929" title="Douglas Head" label="Douglas Head"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4938" end="4947" title="Eary Vane" label="Eary Vane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495211" start="4965" end="4974" title="Glen Maye" label="Glen Maye"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4993" end="5004" title="Glen Rushen" label="Glen Rushen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5023" end="5058" title="Greeba Mountain &amp;amp; Central Hills" label="Greeba Mountain &amp;amp; Central Hills"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5080" end="5093" title="Grenaby Garey" label="Grenaby Garey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734559" start="5113" end="5127" title="Jurby" label="Jurby Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q158444" start="5146" end="5181" title="Derbyhaven" label="Langness, Derbyhaven &amp;amp; Sandwick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5198" end="5210" title="Marine Drive, Isle of Man" label="Marine Drive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5229" end="5258" title="Maughold Cliffs &amp;amp; Brooghs" label="Maughold Cliffs &amp;amp; Brooghs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5277" end="5315" title="Port St Mary Ledges &amp;amp; Kallow Point" label="Port St Mary Ledges &amp;amp; Kallow Point"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5334" end="5352" title="Poyll Vaaish Coast" label="Poyll Vaaish Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q24996968" start="5372" end="5386" title="Ramsey Harbour Swing Bridge" label="Ramsey Estuary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5438" end="5458" title="Ramsey Mooragh Shore" label="Ramsey Mooragh Shore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5476" end="5500" title="Rosehill Quarry, Billown" label="Rosehill Quarry, Billown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5518" end="5550" title="Santon Gorge &amp;amp; Port Soldrick" label="Santon Gorge &amp;amp; Port Soldrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764179" start="5573" end="5594" title="Marine Nature Reserve" label="Marine Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764179" start="5624" end="5645" title="marine nature reserve" label="marine nature reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q125359" start="5664" end="5674" title="Ramsey Bay" label="Ramsey Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q125359" start="5929" end="5939" title="Ramsey Bay" label="Ramsey Bay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5946" end="5963" title="Baie ny Carrickey" label="Baie ny Carrickey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5970" end="5988" title="Calf and Wart Bank" label="Calf and Wart Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301569" start="5995" end="6006" title="Douglas Harbour" label="Douglas Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q158145" start="6013" end="6021" title="Langness" label="Langness"/>
<link wikidata="Q26715137" start="6028" end="6037" title="Laxey Bay" label="Laxey Bay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6044" end="6055" title="Little Ness Marine Nature Reserve" label="Little Ness"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6062" end="6073" title="Niarbyl Bay" label="Niarbyl Bay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6080" end="6093" title="Port Erin Bay" label="Port Erin Bay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6100" end="6110" title="West Coast Marine Nature Reserve" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347080" start="6122" end="6130" title="Eelgrass" label="Eelgrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q21128" start="6196" end="6210" title="Zostera marina" label="Zostera marina"/>
<link wikidata="Q125359" start="6400" end="6410" title="Ramsey Bay" label="Ramsey Bay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6458" end="6475" title="Baie ny Carrickey" label="Baie ny Carrickey"/>
<link wikidata="Q158145" start="6511" end="6519" title="Langness" label="Langness"/>
<link wikidata="Q26715137" start="6553" end="6562" title="Laxey Bay" label="Laxey Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347080" start="6604" end="6612" title="Eelgrass" label="Eelgrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q125359" start="6948" end="6958" title="Ramsey Bay" label="Ramsey Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q158145" start="7020" end="7028" title="Langness" label="Langness"/>
<link wikidata="Q26715137" start="7132" end="7141" title="Laxey Bay" label="Laxey Bay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7203" end="7214" title="Bulgham Bay" label="Bulgham Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001340" start="7300" end="7327" title="Area of Special Protection" label="Areas of Special Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q125363" start="7333" end="7349" title="Point of Ayre" label="Ayres Gravel Pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533036" start="7448" end="7464" title="Bird Sanctuary" label="Bird Sanctuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q27590" start="8030" end="8050" title="Heath" label="Registered Heathland"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="9161" end="9195" title="Nature Reserve" label="Nature Reserves and Wildlife Sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287133" start="9238" end="9257" title="Manx Wildlife Trust" label="Manx Wildlife Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q125389" start="9332" end="9343" title="Calf of Man" label="Calf of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001380" start="9395" end="9414" title="Manx National Trust" label="Manx National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10116" end="10135" title="Ballalough Reedbeds" label="Ballalough Reedbeds"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10174" end="10184" title="Ballanette" label="Ballanette"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10189" end="10206" title="Clay Head Brooghs" label="Clay Head Brooghs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10256" end="10271" title="Snaefell Valley" label="Snaefell Valley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10321" end="10334" title="Manx BirdLife" label="Manx BirdLife"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10335" end="10357" title="Ayres National Reserve" label="Ayres National Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001380" start="10362" end="10381" title="Manx National Heritage" label="Manx National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194934" start="10666" end="10682" title="Ballaugh Curragh" label="Ballaugh Curragh"/>
<link wikidata="Q125363" start="10731" end="10740" title="Point of Ayre" label="The Ayres"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792365" start="11064" end="11077" title="Maughold Head" label="Maughold Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660524" start="11259" end="11270" title="Peel Castle" label="Peel Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11171886" start="11272" end="11279" title="Niarbyl, Isle of Man" label="Niarbyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="11588" end="11598" title="Ordovician" label="Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q62412" start="11634" end="11642" title="Silurian" label="Silurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11171886" start="11678" end="11685" title="Niarbyl" label="Niarbyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="11716" end="11724" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="11759" end="11772" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q104882864" start="11930" end="11940" title="Silverdale Glen" label="Silverdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q76402" start="11959" end="11965" title="Permian" label="Permo-"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="11966" end="11974" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="12191" end="12197" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="12199" end="12203" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="12208" end="12214" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="12216" end="12220" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="12222" end="12226" title="Iron ore" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309" start="12251" end="12259" title="graphite" label="graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="12264" end="12268" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="12304" end="12310" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="12312" end="12321" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q15315" start="12334" end="12340" title="schist" label="schist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="12346" end="12353" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q18569" start="12685" end="12692" title="Douglas, Isle of Man" label="Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18562" start="12784" end="12790" title="Onchan" label="Onchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q150106" start="12792" end="12798" title="Ramsey, Isle of Man" label="Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q147524" start="12813" end="12817" title="Peel, Isle of Man" label="Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q158530" start="12862" end="12872" title="Castletown, Isle of Man" label="Castletown"/>
<link wikidata="Q520798" start="12874" end="12883" title="Port Erin" label="Port Erin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605309" start="12888" end="12900" title="Port St Mary" label="Port St Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282180" start="13024" end="13048" title="Towns in the Isle of Man" label="Towns in the Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719135" start="13051" end="13084" title="List of rivers of the Isle of Man" label="List of rivers of the Isle of Man"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14765" wikidata="Q4313768" url="?curid=14765" title="Demographics of the Isle of Man">
<text>Demographic features of the population of the Isle of Man include population density, ethnicity, level of education, health, economic status, and religious affiliations.

== Vital statistics==


===Structure of the population===



==References==
==External links==
* 2001 Manx Census, overview and details (archived from the original on 7 June 2011)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="0" end="11" title="Demography" label="Demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="28" end="38" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="46" end="57" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14766" wikidata="Q3414226" url="?curid=14766" title="Politics of the Isle of Man">
<text>The government of the Isle of Man is a parliamentary representative democracy. The Monarch of the United Kingdom is also the head of state of the Isle of Man, and generally referred to as &quot;The King, Lord of Mann&quot;. Legislation of the Isle of Man defines &quot;the Crown in right of the Isle of Man&quot; as separate from the &quot;Crown in right of the United Kingdom&quot;. His representative on the island is the Lieutenant Governor of the Isle of Man, but his role is mostly ceremonial, though he does have the power to grant Royal Assent (the withholding of which is the same as a veto).

The Isle of Man is not part of the United Kingdom, and the island has no representation in the UK parliament. As a Crown Dependency, it is not subordinate to the government of the United Kingdom. That government, however, is responsible for defence and island&#x27;s external affairs and could intervene in the domestic affairs of the island under its residual responsibilities to guarantee &quot;good government&quot; in all Crown dependencies. Manx people are British citizens under UK law — there is no separate Manx citizenship.

The legislative power of the government is vested in a bicameral (sometimes called tricameral) parliament called Tynwald (said to be the world&#x27;s oldest &quot;continuously existing&quot; parliament), which consists of the directly-elected House of Keys and the indirectly chosen Legislative Council. After every House of Keys general election, the members of Tynwald elect from amongst themselves the Chief Minister of the Isle of Man, who serves as the head of government for five years (until the next general election). Executive power is vested in the Lieutenant Governor (as Governor-in-Council), the Chief Minister, and the Isle of Man&#x27;s Council of Ministers. The judiciary is independent of the executive and the legislature.

Douglas, the largest town on the Isle of Man, is its capital and seat of government, where the Government offices and the parliament chambers (Tynwald) are located.

==Executive branch==

The Head of State is the Lord of Mann, which is a hereditary position held by the British monarch (currently King Charles III). The Lieutenant Governor is appointed by the King, on the advice of the UK&#x27;s Secretary of State for Justice, for a five-year term and nominally exercises executive power on behalf of the King. The Chief Minister is elected by the House of Keys (formerly by Tynwald) following every House of Keys general election and serves for five years until the next general election.

When acting as Lord of Mann, the King acts on the advice of the Secretary of State for Justice and Lord Chancellor of the United Kingdom having prime responsibility as Privy Counsellor for Manx affairs.

The executive branch under the Chief Minister is referred to as &quot;the Government&quot; or the &quot;Civil Service&quot;, and consists of the Council of Ministers, nine Departments, ten Statutory Boards and three Offices. Each Department is run by a Minister who reports directly to the Council of Ministers. The Civil Service has more than 2000 employees and the total number of public sector employees including the Civil Service, teachers, nurses, police, etc. is about 9000 people. This is somewhat more than 10% of the population of the island, and a full 23% of the working population. This does not include any military forces, as defence is the responsibility of the United Kingdom.

==Legislative branch==

The Manx legislature is Tynwald, which consists of two chambers or &quot;branches&quot;. The House of Keys has 24 members, elected for a five-year term in two-seat constituencies by the whole island. The minimum voting age is 16. The Legislative Council has eleven members: the President of Tynwald, the Bishop of Sodor and Man, the Attorney General (non-voting) and eight other members elected by the House of Keys for a five-year term, with four retiring at a time. (In the past they have often already been Members of the House of Keys, but must leave the Keys if elected to the Council.) There are also joint sittings of the Tynwald Court (the two branches together).

===Political parties and elections===
In the 2021 Manx general election, the Manx Labour Party won two seats and the Liberal Vannin Party won one seat; all 21 remaining seats were won by independents.

Most Manx politicians stand for election as independents rather than as representatives of political parties. Though political parties do exist, their influence is not nearly as strong as in the United Kingdom. Consequently, much Manx legislation develops through consensus among the members of Tynwald, which contrasts with the much more adversarial nature of the British Parliament.

The largest political party is the Liberal Vannin Party, which promotes liberalism, greater Manx independence and more accountability in Government.

The Manx Labour Party is unaffiliated to the British Labour Party.

A political pressure group Mec Vannin advocates the establishment of a sovereign republic.

The Isle of Man Green Party, which was founded in 2016, holds two local government seats and promotes Green politics.

The island also formerly had a Manx National Party. There are Manx members in the Celtic League, a political pressure group that advocates greater co-operation between and political autonomy for the Celtic nations.

===Intervention of the United Kingdom===

The UK Parliament has paramount power to legislate for the Isle of Man on all matters, but it is a long-standing convention that it does not do so on domestic (&quot;insular&quot;) matters without Tynwald&#x27;s consent.

Occasionally, the UK Parliament acts against the wishes of Tynwald: the most recent example was the Marine, &amp;c., Broadcasting (Offences) Act 1967, which banned pirate radio stations from operating in Manx waters. Legislation to accomplish this was defeated on its second reading in the House of Keys, prompting Westminster to legislate directly.

The UK&#x27;s secondary legislation (regulations and statutory instruments) cannot be extended to apply to the Isle of Man.

The UK has had several disputes with the European Court of Human Rights about the Isle of Man&#x27;s laws concerning birching (corporal punishment) in the case of &quot;Tyrer v. the United Kingdom&quot;, and sodomy.

==Judicial branch==
The lowest courts in the Isle of Man are presided over by the High Bailiff and the Deputy High Bailiff, along with lay Justices of the Peace. The High Court of Justice consists of three civil divisions and is presided over by a Deemster. Appeals are dealt with by the Staff of Government Division with final appeal to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in the United Kingdom. The head of the Judiciary is the First Deemster and Clerk of the Rolls. The other High and Appeal Court Judges are the Second Deemster, The Deemster and the Judge of Appeal, all of whom are appointed by the Lieutenant Governor.

The Court of General Gaol Delivery is the criminal court for serious offences (effectively the equivalent of a Crown Court in England). It is theoretically not part of the High Court, but is effectively the criminal division of the court. The Second Deemster normally sits as the judge in this court. In 1992, His Honour Deemster Callow passed the last sentence of death in a court in the British Islands (which was commuted to life imprisonment). Capital punishment in the Isle of Man was formally abolished by Tynwald in 1993 (although the last execution on the island took place in 1872).

==See also==
*Royal Commission on the Constitution (United Kingdom)

==References==
==External links==
*Isle of Man Government
*Tynwald - The Parliament of the Isle of Man
*iomelections.com - 2006 General Election</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="22" end="33" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="39" end="52" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="53" end="77" title="representative democracy" label="representative democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="83" end="112" title="Monarch of the United Kingdom" label="Monarch of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="125" end="138" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q280751" start="204" end="216" title="Lord of Mann" label="Lord of Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="269" end="278" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790061" start="424" end="462" title="Lieutenant Governor of the Isle of Man" label="Lieutenant Governor of the Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="538" end="550" title="Royal Assent" label="Royal Assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="594" end="598" title="veto" label="veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="637" end="651" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="697" end="699" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="700" end="710" title="parliament" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="717" end="733" title="Crown Dependency" label="Crown Dependency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422045" start="855" end="885" title="External relations of the Isle of Man" label="island&amp;#x27;s external affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345314" start="999" end="1014" title="good government" label="good government"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="1028" end="1046" title="Crown dependencies" label="Crown dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q125564" start="1048" end="1059" title="Manx people" label="Manx people"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1064" end="1080" title="British nationality law#British citizenship" label="British citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721171" start="1087" end="1093" title="UK law" label="UK law"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="1140" end="1157" title="legislative power" label="legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q827704" start="1249" end="1256" title="Tynwald" label="Tynwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516957" start="1379" end="1392" title="House of Keys" label="House of Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q679687" start="1419" end="1438" title="Legislative Council of the Isle of Man" label="Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076105" start="1466" end="1482" title="general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072343" start="1541" end="1574" title="Chief Minister of the Isle of Man" label="Chief Minister of the Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="1594" end="1612" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="1663" end="1678" title="Executive power" label="Executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271068" start="1720" end="1739" title="Governor-in-Council" label="Governor-in-Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993842" start="1789" end="1809" title="Council of Ministers of the Isle of Man" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="1815" end="1824" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q18569" start="1879" end="1886" title="Douglas, Isle of Man" label="Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="1932" end="1939" title="Capital (political)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901835" start="1944" end="1962" title="seat of government" label="seat of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q827704" start="2022" end="2029" title="Tynwald" label="Tynwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="2071" end="2084" title="Head of State" label="Head of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q280751" start="2092" end="2104" title="Lord of Mann" label="Lord of Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="2149" end="2164" title="British monarch" label="British monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="2176" end="2192" title="King Charles III" label="King Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790061" start="2199" end="2218" title="Lieutenant Governor of the Isle of Man" label="Lieutenant Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477307" start="2276" end="2306" title="Secretary of State for Justice" label="Secretary of State for Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072343" start="2396" end="2410" title="Chief Minister of the Isle of Man" label="Chief Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q827704" start="2456" end="2463" title="Tynwald" label="Tynwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076105" start="2553" end="2569" title="general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477307" start="2636" end="2708" title="Secretary of State for Justice" label="Secretary of State for Justice and Lord Chancellor of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993842" start="2921" end="2941" title="Council of Ministers of the Isle of Man" label="Council of Ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="3397" end="3405" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3454" end="3468" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="3504" end="3515" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q827704" start="3519" end="3526" title="Tynwald" label="Tynwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="3550" end="3558" title="bicameralism" label="chambers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516957" start="3588" end="3601" title="House of Keys" label="House of Keys"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915088" start="3659" end="3673" title="House of Keys constituencies" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q679687" start="3729" end="3748" title="Legislative Council of the Isle of Man" label="Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734556" start="3773" end="3793" title="President of Tynwald" label="President of Tynwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837404" start="3799" end="3822" title="Bishop of Sodor and Man" label="Bishop of Sodor and Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818628" start="3828" end="3844" title="Attorney General (Isle of Man)" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753299" start="4245" end="4262" title="Manx Labour Party" label="Manx Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540820" start="4285" end="4305" title="Liberal Vannin Party" label="Liberal Vannin Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="4743" end="4753" title="Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="4828" end="4838" title="liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="4959" end="4971" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735875" start="5001" end="5011" title="Mec Vannin" label="Mec Vannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="5045" end="5054" title="sovereignty" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="5055" end="5063" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56277299" start="5070" end="5093" title="Isle of Man Green Party" label="Isle of Man Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661415" start="5168" end="5182" title="Green politics" label="Green politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753302" start="5216" end="5235" title="Manx National Party" label="Manx National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q226050" start="5267" end="5280" title="Celtic League" label="Celtic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16320185" start="5384" end="5390" title="Modern Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997365" start="5765" end="5814" title="Marine, &amp;amp;c., Broadcasting (Offences) Act 1967" label="Marine, &amp;amp;c., Broadcasting (Offences) Act 1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q128693670" start="6030" end="6051" title="secondary legislation" label="secondary legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604686" start="6069" end="6089" title="statutory instrument (UK)" label="statutory instrument"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="6182" end="6212" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q865593" start="6258" end="6266" title="birching" label="birching"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861499" start="6310" end="6337" title="Tyrer v. the United Kingdom" label="Tyrer v. the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q206426" start="6349" end="6355" title="sodomy" label="sodomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16842947" start="6440" end="6452" title="High Bailiff" label="High Bailiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q16842947" start="6461" end="6480" title="High Bailiff" label="Deputy High Bailiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q329455" start="6497" end="6518" title="Justices of the Peace" label="Justices of the Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083974" start="6524" end="6545" title="Isle of Man High Court" label="High Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182332" start="6606" end="6614" title="Deemster" label="Deemster"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932870" start="6646" end="6674" title="Staff of Government Division" label="Staff of Government Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710982" start="6700" end="6739" title="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council" label="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="6747" end="6761" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182332" start="6796" end="6833" title="Deemster" label="First Deemster and Clerk of the Rolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182332" start="6882" end="6897" title="Deemster" label="Second Deemster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302671" start="6920" end="6935" title="Judge of Appeal" label="Judge of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790061" start="6970" end="6989" title="Lieutenant Governor of the Isle of Man" label="Lieutenant Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083974" start="6996" end="7026" title="Court of General Gaol Delivery" label="Court of General Gaol Delivery"/>
<link wikidata="Q203895" start="7103" end="7114" title="Crown Court" label="Crown Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5719141" start="7313" end="7328" title="Henry Callow" label="Deemster Callow"/>
<link wikidata="Q256091" start="7381" end="7396" title="British Islands" label="British Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035769" start="7440" end="7477" title="Capital punishment in the Isle of Man" label="Capital punishment in the Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q827704" start="7504" end="7511" title="Tynwald" label="Tynwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986370" start="7599" end="7652" title="Royal Commission on the Constitution (United Kingdom)" label="Royal Commission on the Constitution (United Kingdom)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14767" wikidata="Q3718701" url="?curid=14767" title="Economy of the Isle of Man">
<text>The economy of the [[Isle of Man]] is a low-tax economy with insurance, online gambling operators and developers, information and communications technology (ICT), and offshore banking forming key sectors of the island&#x27;s economy.

As an offshore financial centre located in the Irish Sea, the Isle of Man is within the British Isles but does not form part of the United Kingdom and was never a part of the European Union.

As of 2016, the Crown dependency&#x27;s gross national income (GNI) per capita was US$89,970 as assessed by the World Bank. The Isle of Man Government&#x27;s own National Income Report shows the largest sectors of the economy are insurance and eGaming with 17% of GNI each, followed by ICT and banking with 9% each, with tourist accommodation in the lowest sector at 0.3%.

== Economic performance ==
After 32 years of continued Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth, the financial year 2015/16 showed the first drop in GDP, of 0.9%, triggered by decline in eGaming revenues.

The unemployment rate is around 5%.

Property prices are flat or declining, but recent figures also show an increase in resident income tax payers.

The government&#x27;s policy of offering incentives to high-technology companies and financial institutions to locate on the island has expanded employment opportunities in high-income industries. Agriculture, fishing, and the hospitality industry, once the mainstays of the economy, now make declining contributions to the island&#x27;s GNP. The hospitality sector contributed just of 0.3% of GNP in 2015/16, and 629 jobs in 2016. eGaming and ICT contribute the great bulk of GNP. The stability of the island&#x27;s government and its openness for business make the Isle of Man an attractive alternative jurisdiction (DAW Index ranked 3).

== Economic strategy ==
In the Vision2020 the Isle of Man government lays out the national strategy of economic growth, seeking an increase of the economically active population an promoting the Island as an &#x27;Enterprise Island, &quot;Tech Isle&#x27;, &#x27;Manufacturing centre of excellence&#x27;, &#x27;Offshore energy hub&#x27;, &#x27;Destination Island&#x27; and for &#x27;Distinctive local food and drink&#x27;. The government has published its national economic strategies for several emerging sectors: aerospace, biomed, digital media, ICT.

== Taxation and trade ==

=== Tax rates ===
The Isle of Man is a low-tax economy with no capital gains tax, wealth tax, stamp duty, or inheritance tax; and a top rate of income tax of 22%. A tax cap is in force: the maximum amount of tax payable by an individual is £200,000; or £400,000 for couples if they choose to have their incomes jointly assessed. Personal income is assessed and taxed on a total worldwide income basis rather than on a remittance basis. This means that all income earned throughout the world is assessable for Manx tax, rather than only income earned in or brought into the Island.

The standard rate of corporation tax for residents and non-residents is 0%; retail business profits above £500,000 and banking business income are taxed at 10%, and rental (or other) income from land and buildings situated on the Isle of Man is taxed at 22%.

=== Trade ===
Trade is mostly with the United Kingdom. The Isle of Man has free access to European Union markets for goods, but only has restricted access for services, people, or financial products.

=== Tax transparency and the offshore banking debate ===
The Isle of Man as an offshore financial centre has been repeatedly featured in the press as a tax haven, most recently in the wake of the Paradise Papers.

The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development&#x27;s (OECD) Global Forum on Transparency and Exchange of Information for Tax Purposes has rated the Isle of Man as &#x27;top compliant&#x27; for a second time: a status which only three jurisdictions in the world have achieved so far. The island has become the second nation after Austria to ratify a multilateral convention with the OECD to implement measures to prevent Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS).

In a report the European Council lists the Isle of Man together with the other two Crown Dependencies (Guernsey and Jersey) as well as Bermuda, the Cayman Islands and Vanuatu, as committed to addressing the Council&#x27;s concerns of &quot;Existence of tax regimes that facilitate offshore structures which attract profits without real economic activity&quot; by 2018.

== Sectors ==
The Isle of Man&#x27;s Department for Enterprise manages the diversified economy in twelve key sectors. The largest individual sectors by GNI are insurance and eGaming with 17% of GNI each, followed by ICT and banking with 9% each. The 2016 census lists 41,636 total employed. The largest sectors by employment are &quot;medical and health&quot;, &quot;financial and business services&quot;, construction, retail and public administration. Manufacturing, focused on aerospace and the food and drink industry, employs almost 2000 workers and contributes about 5% of GDP. The sector provides laser optics, industrial diamonds, electronics, plastics and aerospace precision engineering.

===Finance sector===
Insurance, banking (includes retail banking, offshore banking and other banking services), other finance and business services, and corporate service providers together contribute the most to the GNI and most of the jobs, with 10,057 people employed in 2016.

===eGaming &amp; ICT===
Among the largest employers of the Island&#x27;s private sector are eGaming (online gambling) companies like The Stars Group, Microgaming, Newfield, and Playtech. The Manx eGaming Association MEGA is representing the sector. Licenses are issued by the Gambling Supervision Commission.

In 2005 PokerStars, one of the world&#x27;s largest online poker sites, relocated its headquarters to the Isle of Man from Costa Rica. In 2006, RNG Gaming a large gaming software developer of P2P tournaments and Get21, a multiplayer online blackjack site, based their corporate offices on the island.

The Isle of Man Government Lottery operated from 1986 to 1997. Since 2 December 1999 the island has participated in the United Kingdom National Lottery. The island is the only jurisdiction outside the United Kingdom where it is possible to play the UK National Lottery. Since 2010 it has also been possible for projects in the Isle of Man to receive national lottery Good Causes Funding. The good causes funding is distributed by the Manx Lottery Trust. Tynwald receives the 12p lottery duty for tickets sold in the Island.

The shortage of workers with ICT skills is tackled by several initiatives, like an IT and education campus, a new cyber security degree at the University College of Man, a Code Club, and a work permit waiver for skilled immigrants.

===Filmmaking and digital media===
Since 1995 Isle of Man Film has co-financed and co-produced over 100 feature film and television dramas which have all filmed on the Island.

Among the most successful productions funded in part by Isle of Man Film agency were &quot;Waking Ned&quot;, where the Manx countryside stood in for rural Ireland, and films like &quot;Stormbreaker&quot;, &quot;Shergar&quot;, &quot;Tom Brown&#x27;s Schooldays&quot;, &quot;I Capture the Castle&quot;, &quot;The Libertine&quot;, &quot;Island at War&quot; (TV series), &quot;Five Children and It&quot;, &quot;Colour Me Kubrick&quot;, &quot;Sparkle&quot;, and others. Other films that have been filmed on the Isle of Man include &quot;Thomas and the Magic Railroad&quot;, &quot;Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets&quot;, &quot;Keeping Mum and Mindhorn.&quot;

2011 Isle of Man Film Oxford Economics was commissioned by Isle of Man Film Ltd to conduct a study into the economic impact of the film industry on the Isle of. Man. The recommendation of this report for Isle of Man Film was to partner with a more established film institution in the UK to source more Isle of Man film production opportunities. This led to the investment of the Isle of Man Government to take shares in Pinewood Shepperton Plc which were sold later with profit.

Once one of the busiest areas of film production in the British Isles, the Isle of Man hopes to use its strong foundation in film to grow its television and new digital media industry. In a recent Isle of Man Department of Economic Development strategic review, the Island&#x27;s over 2,000 jobs counting digital sector features &#x27;digital media&#x27; and the creative industries, and embraces partnerships with the industry and its individual sector bodies like the Isle of Media, a new media cluster.

===Motorsports===
Hosting of motorsports events, like the Isle of Man Car Rally and the more-prominent TT motorcycle races, contributes to the tourism economy.

=== Tourism ===
Tourism in the Isle of Man developed from advances in transport to the island. In 1819 the first steamship &quot;Robert Bruce&quot; came to the island, only seven years after the first steam vessel in the UK. In the 1820s, tourism was growing due to improved transport. The island government&#x27;s own report for the financial years 2014/15-2015/16 shows tourist accommodation to be in the lowest sector at 0.3%, ranking slightly above &#x27;mining and quarrying&#x27; (0.1%).

==Infrastructure==

=== Electricity ===
Since 1999, the Isle of Man has received electricity through the world&#x27;s second longest submarine AC cable, the 90 kV Isle of Man to England Interconnector, as well as from a natural gas power station in Douglas, an oil power station in Peel and a small hydro-electric power station in Sulby Glen.

=== Gas ===
Gas for lighting and heating has been supplied to users on the Isle of Man since 1836, firstly as town gas, then as liquid petroleum gas (LPG); since 2003 natural gas has been available. The future use of hydrogen as a supplementary or substitute fuel is being studied.

=== Broadband ===
The Island is connected with five submarine cables to the UK and Ireland.

While the Isle of Man Communications Commission refers to Akamai’s recent State of the Internet Report for Q1 2017, with &quot;the Island ranked 8th in the world for percentage of broadband connections with &gt;4 Mb/s connectivity, with 96% of users connecting at speeds greater than 4 Mb/s&quot;, an &quot;international league table of broadband speeds puts the Isle of Man at 50th in the world&quot;. Manx Telecom recently announced to roll out Fibre-to-the-Home (FTTH) superfast broadband with download speeds of up to 1Gigabit per second.

=== Travel links ===
Ronaldsway Airport links the Isle of Man with six airlines to eleven UK and Irish scheduled flight destinations.

The Steam Packet Company provides ferry services to Liverpool, Heysham, Belfast and Dublin.

== Statistics ==
Labour force—by occupation:
agriculture, forestry and fishing 3%, manufacturing 11%, construction 10%, transport and communication 8%, wholesale and retail distribution 11%, professional and scientific services 18%, public administration 6%, banking and finance 18%, tourism 2%, entertainment and catering 3%, miscellaneous services 10%

Unemployment rate:
nominally 5.0% (July 2020)

Industries:
financial services, light manufacturing, tourism

Agriculture—products:
cereals, vegetables, cattle, sheep, pigs, poultry

Exports:
$NA

Exports—commodities:
tweeds, herring, processed shellfish, beef, lamb

Exports—partners:
UK

Imports:
$NA

Imports—commodities:
timber, fertilizers, fish

Imports—partners:
UK

Debt—external:
$NA

Economic aid—recipient:
$NA

Currency:
1 Isle of Man pound = 100 pence

Exchange rates:
the Manx pound is at par with the British pound

Fiscal year:
1 April – 31 March

==See also==

*Economy of Europe

== Notes ==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3718701" start="4" end="34" title="Economy of the Isle of Man" label="economy of the [[Isle of Man]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="61" end="70" title="insurance" label="insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550859" start="72" end="87" title="online gambling" label="online gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="114" end="155" title="information and communications technology" label="information and communications technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593736" start="167" end="180" title="offshore bank" label="offshore bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="225" end="232" title="economics" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q205181" start="241" end="266" title="offshore financial centre" label="offshore financial centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q41735" start="282" end="291" title="Irish Sea" label="Irish Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="297" end="308" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="410" end="424" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="443" end="459" title="Crown dependencies" label="Crown dependency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803767" start="467" end="488" title="gross national income" label="gross national income"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="539" end="549" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112593" start="555" end="577" title="Isle of Man Government" label="Isle of Man Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550859" start="671" end="678" title="Online gambling" label="eGaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="713" end="716" title="Information and communications technology" label="ICT"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="856" end="878" title="Gross domestic product" label="Gross Domestic Product"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="1348" end="1359" title="Agriculture" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="1361" end="1368" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q687591" start="2435" end="2452" title="capital gains tax" label="capital gains tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q967719" start="2454" end="2464" title="wealth tax" label="wealth tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472954" start="2466" end="2476" title="stamp duty" label="stamp duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q628413" start="2481" end="2496" title="inheritance tax" label="inheritance tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="2516" end="2526" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="2790" end="2800" title="remittance" label="remittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q645011" start="2975" end="2990" title="Corporate tax" label="corporation tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3253" end="3267" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="3304" end="3318" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q205181" start="3494" end="3519" title="offshore financial centre" label="offshore financial centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="3567" end="3576" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q42722842" start="3611" end="3626" title="Paradise Papers" label="Paradise Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="3633" end="3687" title="OECD" label="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078668" start="3702" end="3775" title="Global Forum on Transparency and Exchange of Information for Tax Purposes" label="Global Forum on Transparency and Exchange of Information for Tax Purposes"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134339" start="4062" end="4094" title="Base erosion and profit shifting (OECD project)" label="Base Erosion and Profit Shifting"/>
<link wikidata="Q8886" start="4120" end="4136" title="European Council" label="European Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="4187" end="4205" title="Crown dependencies" label="Crown Dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311985" start="4207" end="4215" title="Guernsey" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="4220" end="4226" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260254" start="4511" end="4536" title="Department for Enterprise (Isle of Man)" label="Department for Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550859" start="4648" end="4655" title="Online gambling" label="eGaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="4690" end="4693" title="Information and communications technology" label="ICT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548025" start="5223" end="5237" title="retail banking" label="retail banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593736" start="5239" end="5255" title="offshore banking" label="offshore banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550859" start="5555" end="5570" title="online gambling" label="online gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167683" start="5587" end="5602" title="The Stars Group" label="The Stars Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839537" start="5604" end="5615" title="Microgaming" label="Microgaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q583242" start="5631" end="5639" title="Playtech" label="Playtech"/>
<link wikidata="Q941317" start="5772" end="5782" title="PokerStars" label="PokerStars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050367" start="5816" end="5828" title="online poker" label="online poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="5887" end="5897" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5908" end="5918" title="RNG Gaming" label="RNG Gaming"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5976" end="5981" title="Get21" label="Get21"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517536" start="6186" end="6217" title="National Lottery (United Kingdom)" label="United Kingdom National Lottery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6433" end="6452" title="National Lottery (United Kingdom)#Good causes" label="Good Causes Funding"/>
<link wikidata="Q827704" start="6520" end="6527" title="Tynwald" label="Tynwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848850" start="7057" end="7073" title="Isle of Man Film" label="Isle of Man Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804855" start="7092" end="7102" title="Waking Ned" label="Waking Ned"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="7156" end="7163" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q169996" start="7186" end="7198" title="Stormbreaker (film)" label="Stormbreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739031" start="7212" end="7219" title="Shergar" label="Shergar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126000" start="7233" end="7260" title="Tom Brown&amp;#x27;s Schooldays (2005 film)" label="Tom Brown&amp;#x27;s Schooldays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888031" start="7274" end="7294" title="I Capture the Castle (film)" label="I Capture the Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q633307" start="7308" end="7321" title="The Libertine (2004 film)" label="The Libertine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848797" start="7335" end="7348" title="Island at War" label="Island at War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604842" start="7374" end="7394" title="Five Children and It (film)" label="Five Children and It"/>
<link wikidata="Q112831" start="7408" end="7425" title="Colour Me Kubrick" label="Colour Me Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573668" start="7439" end="7446" title="Sparkle (2007 film)" label="Sparkle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635070" start="7533" end="7562" title="Thomas and the Magic Railroad" label="Thomas and the Magic Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q102244" start="7576" end="7615" title="Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets (film)" label="Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets"/>
<link wikidata="Q429867" start="7629" end="7640" title="Keeping Mum" label="Keeping Mum"/>
<link wikidata="Q29832180" start="7645" end="7653" title="Mindhorn" label="Mindhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757177" start="8082" end="8105" title="Pinewood Group" label="Pinewood Shepperton Plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260254" start="8339" end="8385" title="Department of Economic Development (Isle of Man)" label="Isle of Man Department of Economic Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q969040" start="8505" end="8524" title="creative industries" label="creative industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q43079976" start="8612" end="8625" title="Isle of Media" label="Isle of Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q619420" start="8707" end="8728" title="Rally Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man Car Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q522661" start="8752" end="8771" title="Isle of Man TT" label="TT motorcycle races"/>
<link wikidata="Q4465969" start="8826" end="8852" title="Tourism in the Isle of Man" label="Tourism in the Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q178193" start="9011" end="9023" title="steam vessel" label="steam vessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="9031" end="9033" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="9386" end="9397" title="electricity" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q25250" start="9465" end="9467" title="Volt" label="kV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271607" start="9468" end="9505" title="Isle of Man to England Interconnector" label="Isle of Man to England Interconnector"/>
<link wikidata="Q18569" start="9554" end="9561" title="Douglas, Isle of Man" label="Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q147524" start="9587" end="9591" title="Peel, Isle of Man" label="Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636065" start="9636" end="9646" title="Sulby Glen" label="Sulby Glen"/>
<link wikidata="Q842311" start="9759" end="9767" title="Coal gas" label="town gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q351609" start="9777" end="9797" title="Liquefied petroleum gas" label="liquid petroleum gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="9816" end="9827" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4095891" start="9984" end="9999" title="submarine cable" label="submarine cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q415598" start="10083" end="10089" title="Akamai Technologies" label="Akamai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432658" start="10428" end="10440" title="Manx Telecom" label="Manx Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q586034" start="10472" end="10489" title="Fibre to the home" label="Fibre-to-the-Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q9001" start="10590" end="10608" title="Isle of Man Airport" label="Ronaldsway Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="10842" end="10853" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="10855" end="10863" title="forestry" label="forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="10868" end="10875" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="10880" end="10893" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="10899" end="10911" title="construction" label="construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="10917" end="10926" title="transport" label="transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11024" start="10931" end="10944" title="communication" label="communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q867147" start="10970" end="10982" title="distribution (business)" label="distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="11005" end="11015" title="science" label="scientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q31728" start="11030" end="11051" title="public administration" label="public administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q22687" start="11056" end="11063" title="banking" label="banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q43015" start="11068" end="11075" title="finance" label="finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="11081" end="11088" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q173799" start="11093" end="11106" title="entertainment" label="entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q777754" start="11111" end="11119" title="catering" label="catering"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="11152" end="11164" title="Unemployment" label="Unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="11283" end="11289" title="cereal" label="cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="11292" end="11301" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="11304" end="11310" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="11312" end="11317" title="domestic sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="11319" end="11322" title="pig" label="pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q178559" start="11325" end="11332" title="poultry" label="poultry"/>
<link wikidata="Q40601" start="11369" end="11374" title="tweed (cloth)" label="tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127419" start="11377" end="11384" title="herring" label="herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501235" start="11396" end="11405" title="shellfish" label="shellfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q192628" start="11407" end="11411" title="beef" label="beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="11413" end="11417" title="domestic sheep" label="lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="11476" end="11482" title="timber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="11484" end="11494" title="fertilizer" label="fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="11497" end="11501" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8142" start="11574" end="11582" title="Currency" label="Currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q27614" start="11586" end="11603" title="Isle of Man pound" label="Isle of Man pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226947" start="11730" end="11747" title="Economy of Europe" label="Economy of Europe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14768" wikidata="Q5154217" url="?curid=14768" title="Communications in the Isle of Man">
<text>The Isle of Man has an extensive communications infrastructure consisting of telephone cables, submarine cables, and an array of television and mobile phone transmitters and towers.

==Telecommunications==
===Telegraph===
The history of Manx telecommunications starts in 1859, when the Isle of Man Electric Telegraph Company was formed on the Island with the intention of connecting across the Island by telegraph, and allowing messages to be sent onwards to the UK. In August 1859, a long cable was commissioned from Glass, Elliot and Company of Greenwich and laid from Cranstal (north of Ramsey) to St Bees in Cumbria using the chartered cable ship &quot;Resolute&quot;. The cable was single-core, with gutta-percha insulation.

Twenty miles of overhead cable were also erected from Cranstal south to Ramsey, and on to Douglas. In England, the telegraph was connected to Whitehaven and the circuits of the Electric Telegraph Company.

The telegraph offices were located at 64 Athol Street, Douglas (also the company&#x27;s head office) and at East Quay, Ramsey (now Marina House).

On 10 August 1860 the company was statutorily incorporated by an Act of Tynwald with a capital of £5,500.

The currents at Cranstal proved too strong, and in 1864 the cable was taken up and relaid further south, at Port-e-Vullen in Ramsey Bay. It was later relaid to land even further south at Port Cornaa.

Following the 1869 finalisation of UK telegraph nationalisation into a General Post Office monopoly, the Isle of Man Electric Telegraph Company was nationalised in 1870 under the Telegraph Act 1870 (an Act of Parliament) at a cost to the British Government of £16,106 (paid in 1872 following arbitration proceedings over the value). Prior to nationalisation, the Island&#x27;s telegraph operations had been performing poorly and the company&#x27;s share price valued it at around £100.

Subsequent to nationalisation, operations were taken over by the GPO. The internal telegraph system was extended within a year to Castletown and Peel, however by then the previous lack of modern communications in Castletown had already started the Isle of Man Government on its move to Douglas.

Due to increasing usage in the years following nationalisation, further cables between Port Cornaa and St Bees were laid in 1875 and 1885.

By 1883 Smith&#x27;s Directory listed several telegraph offices operated by the Post Office, in addition to those at Douglas, Ramsey, Castletown and Peel the telegraph was also available at Laxey, Ballaugh, and Port St. Mary.

Throughout the First World War, the cable landing station at Port Cornaa was guarded by the Isle of Man Volunteer Corps.

The undersea telegraph cables have been disused since the 1950s, but remain in place.

===Teleport===
A Teleport, with several earth stations, is currently under construction in the Isle of Man. SES Satellite Leasing, the entrepreneurial investment arm of SES . The teleport is expected to enter into service in 2017. It will be a state-of-the-art facility providing satellite telemetry, tracking and commanding (TT&amp;C) facilities and capacity management, together with a wide range of teleport services such as uplink, downlink, and contribution services for broadcasters and data centres.

===Telephones===
The main telephone provider in the Isle of Man today is Manx Telecom.

In 1889 George Gillmore, formerly an electrician for the GPO&#x27;s Manx telegraph operations, was granted a licence by the Postmaster General to operate the Isle of Man&#x27;s first telephone service. Based in an exchange in Athol Street, early customers of Gilbert&#x27;s telephone service included the Isle of Man Steam Packet Company and the Isle of Man Railway. Not having the resources to fund expansion or a link to England, Gillmore sold his licence to the National Telephone Company and stayed on as their manager on the island.

By 1901 there were 600 subscribers, and the telephone system had been extended to Ramsey, Castletown, Peel, Port Erin, Port St. Mary and Onchan.

On 1 January 1912 the National Telephone Company was nationalised and merged into the General Post Office by the Telephone Transfer Act 1911. Only Guernsey, Portsmouth and Hull remained outside of the GPO.

In 1922, the General Post Office offered to sell the island&#x27;s telephone service to the Manx government, but the offer was not taken up. A similar arrangement in Jersey for that island&#x27;s telephone service was concluded in 1923.

The first off-island telephone link was established in 1929, with the laying of a cable by the &quot;CS Faraday&quot; between Port Erin and Ballyhornan in Northern Ireland, a distance of 57 km, and then between Port Grenaugh and Blackpool, primarily to provide a link to Northern Ireland. The cable was completed on 6 June 1929 and the first call between the Isle of Man and the outside world was made on 28 June 1929 by Lieutenant Governor Sir Claude Hill in Douglas to the Postmaster General in Liverpool. The cable initially carried only two trunk circuits.

In 1942, a pioneering VHF frequency-modulated radio-link was established between Creg-na-Baa and the UK to provide an alternative to the sub-sea cable. This has since been discontinued.

This was augmented on 24 June 1943 by a long cable between Cemaes Bay in Anglesey and Port Erin, which had the world&#x27;s first submerged repeater, laid by &quot;HMCS Iris&quot;. The repeater doubled the possible number of circuits on the cable, and although it failed after only five months, its replacement worked for seven years.

In 1962 a further undersea cable was laid by &quot;HMTS Ariel&quot; between Colwyn Bay and the Island.

Historically, the telephone system in the Isle of Man had been run as a monopoly by the British General Post Office, and later British Telecommunications, and operated as part of the Liverpool telephone district.

By 1985 the privatised British Telecom had inherited the telephone operations of the GPO, including those in the Isle of Man. At this time the Manx Government announced that it would award a 20-year licence to operate the telephone system in a tender process. As part of this process, in 1986 British Telecom created a Manx-registered subsidiary company, Manx Telecom, to bid for the tender. It was believed that a local identity and management would be more politically acceptable in the tendering process as they competed with Cable &amp; Wireless to win the licence. Manx Telecom won the tender, and commenced operations under the new identity from 1 January 1987.

On 28 March 1988 an 8,000 telephone circuit fibre optic cable, the longest unregenerated system in Europe, was inaugurated. It links Port Grenaugh to Silecroft in Cumbria, and was laid in September 1987. The cable was buried in the seabed along its entire length.

A further fibre optic cable, known as BT-MT1 was laid in October 1990 between Millom in Cumbria and Douglas, a distance of . Jointly operated by BT and Manx Telecom, it provides six channels each with a bandwidth of 140 Mbit/s. This cable remains in use today.

In July 1992, Mercury Communications laid the LANIS fibre-optic cables. LANIS-1 runs for between Port Grenaugh and Blackpool, and LANIS-2 runs for between the Isle of Man and Northern Ireland. They have six channels each with a bandwidth of 565 Mbit/s. The LANIS cables are now operated by Cable &amp; Wireless. The LANIS-1 cable was damaged 600 m off Port Grenaugh on 27 November 2006, causing loss of the link and resulting in temporary Internet access issues for some Manx customers whilst it was awaiting repair.

On 17 November 2001 Manx Telecom became part of mmO2 following the demerger of BT Wireless&#x27;s operations from BT Group, and the company was owned by Telefónica. On 4 June 2010 Manx Telecom was sold by Telefónica to UK private equity investor HgCapital (who were buying the majority stake), alongside telecoms management company CPS Partners

In December 2007, the Manx Electricity Authority and its telecoms subsidiary, e-llan Communications, commissioned the lighting of a new undersea fibre-optic link. It was laid in 1999 between Blackpool and Douglas as part of the Isle of Man to England Interconnector which connects the Manx electricity system to the UK&#x27;s National Grid.

In December 2017, Horizon Electronics Isle of Man (formerly Horizon Electro) helped with the online TV services of the Isle of Man.

According to the CIA World Factbook, in 1999 there were 51,000 fixed telephone lines in use in the Isle of Man.

The Isle of Man is included within the UK telephone numbering system, and is accessed externally via UK area codes, rather than by its own country calling code. The area codes currently in use are: +44 1624 (landlines) and +44 7425 / +44 7624 / +44 7924 (mobiles).

====Submarine communications cables in service====

*BT-MT1 (BT/Manx Telecom, 1990 - UK)
* BT-MT1-NI (BT/Manx Telecom, 2000 - Northern Ireland (UK))
*LANIS-1 (Cable &amp; Wireless, 1992 - UK)
*LANIS-2 (Cable &amp; Wireless, 1992 - Northern Ireland (UK))
*Isle of Man to England Interconnector (Manx Electricity Authority, 2007 - UK)
*Aqua Comms Isle of Man Link to Ireland and the USA
*Aqua Comms Isle of Man Link to Blackpool UK

Submarine cables in Manx waters are governed by the Submarine Cables Act 2003 (an Act of Tynwald).

====Telecoms service providers====
* Manx Telecom The incumbent provider offering all types of telecoms and owner of the national network.
* Sure The islands second full service provider offering all types of telecommunications from: Mobiles, Broadband, Home Phone, Private Circuits, Dedicated Internet Access, Data Centre Hosting, LAN/WAN/PABX consultancy etc.
*Wi-Manx VoIP and internet services provider since 2007. In 2014 Wi-Manx were granted a Full Telecoms Operator license.
*Netcetera Offers hosting and co-location in its Ballasalla data centre.
*BlueWave Communications A provider of ISP and 4G services to business and consumers. BlueWave Communications is a communications service provider located in Douglas in the Isle of Man who were granted their Full Telecoms Operator licence in 2018 . It was founded in 2007 by Stuart Baggs and provides communications services to both businesses and consumers in the Isle of Man.

===Mobile telephones===
The mobile phone network operated by Manx Telecom has been used by O2 as an environment for developing and testing new products and services prior to wider rollout. In December 2001, the company became the first telecommunications operator in Europe to launch a live 3G network. In November 2005, the company became the first in Europe to offer its customers an HSDPA (3.5G) service.

Sure built their own mobile network on the island in 2007 and following various upgrades now deliver 2G/3G and 4G services

===Internet===
In 1996 the Isle of Man government obtained permission to use the .im national top level domain (TLD) and has ultimate responsibility for its use. The domain is managed on a daily basis by Domicilium (IOM) Limited, an island based Internet service provider. Broadband Internet services are available through five local providers which are Manx Telecom, Sure , Wi-Manx , Domicilium , Opti-Fi Limited and BlueWave Communications.

In 2021 it was revealed Bluewave host a Ground station for the Starlink Satellite Internet system 

==Broadcasting==
===Radio===
The public-service commercial radio station for the island is Manx Radio. Manx Radio is part funded by government grant, and partly by advertising. There are two other Manx-based FM radio stations, Energy FM and 3 FM.

BBC national radio stations are also relayed locally via a transmitter located to the south of Douglas, relayed from Sandale transmitting station in Cumbria, as well as a signal feed from the Holme Moss transmitting station in West Yorkshire. The Douglas transmitter also broadcasts the BBC&#x27;s DAB digital radio services and Classic FM.

Manx Radio is the only local service to broadcast on AM medium wave. No UK services are relayed via local AM transmitters. No longwave stations operate from the Island, although one (MusicMann 279) was proposed. There are currently no proposals to broadcast any of the three insular FM stations on DAB.

====Transmitters====
* Snaefell - Manx Radio, Energy FM, 3FM
* Foxdale - Manx Radio (AM)
* Mull Hill (near Port St. Mary) - Energy FM, 3FM
* Jurby - Energy FM, Manx Radio,
* Ramsey - Manx Radio, Energy FM, 3FM, Horizon Pulse, (a nearby site also used for television broadcasts the BBC DAB multiplex)
* Ballasaig (Maughold) - Energy FM
* Carnane (Douglas) - Manx Radio, Energy FM, 3FM, Horizon Pulse, Radio 1, Radio 2, Radio 3, Radio 4, Classic FM, BBC DAB multiplex
* Port St Mary - 3FM, BBC DAB multiplex
* Beary Peark - Energy FM, 3FM
* Peel - Manx Radio
* Cronk ny Arrey - 3FM

===Television===
There is no Island-specific television service. Local transmitters retransmit UK Freeview broadcasts. The BBC region is BBC North West and the ITV region is Granada Television.

Many television services are available by satellite, such as Sky, and Freesat from the Astra 2/Eurobird 1 group, as well as services from a range of other satellites around Europe such as Astra 1 and Hot Bird.

Manx ViaSat-IOM, ManSat, Telesat-IOM companies uses the first communications satellite ViaSat-1 that launched in 2011 and positioned at the Isle of Man registered 115.1 degrees West longitude geostationary orbit point. In some areas, terrestrial television directly from the United Kingdom or Republic of Ireland can also be received.

Analogue television transmission ceased between 2008 and 2009, when limited local transmission of digital terrestrial television commenced. The UK&#x27;s television licence regime extends to the island.

There is no Island-specific opt-out of the BBC regional news programme &quot;North West Tonight&quot;, in the way that the Channel Islands get their own version of &quot;Spotlight&quot;.

Television was first received in the Isle of Man from the Holme Moss transmitter which started broadcasting BBC Television (later BBC One) from 12 October 1951. Signals from Holme Moss were easily received in the Isle of Man.

ITV television has been available on parts of the east of the Isle of Man on 3 May 1956 when Granada Television (and ABC Television from 5 May 1956 to 28 July 1968) transmissions started from the Winter Hill transmitting station, and to parts of the west of the island on 31 October 1959 from the Black Mountain transmitting station in Northern Ireland which broadcasts Ulster Television. Parts of the north of the Island received Border Television since 1 September 1961, initially directly from the Caldbeck transmitting station in Cumberland (later became Cumbria from 1974). On 26 March 1965, Border Television commenced relay of their signal through a local transmitter on Richmond Hill, above sea level and from the centre of Douglas. The site allowed reliable reception of the Caldbeck signal, which is rebroadcast on a different frequency. The high transmission tower was re-sited from London, where it had been used for early ITV transmissions. Richmond Hill was decommissioned after the close of 405-line broadcasts, although the 200 ft tower remained in use for radio with Manx Radio transmitting on 96.9 MHz and then 97.3 MHz until 1989. Manx Radio moved their FM service to the Carnane site and the frequency changed to the current 97.2 MHz.

The television broadcasts are now transmitted from a high transmitter on a hill to the south of Douglas. The transmitter is operated by Arqiva and is directly fed using a fibre optic cable. There are further sub-relay transmitters across the Island. Following a realignment of ITV regional services and the digital switchover, the Douglas relay switched ITV broadcasts to Granada Television on Thursday 17 July 2009.

The Broadcasting Act 1993 (An Act of Tynwald) allows for the establishment of local television services. Only one application for a licence to run such a service was received by the Communications Commission. That application was rejected.

According to the CIA World Factbook, in 1999 there were 27,490 televisions in use in the Isle of Man.

====Transmitters====
* Kimmeragh (Bride)
* Beary Peark (St Johns)
* Glen Maye
* Foxdale
* Port St. Mary
* Carnane (Douglas)
* Union Mills
* Laxey
* Jurby
* Ramsey

==Post==
Isle of Man Post issues its own stamps for use within the Island and for sending post off-Island. Only Manx stamps are valid for sending mail using the postal system. The Isle of Man adopted postcodes in 1993 using the prefix IM to fit in with the already established UK postcode system.

==See also==
* Communications Commission
* Isle of Man Post

==References==
==External links==
* Communications Commission
* Communications summary</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="4" end="15" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="404" end="413" title="telegraph" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925151" start="571" end="579" title="Cranstal" label="Cranstal"/>
<link wikidata="Q150106" start="590" end="596" title="Ramsey, Isle of Man" label="Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017068" start="601" end="608" title="St Bees" label="St Bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q423261" start="705" end="717" title="gutta-percha" label="gutta-percha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012481" start="873" end="883" title="Whitehaven" label="Whitehaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357511" start="908" end="934" title="Electric Telegraph Company" label="Electric Telegraph Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q18569" start="992" end="999" title="Douglas, Isle of Man" label="Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676700" start="1149" end="1163" title="Act of Tynwald" label="Act of Tynwald"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1299" end="1312" title="Port-e-Vullen" label="Port-e-Vullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325334" start="1463" end="1482" title="General Post Office" label="General Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696221" start="1571" end="1589" title="Telegraph Act 1870" label="Telegraph Act 1870"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2634" end="2661" title="Isle of Man Volunteer Corps" label="Isle of Man Volunteer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432658" start="3332" end="3344" title="Manx Telecom" label="Manx Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="3530" end="3539" title="telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674254" start="3652" end="3684" title="Isle of Man Steam Packet Company" label="Isle of Man Steam Packet Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456606" start="3693" end="3712" title="Isle of Man Railway" label="Isle of Man Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978890" start="3812" end="3838" title="National Telephone Company" label="National Telephone Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696484" start="4145" end="4172" title="Telephone Transfer Act 1911" label="Telephone Transfer Act 1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311985" start="4179" end="4187" title="Guernsey" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="4189" end="4199" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q128147" start="4204" end="4208" title="Kingston upon Hull" label="Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q520798" start="4603" end="4612" title="Port Erin" label="Port Erin"/>
<link wikidata="Q60762" start="4617" end="4628" title="Ballyhornan" label="Ballyhornan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230653" start="4688" end="4701" title="Port Grenaugh" label="Port Grenaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q170377" start="4706" end="4715" title="Blackpool" label="Blackpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790061" start="4898" end="4917" title="Lieutenant Governor of the Isle of Man" label="Lieutenant Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581578" start="4952" end="4970" title="Postmaster General of the United Kingdom" label="Postmaster General"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183966" start="5120" end="5131" title="Creg-na-Baa" label="Creg-na-Baa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405038" start="5285" end="5295" title="Cemaes Bay" label="Cemaes Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q168159" start="5299" end="5307" title="Anglesey" label="Anglesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q520798" start="5312" end="5321" title="Port Erin" label="Port Erin"/>
<link wikidata="Q527467" start="5638" end="5648" title="Colwyn Bay" label="Colwyn Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325334" start="5762" end="5781" title="General Post Office" label="General Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="5793" end="5819" title="British Telecommunications" label="British Telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024869" start="6409" end="6429" title="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless plc" label="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="6593" end="6604" title="fibre optic" label="fibre optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7514340" start="6699" end="6708" title="Silecroft" label="Silecroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q368740" start="6892" end="6898" title="Millom" label="Millom"/>
<link wikidata="Q18569" start="6914" end="6921" title="Douglas, Isle of Man" label="Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351621" start="7034" end="7040" title="Mbit/s" label="Mbit/s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818605" start="7090" end="7112" title="Mercury Communications" label="Mercury Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q14507083" start="7366" end="7386" title="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless Worldwide" label="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072245" start="7673" end="7684" title="O2 (United Kingdom)" label="BT Wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q5750082" start="7840" end="7849" title="HgCapital" label="HgCapital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753296" start="7962" end="7988" title="Manx Electricity Authority" label="Manx Electricity Authority"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8018" end="8039" title="e-llan Communications" label="e-llan Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271607" start="8168" end="8205" title="Isle of Man to England Interconnector" label="Isle of Man to England Interconnector"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261121" start="8266" end="8279" title="National Grid (Great Britain)" label="National Grid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8300" end="8331" title="Horizon Electronics Isle of Man" label="Horizon Electronics Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q848096" start="8567" end="8596" title="telephone numbers in the United Kingdom" label="UK telephone numbering system"/>
<link wikidata="Q34768" start="8667" end="8687" title="country calling code" label="country calling code"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676700" start="9307" end="9321" title="Act of Tynwald" label="Act of Tynwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432658" start="9362" end="9374" title="Manx Telecom" label="Manx Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169186" start="9466" end="9470" title="Sure (company)" label="Sure"/>
<link wikidata="Q106617171" start="9881" end="9904" title="BlueWave Communications" label="BlueWave Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q106617171" start="10155" end="10167" title="Stuart Baggs" label="Stuart Baggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072245" start="10350" end="10352" title="O2 (United Kingdom)" label="O2"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="10550" end="10552" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q731991" start="10645" end="10650" title="HSDPA" label="HSDPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q42050" start="10873" end="10876" title=".im" label=".im"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432658" start="11146" end="11158" title="Manx Telecom" label="Manx Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q106617171" start="11210" end="11233" title="BlueWave Communications" label="BlueWave Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349167" start="11276" end="11290" title="Ground station" label="Ground station"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867977" start="11299" end="11307" title="Starlink" label="Starlink"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="11395" end="11400" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365538" start="11427" end="11437" title="Manx Radio" label="Manx Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376930" start="11563" end="11572" title="Energy FM (Isle of Man)" label="Energy FM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11577" end="11581" title="3 FM (Isle of Man)" label="3 FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415957" start="11701" end="11729" title="Sandale transmitting station" label="Sandale transmitting station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5883395" start="11776" end="11807" title="Holme Moss transmitting station" label="Holme Moss transmitting station"/>
<link wikidata="Q23083" start="11811" end="11825" title="West Yorkshire" label="West Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128150" start="11913" end="11923" title="Classic FM (UK)" label="Classic FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082861" start="12052" end="12060" title="longwave" label="longwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156823" start="12909" end="12917" title="Freeview (UK)" label="Freeview"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="12934" end="12937" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834879" start="12948" end="12962" title="BBC North West" label="BBC North West"/>
<link wikidata="Q674608" start="12971" end="12974" title="ITV (TV channel)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476957" start="12985" end="13003" title="ITV Granada" label="Granada Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033167" start="13067" end="13070" title="Sky UK" label="Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055297" start="13076" end="13083" title="Freesat" label="Freesat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13093" end="13111" title="Astra 2/Eurobird 1" label="Astra 2/Eurobird 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="13179" end="13185" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115330" start="13194" end="13201" title="Astra 1" label="Astra 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991147" start="13206" end="13214" title="Hot Bird" label="Hot Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q7924358" start="13222" end="13228" title="ViaSat" label="ViaSat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13234" end="13240" title="ManSat" label="ManSat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401935" start="13242" end="13249" title="Telesat" label="Telesat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521638" start="13304" end="13312" title="ViaSat-1" label="ViaSat-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q192316" start="13409" end="13428" title="geostationary orbit" label="geostationary orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q175122" start="13451" end="13473" title="terrestrial television" label="terrestrial television"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="13492" end="13506" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="13510" end="13529" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083894" start="13651" end="13681" title="digital terrestrial television" label="digital terrestrial television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712877" start="13707" end="13725" title="television licensing in the United Kingdom" label="television licence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834876" start="13834" end="13852" title="BBC North West Tonight" label="North West Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="13880" end="13895" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876715" start="13927" end="13936" title="Spotlight (BBC South West News)" label="Spotlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5883395" start="14003" end="14025" title="Holme Moss transmitting station" label="Holme Moss transmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q261492" start="14053" end="14067" title="BBC Television" label="BBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="14075" end="14082" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q674608" start="14172" end="14175" title="ITV (TV channel)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476957" start="14265" end="14283" title="ITV Granada" label="Granada Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q664991" start="14289" end="14303" title="ABC Weekend TV" label="ABC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026260" start="14368" end="14400" title="Winter Hill transmitting station" label="Winter Hill transmitting station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921357" start="14469" end="14504" title="Black Mountain transmitting station" label="Black Mountain transmitting station"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="14508" end="14524" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406307" start="14542" end="14559" title="UTV (TV channel)" label="Ulster Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975058" start="14603" end="14620" title="ITV Border" label="Border Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018975" start="14673" end="14702" title="Caldbeck transmitting station" label="Caldbeck transmitting station"/>
<link wikidata="Q23360" start="14706" end="14716" title="Cumberland" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23066" start="14731" end="14738" title="Cumbria" label="Cumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q18569" start="14904" end="14911" title="Douglas, Isle of Man" label="Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="15066" end="15072" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291066" start="15178" end="15186" title="405-line television system" label="405-line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365538" start="15256" end="15266" title="Manx Radio" label="Manx Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4795774" start="15564" end="15570" title="Arqiva" label="Arqiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154162" start="16028" end="16053" title="Communications Commission" label="Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432267" start="16363" end="16379" title="Isle of Man Post" label="Isle of Man Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q37447" start="16554" end="16563" title="postcodes" label="postcodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972146" start="16589" end="16591" title="IM postcode area" label="IM"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="16631" end="16633" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370074" start="16634" end="16642" title="UK postcodes" label="postcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154162" start="16667" end="16692" title="Communications Commission" label="Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432267" start="16695" end="16711" title="Isle of Man Post" label="Isle of Man Post"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14769" wikidata="Q7835121" url="?curid=14769" title="Transport in the Isle of Man">
<text>There are a number of transport services around the [[Isle of Man]], mostly consisting of paved roads, public transport, rail services, sea ports and an airport.

==Roads==

The island has a total of of public roads, all of which are paved. Roads are numbered using a numbering scheme similar to the numbering schemes of Great Britain and Northern Ireland; each road is assigned a letter, which represents the road&#x27;s category, followed by a 1 or 2 digit number. &quot;A&quot; roads are the main roads of the island whilst roads labelled &quot;B&quot;, &quot;C&quot;, &quot;D&quot; or &quot;U&quot; decrease in size and/or quality. (The C, D and U numbers are not marked on most maps or on signposts.) There is no national speed limit – some roads may be driven at any speed which is safe and appropriate. Careless and dangerous driving laws still apply, so one may not drive at absolutely any speed, and there are local speed limits on many roads. Many unrestricted roads have frequent bends which even the most experienced driver cannot see round. Drivers are limited to in the first full year after passing their driving test (Isle of Man citizens are permitted to start driving at the age of sixteen) and some are not used to having to make progress in the same way as on a larger road network such as that in the UK: even a cautious driver can get from anywhere in the island to anywhere else in no more than sixty minutes.

Set against this is a strong culture of motor sport enthusiasm (pinnacled in the TT, but there are many events during the year) and many residents familiar with the roads are well used to traversing country roads at speeds illegal on similar roads elsewhere. This leads to a very diverse spread of both driving competence and speed. In an official survey in 2006 the introduction of blanket speed limits was refused by the population, suggesting that a large number appreciate the freedom.

There is a comprehensive bus network, operated by Bus Vannin, a department of the Isle of Man Government, with most routes originating or terminating in Douglas.

An organisation on the Isle of Man called the Fare Free Campaign supports making bus and tram travel on the island free of charge for all routes. One of the reasons the campaign gives for supporting this is to encourage people to change their transportation habits to help mitigate climate change.

==Railways==

The island has a total of of railway. There are seven separate public rail or tram systems on the island:

&quot;a&quot; Reopened 2022, on a shortened route with its western terminus at Broadway.

(The last three are short-distance tourist rides which cannot be said to be transport services.)

All of these routes are seasonal.

==Airports==
The only commercial airport on the island is the Isle of Man Airport at Ronaldsway. Scheduled services operate to and from various cities in the United Kingdom and Ireland, operated by several different airlines.

The island&#x27;s other paved runways are at Jurby and Andreas. Jurby remains in Isle of Man Government ownership and is used for motorsport events and, previously, airshows, while Andreas is privately owned and used by a local glider club. The old Hall Caine Airport, a grass field near Ramsey, is no longer used.

==Aircraft Register==
The Isle of Man Aircraft Register became operational on 1 May 2007. The register is open to all non-commercial aircraft and is intended to be of particular interest to professionally flown corporate operators.
As of November 2012 a total of 537 corporate and private aircraft had been registered.

==Ports and harbours==

There are ports at Castletown, Douglas, Peel, Port St Mary and Ramsey. Douglas is served by frequent ferries to/from England and occasional ferries to/from Ireland; the sole operator is the Isle of Man Steam Packet Company, with exclusive use of the Isle of Man Sea Terminal and the Douglas port linkspans under the conditions of the user agreement with the Isle of Man Government.

==Merchant marine==
The Isle of Man register comprised 404 merchant ships of 1,000 GT or over at the end of 2017.

==References==

==External links==
*Isle of Man Transport (Arraghey Ellan Vannin)
*Isle of Man Steam Packet Company
*Isle of Man Airport
*Isle of Man Aircraft Registry
*Searchable Isle of Man Bus/Railway Timetables
*Manx Electric Railway Society (MERS)
*Archived copy of old MERS site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7835121" start="22" end="67" title="Transport in the Isle of Man" label="transport services around the [[Isle of Man]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005002" start="268" end="284" title="numbering scheme" label="numbering scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q387692" start="321" end="334" title="Great Britain road numbering scheme" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167059" start="339" end="355" title="roads in Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q228913" start="718" end="738" title="national speed limit" label="national speed limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216147" start="823" end="840" title="dangerous driving" label="dangerous driving"/>
<link wikidata="Q522661" start="1515" end="1517" title="Isle of Man TT" label="TT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001204" start="1975" end="1985" title="Bus Vannin" label="Bus Vannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112593" start="2007" end="2029" title="Isle of Man Government" label="Isle of Man Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105834" start="2203" end="2217" title="Free public transport" label="free of charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="2370" end="2384" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q9001" start="2793" end="2812" title="Isle of Man Airport" label="Isle of Man Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292403" start="2816" end="2826" title="Ronaldsway" label="Ronaldsway"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2889" end="2903" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="2908" end="2915" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275407" start="3003" end="3008" title="RAF Jurby" label="Jurby"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755356" start="3013" end="3020" title="RAF Andreas" label="Andreas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642563" start="3207" end="3225" title="Hall Caine Airport" label="Hall Caine Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q150106" start="3246" end="3252" title="Ramsey, Isle of Man" label="Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q158530" start="3637" end="3647" title="Castletown, Isle of Man" label="Castletown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301569" start="3649" end="3656" title="Douglas Harbour" label="Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q147524" start="3658" end="3662" title="Peel, Isle of Man" label="Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605309" start="3664" end="3676" title="Port St Mary" label="Port St Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q150106" start="3681" end="3687" title="Ramsey, Isle of Man" label="Ramsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674254" start="3808" end="3840" title="Isle of Man Steam Packet Company" label="Isle of Man Steam Packet Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228877" start="3868" end="3892" title="Isle of Man Sea Terminal" label="Isle of Man Sea Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554416" start="3914" end="3922" title="linkspan" label="linkspan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719498" start="4084" end="4086" title="Gross tonnage" label="GT"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14773" wikidata="Q131222" url="?curid=14773" title="Information theory">
<text>Information theory is the mathematical study of the quantification, storage, and communication of information. The field was established and formalized by Claude Shannon in the 1940s, though early contributions were made in the 1920s through the works of Harry Nyquist and Ralph Hartley. It is at the intersection of electronic engineering, mathematics, statistics, computer science, neurobiology, physics, and electrical engineering.

A key measure in information theory is entropy. Entropy quantifies the amount of uncertainty involved in the value of a random variable or the outcome of a random process. For example, identifying the outcome of a fair coin flip (which has two equally likely outcomes) provides less information (lower entropy, less uncertainty) than identifying the outcome from a roll of a die (which has six equally likely outcomes). Some other important measures in information theory are mutual information, channel capacity, error exponents, and relative entropy. Important sub-fields of information theory include source coding, algorithmic complexity theory, algorithmic information theory and information-theoretic security.

Applications of fundamental topics of information theory include source coding/data compression (e.g. for ZIP files), and channel coding/error detection and correction (e.g. for DSL). Its impact has been crucial to the success of the Voyager missions to deep space, the invention of the compact disc, the feasibility of mobile phones and the development of the Internet and artificial intelligence. The theory has also found applications in other areas, including statistical inference, cryptography, neurobiology, perception, signal processing, linguistics, the evolution and function of molecular codes (bioinformatics), thermal physics, molecular dynamics, black holes, quantum computing, information retrieval, intelligence gathering, plagiarism detection, pattern recognition, anomaly detection, the analysis of music, art creation, imaging system design, study of outer space, the dimensionality of space, and epistemology.

==Overview==
Information theory studies the transmission, processing, extraction, and utilization of information. Abstractly, information can be thought of as the resolution of uncertainty. In the case of communication of information over a noisy channel, this abstract concept was formalized in 1948 by Claude Shannon in a paper entitled &quot;A Mathematical Theory of Communication&quot;, in which information is thought of as a set of possible messages, and the goal is to send these messages over a noisy channel, and to have the receiver reconstruct the message with low probability of error, in spite of the channel noise. Shannon&#x27;s main result, the noisy-channel coding theorem, showed that, in the limit of many channel uses, the rate of information that is asymptotically achievable is equal to the channel capacity, a quantity dependent merely on the statistics of the channel over which the messages are sent.

Coding theory is concerned with finding explicit methods, called &quot;codes&quot;, for increasing the efficiency and reducing the error rate of data communication over noisy channels to near the channel capacity. These codes can be roughly subdivided into data compression (source coding) and error-correction (channel coding) techniques. In the latter case, it took many years to find the methods Shannon&#x27;s work proved were possible.

A third class of information theory codes are cryptographic algorithms (both codes and ciphers). Concepts, methods and results from coding theory and information theory are widely used in cryptography and cryptanalysis, such as the unit ban.

==Historical background==
The landmark event &quot;establishing&quot; the discipline of information theory and bringing it to immediate worldwide attention was the publication of Claude E. Shannon&#x27;s classic paper &quot;A Mathematical Theory of Communication&quot; in the &quot;Bell System Technical Journal&quot; in July and October 1948. Historian James Gleick rated the paper as the most important development of 1948, noting that the paper was &quot;even more profound and more fundamental&quot; than the transistor. He came to be known as the &quot;father of information theory&quot;. Shannon outlined some of his initial ideas of information theory as early as 1939 in a letter to Vannevar Bush.

Prior to this paper, limited information-theoretic ideas had been developed at Bell Labs, all implicitly assuming events of equal probability. Harry Nyquist&#x27;s 1924 paper, &quot;Certain Factors Affecting Telegraph Speed&quot;, contains a theoretical section quantifying &quot;intelligence&quot; and the &quot;line speed&quot; at which it can be transmitted by a communication system, giving the relation (recalling the Boltzmann constant), where &quot;W&quot; is the speed of transmission of intelligence, &quot;m&quot; is the number of different voltage levels to choose from at each time step, and &quot;K&quot; is a constant. Ralph Hartley&#x27;s 1928 paper, &quot;Transmission of Information&quot;, uses the word &quot;information&quot; as a measurable quantity, reflecting the receiver&#x27;s ability to distinguish one sequence of symbols from any other, thus quantifying information as , where &quot;S&quot; was the number of possible symbols, and &quot;n&quot; the number of symbols in a transmission. The unit of information was therefore the decimal digit, which since has sometimes been called the hartley in his honor as a unit or scale or measure of information. Alan Turing in 1940 used similar ideas as part of the statistical analysis of the breaking of the German second world war Enigma ciphers.

Much of the mathematics behind information theory with events of different probabilities were developed for the field of thermodynamics by Ludwig Boltzmann and J. Willard Gibbs. Connections between information-theoretic entropy and thermodynamic entropy, including the important contributions by Rolf Landauer in the 1960s, are explored in &quot;Entropy in thermodynamics and information theory&quot;.

In Shannon&#x27;s revolutionary and groundbreaking paper, the work for which had been substantially completed at Bell Labs by the end of 1944, Shannon for the first time introduced the qualitative and quantitative model of communication as a statistical process underlying information theory, opening with the assertion: 
:&quot;The fundamental problem of communication is that of reproducing at one point, either exactly or approximately, a message selected at another point.&quot;

With it came the ideas of: 
* the information entropy and redundancy of a source, and its relevance through the source coding theorem;
* the mutual information, and the channel capacity of a noisy channel, including the promise of perfect loss-free communication given by the noisy-channel coding theorem;
* the practical result of the Shannon–Hartley law for the channel capacity of a Gaussian channel; as well as
* the bit—a new way of seeing the most fundamental unit of information.

==Quantities of information==
Information theory is based on probability theory and statistics, where quantified information is usually described in terms of bits. Information theory often concerns itself with measures of information of the distributions associated with random variables. One of the most important measures is called entropy, which forms the building block of many other measures. Entropy allows quantification of measure of information in a single random variable. Another useful concept is mutual information defined on two random variables, which describes the measure of information in common between those variables, which can be used to describe their correlation. The former quantity is a property of the probability distribution of a random variable and gives a limit on the rate at which data generated by independent samples with the given distribution can be reliably compressed. The latter is a property of the joint distribution of two random variables, and is the maximum rate of reliable communication across a noisy channel in the limit of long block lengths, when the channel statistics are determined by the joint distribution.

The choice of logarithmic base in the following formulae determines the unit of information entropy that is used. A common unit of information is the bit or shannon, based on the binary logarithm. Other units include the nat, which is based on the natural logarithm, and the decimal digit, which is based on the common logarithm.

In what follows, an expression of the form is considered by convention to be equal to zero whenever . This is justified because formula_1 for any logarithmic base.

===Entropy of an information source===
Based on the probability mass function of each source symbol to be communicated, the Shannon entropy , in units of bits (per symbol), is given by
:formula_2
where is the probability of occurrence of the -th possible value of the source symbol. This equation gives the entropy in the units of &quot;bits&quot; (per symbol) because it uses a logarithm of base 2, and this base-2 measure of entropy has sometimes been called the shannon in his honor. Entropy is also commonly computed using the natural logarithm (base , where is Euler&#x27;s number), which produces a measurement of entropy in nats per symbol and sometimes simplifies the analysis by avoiding the need to include extra constants in the formulas. Other bases are also possible, but less commonly used. For example, a logarithm of base will produce a measurement in bytes per symbol, and a logarithm of base 10 will produce a measurement in decimal digits (or hartleys) per symbol.

Intuitively, the entropy of a discrete random variable is a measure of the amount of &quot;uncertainty&quot; associated with the value of when only its distribution is known.

The entropy of a source that emits a sequence of symbols that are independent and identically distributed (iid) is bits (per message of symbols). If the source data symbols are identically distributed but not independent, the entropy of a message of length will be less than .

If one transmits 1000 bits (0s and 1s), and the value of each of these bits is known to the receiver (has a specific value with certainty) ahead of transmission, it is clear that no information is transmitted. If, however, each bit is independently equally likely to be 0 or 1, 1000 shannons of information (more often called bits) have been transmitted. Between these two extremes, information can be quantified as follows. If formula_3 is the set of all messages that could be, and is the probability of some formula_4, then the entropy, , of is defined:

:formula_5

(Here, is the self-information, which is the entropy contribution of an individual message, and formula_6 is the expected value.) A property of entropy is that it is maximized when all the messages in the message space are equiprobable ; i.e., most unpredictable, in which case .

The special case of information entropy for a random variable with two outcomes is the binary entropy function, usually taken to the logarithmic base 2, thus having the shannon (Sh) as unit:

:formula_7

===Joint entropy===
The of two discrete random variables and is merely the entropy of their pairing: . This implies that if and are independent, then their joint entropy is the sum of their individual entropies.

For example, if represents the position of a chess piece— the row and the column, then the joint entropy of the row of the piece and the column of the piece will be the entropy of the position of the piece.

:formula_8

Despite similar notation, joint entropy should not be confused with .

===Conditional entropy (equivocation)===
The or &quot;conditional uncertainty&quot; of given random variable (also called the &quot;equivocation&quot; of about ) is the average conditional entropy over :

:formula_9

Because entropy can be conditioned on a random variable or on that random variable being a certain value, care should be taken not to confuse these two definitions of conditional entropy, the former of which is in more common use. A basic property of this form of conditional entropy is that:

: formula_10

===Mutual information (transinformation)===
&quot;Mutual information&quot; measures the amount of information that can be obtained about one random variable by observing another. It is important in communication where it can be used to maximize the amount of information shared between sent and received signals. The mutual information of relative to is given by:

:formula_11
where (&quot;S&quot;pecific mutual Information) is the pointwise mutual information.

A basic property of the mutual information is that
: formula_12
That is, knowing &quot;Y&quot;, we can save an average of bits in encoding &quot;X&quot; compared to not knowing &quot;Y&quot;.

Mutual information is symmetric:
: formula_13

Mutual information can be expressed as the average Kullback–Leibler divergence (information gain) between the posterior probability distribution of &quot;X&quot; given the value of &quot;Y&quot; and the prior distribution on &quot;X&quot;:
: formula_14
In other words, this is a measure of how much, on the average, the probability distribution on &quot;X&quot; will change if we are given the value of &quot;Y&quot;. This is often recalculated as the divergence from the product of the marginal distributions to the actual joint distribution:
: formula_15

Mutual information is closely related to the log-likelihood ratio test in the context of contingency tables and the multinomial distribution and to Pearson&#x27;s χ2 test: mutual information can be considered a statistic for assessing independence between a pair of variables, and has a well-specified asymptotic distribution.

===Kullback–Leibler divergence (information gain)===
The &quot;Kullback–Leibler divergence&quot; (or &quot;information divergence&quot;, &quot;information gain&quot;, or &quot;relative entropy&quot;) is a way of comparing two distributions: a &quot;true&quot; probability distribution , and an arbitrary probability distribution . If we compress data in a manner that assumes is the distribution underlying some data, when, in reality, is the correct distribution, the Kullback–Leibler divergence is the number of average additional bits per datum necessary for compression. It is thus defined

:formula_16

Although it is sometimes used as a &#x27;distance metric&#x27;, KL divergence is not a true metric since it is not symmetric and does not satisfy the triangle inequality (making it a semi-quasimetric).

Another interpretation of the KL divergence is the &quot;unnecessary surprise&quot; introduced by a prior from the truth: suppose a number &quot;X&quot; is about to be drawn randomly from a discrete set with probability distribution . If Alice knows the true distribution , while Bob believes (has a prior) that the distribution is , then Bob will be more surprised than Alice, on average, upon seeing the value of &quot;X&quot;. The KL divergence is the (objective) expected value of Bob&#x27;s (subjective) surprisal minus Alice&#x27;s surprisal, measured in bits if the &quot;log&quot; is in base 2. In this way, the extent to which Bob&#x27;s prior is &quot;wrong&quot; can be quantified in terms of how &quot;unnecessarily surprised&quot; it is expected to make him.

===Directed Information===
&quot;Directed information&quot;, formula_17, is an information theory measure that quantifies the information flow from the random process formula_18 to the random process formula_19. The term &quot;directed information&quot; was coined by James Massey and is defined as
:formula_20,
where formula_21 is the conditional mutual information formula_22.

In contrast to &quot;mutual&quot; information, &quot;directed&quot; information is not symmetric. The formula_17 measures the information bits that are transmitted causally from formula_24 to formula_25. The Directed information has many applications in problems where causality plays an important role such as capacity of channel with feedback, capacity of discrete memoryless networks with feedback, gambling with causal side information, compression with causal side information,
real-time control communication settings, and in statistical physics.

===Other quantities===
Other important information theoretic quantities include the Rényi entropy and the Tsallis entropy (generalizations of the concept of entropy), differential entropy (a generalization of quantities of information to continuous distributions), and the conditional mutual information. Also, pragmatic information has been proposed as a measure of how much information has been used in making a decision.

==Coding theory==


Coding theory is one of the most important and direct applications of information theory. It can be subdivided into source coding theory and channel coding theory. Using a statistical description for data, information theory quantifies the number of bits needed to describe the data, which is the information entropy of the source.

* Data compression (source coding): There are two formulations for the compression problem:
** lossless data compression: the data must be reconstructed exactly;
** lossy data compression: allocates bits needed to reconstruct the data, within a specified fidelity level measured by a distortion function. This subset of information theory is called &quot;rate–distortion theory&quot;.
* Error-correcting codes (channel coding): While data compression removes as much redundancy as possible, an error-correcting code adds just the right kind of redundancy (i.e., error correction) needed to transmit the data efficiently and faithfully across a noisy channel.

This division of coding theory into compression and transmission is justified by the information transmission theorems, or source–channel separation theorems that justify the use of bits as the universal currency for information in many contexts. However, these theorems only hold in the situation where one transmitting user wishes to communicate to one receiving user. In scenarios with more than one transmitter (the multiple-access channel), more than one receiver (the broadcast channel) or intermediary &quot;helpers&quot; (the relay channel), or more general networks, compression followed by transmission may no longer be optimal.

===Source theory===
Any process that generates successive messages can be considered a of information. A memoryless source is one in which each message is an independent identically distributed random variable, whereas the properties of ergodicity and stationarity impose less restrictive constraints. All such sources are stochastic. These terms are well studied in their own right outside information theory.

====Rate====
Information &quot;rate&quot; is the average entropy per symbol. For memoryless sources, this is merely the entropy of each symbol, while, in the case of a stationary stochastic process, it is:

:formula_26

that is, the conditional entropy of a symbol given all the previous symbols generated. For the more general case of a process that is not necessarily stationary, the &quot;average rate&quot; is:

:formula_27

that is, the limit of the joint entropy per symbol. For stationary sources, these two expressions give the same result.

The information rate is defined as: 
:formula_28

It is common in information theory to speak of the &quot;rate&quot; or &quot;entropy&quot; of a language. This is appropriate, for example, when the source of information is English prose. The rate of a source of information is related to its redundancy and how well it can be compressed, the subject of .

===Channel capacity===
Communications over a channel is the primary motivation of information theory. However, channels often fail to produce exact reconstruction of a signal; noise, periods of silence, and other forms of signal corruption often degrade quality.

Consider the communications process over a discrete channel. A simple model of the process is shown below:

:formula_29

Here &quot;X&quot; represents the space of messages transmitted, and &quot;Y&quot; the space of messages received during a unit time over our channel. Let be the conditional probability distribution function of &quot;Y&quot; given &quot;X&quot;. We will consider to be an inherent fixed property of our communications channel (representing the nature of the &quot;noise&quot; of our channel). Then the joint distribution of &quot;X&quot; and &quot;Y&quot; is completely determined by our channel and by our choice of , the marginal distribution of messages we choose to send over the channel. Under these constraints, we would like to maximize the rate of information, or the &quot;signal&quot;, we can communicate over the channel. The appropriate measure for this is the mutual information, and this maximum mutual information is called the and is given by:
:formula_30
This capacity has the following property related to communicating at information rate &quot;R&quot; (where &quot;R&quot; is usually bits per symbol). For any information rate &quot;R&quot; &lt; &quot;C&quot; and coding error &quot;ε&quot; &gt; 0, for large enough &quot;N&quot;, there exists a code of length &quot;N&quot; and rate ≥ R and a decoding algorithm, such that the maximal probability of block error is ≤ &quot;ε&quot;; that is, it is always possible to transmit with arbitrarily small block error. In addition, for any rate &quot;R&quot; &gt; &quot;C&quot;, it is impossible to transmit with arbitrarily small block error.

&quot;Channel coding&quot; is concerned with finding such nearly optimal codes that can be used to transmit data over a noisy channel with a small coding error at a rate near the channel capacity.

====Capacity of particular channel models====
* A continuous-time analog communications channel subject to Gaussian noise—see Shannon–Hartley theorem.
* A binary symmetric channel (BSC) with crossover probability &quot;p&quot; is a binary input, binary output channel that flips the input bit with probability &quot;p&quot;. The BSC has a capacity of bits per channel use, where is the binary entropy function to the base-2 logarithm:

* A binary erasure channel (BEC) with erasure probability &quot;p&quot; is a binary input, ternary output channel. The possible channel outputs are 0, 1, and a third symbol &#x27;e&#x27; called an erasure. The erasure represents complete loss of information about an input bit. The capacity of the BEC is bits per channel use.

====Channels with memory and directed information====
In practice many channels have memory. Namely, at time formula_31 the channel is given by the conditional probabilityformula_32.
It is often more comfortable to use the notation formula_33 and the channel become formula_34.
In such a case the capacity is given by the mutual information rate when there is no feedback available and the Directed information rate in the case that either there is feedback or not (if there is no feedback the directed information equals the mutual information).

===Fungible information===
Fungible information is the information for which the means of encoding is not important. Classical information theorists and computer scientists are mainly concerned with information of this sort. It is sometimes referred as speakable information.

==Applications to other fields==

===Intelligence uses and secrecy applications===

Information theoretic concepts apply to cryptography and cryptanalysis. Turing&#x27;s information unit, the ban, was used in the Ultra project, breaking the German Enigma machine code and hastening the end of World War II in Europe. Shannon himself defined an important concept now called the unicity distance. Based on the redundancy of the plaintext, it attempts to give a minimum amount of ciphertext necessary to ensure unique decipherability.

Information theory leads us to believe it is much more difficult to keep secrets than it might first appear. A brute force attack can break systems based on asymmetric key algorithms or on most commonly used methods of symmetric key algorithms (sometimes called secret key algorithms), such as block ciphers. The security of all such methods comes from the assumption that no known attack can break them in a practical amount of time.

Information theoretic security refers to methods such as the one-time pad that are not vulnerable to such brute force attacks. In such cases, the positive conditional mutual information between the plaintext and ciphertext (conditioned on the key) can ensure proper transmission, while the unconditional mutual information between the plaintext and ciphertext remains zero, resulting in absolutely secure communications. In other words, an eavesdropper would not be able to improve his or her guess of the plaintext by gaining knowledge of the ciphertext but not of the key. However, as in any other cryptographic system, care must be used to correctly apply even information-theoretically secure methods; the Venona project was able to crack the one-time pads of the Soviet Union due to their improper reuse of key material.

===Pseudorandom number generation===

Pseudorandom number generators are widely available in computer language libraries and application programs. They are, almost universally, unsuited to cryptographic use as they do not evade the deterministic nature of modern computer equipment and software. A class of improved random number generators is termed cryptographically secure pseudorandom number generators, but even they require random seeds external to the software to work as intended. These can be obtained via extractors, if done carefully. The measure of sufficient randomness in extractors is min-entropy, a value related to Shannon entropy through Rényi entropy; Rényi entropy is also used in evaluating randomness in cryptographic systems. Although related, the distinctions among these measures mean that a random variable with high Shannon entropy is not necessarily satisfactory for use in an extractor and so for cryptography uses.

===Seismic exploration===
One early commercial application of information theory was in the field of seismic oil exploration. Work in this field made it possible to strip off and separate the unwanted noise from the desired seismic signal. Information theory and digital signal processing offer a major improvement of resolution and image clarity over previous analog methods.

===Semiotics===
Semioticians and Winfried Nöth both considered Charles Sanders Peirce as having created a theory of information in his works on semiotics. Nauta defined semiotic information theory as the study of &quot;the internal processes of coding, filtering, and information processing.&quot;

Concepts from information theory such as redundancy and code control have been used by semioticians such as Umberto Eco and to explain ideology as a form of message transmission whereby a dominant social class emits its message by using signs that exhibit a high degree of redundancy such that only one message is decoded among a selection of competing ones.

===Integrated process organization of neural information===
Quantitative information theoretic methods have been applied in cognitive science to analyze the integrated process organization of neural information in the context of the binding problem in cognitive neuroscience. In this context, either an information-theoretical measure, such as (Gerald Edelman and Giulio Tononi&#x27;s functional clustering model and dynamic core hypothesis (DCH)) or (Tononi&#x27;s integrated information theory (IIT) of consciousness), is defined (on the basis of a reentrant process organization, i.e. the synchronization of neurophysiological activity between groups of neuronal populations), or the measure of the minimization of free energy on the basis of statistical methods (Karl J. Friston&#x27;s free energy principle (FEP), an information-theoretical measure which states that every adaptive change in a self-organized system leads to a minimization of free energy, and the Bayesian brain hypothesis).

===Miscellaneous applications===
Information theory also has applications in the search for extraterrestrial intelligence, black holes, bioinformatics, and gambling.

==See also==
* Algorithmic probability
* Bayesian inference
* Communication theory
* Constructor theory – a generalization of information theory that includes quantum information
* Formal science
* Inductive probability
* Info-metrics
* Minimum message length
* Minimum description length
* Philosophy of information
===Applications===

* Active networking
* Cryptanalysis
* Cryptography
* Cybernetics
* Entropy in thermodynamics and information theory
* Gambling
* Intelligence (information gathering)
* Seismic exploration
===History===
* Hartley, R.V.L.
* History of information theory
* Shannon, C.E.
* Timeline of information theory
* Yockey, H.P.
* Andrey Kolmogorov

===Theory===

* Coding theory
* Detection theory
* Estimation theory
* Fisher information
* Information algebra
* Information asymmetry
* Information field theory
* Information geometry
* Information theory and measure theory
* Kolmogorov complexity
* List of unsolved problems in information theory
* Logic of information
* Network coding
* Philosophy of information
* Quantum information science
* Source coding
===Concepts===

* Ban (unit)
* Channel capacity
* Communication channel
* Communication source
* Conditional entropy
* Covert channel
* Data compression
* Decoder
* Differential entropy
* Fungible information
* Information fluctuation complexity
* Information entropy
* Joint entropy
* Kullback–Leibler divergence
* Mutual information
* Pointwise mutual information (PMI)
* Receiver (information theory)
* Redundancy
* Rényi entropy
* Self-information
* Unicity distance
* Variety
* Hamming distance
* Perplexity

==References==
== Further reading ==

===The classic work===

* Shannon, C.E. (1948), &quot;A Mathematical Theory of Communication&quot;, &quot;Bell System Technical Journal&quot;, 27, pp. 379–423 &amp; 623–656, July &amp; October, 1948. PDF. Notes and other formats.
* R.V.L. Hartley, &quot;Transmission of Information&quot;, &quot;Bell System Technical Journal&quot;, July 1928
* Andrey Kolmogorov (1968), &quot;Three approaches to the quantitative definition of information&quot; in &quot;International Journal of Computer Mathematics&quot;, 2, pp. 157–168.
===Other journal articles===

* J. L. Kelly Jr., Princeton, &quot;A New Interpretation of Information Rate&quot; &quot;Bell System Technical Journal&quot;, Vol. 35, July 1956, pp. 917–26.
* R. Landauer, IEEE.org, &quot;Information is Physical&quot; &quot;Proc. Workshop on Physics and Computation PhysComp&#x27;92&quot; (IEEE Comp. Sci.Press, Los Alamitos, 1993) pp. 1–4.
* 
===Textbooks on information theory===

* Alajaji, F. and Chen, P.N. An Introduction to Single-User Information Theory. Singapore: Springer, 2018. 
* Arndt, C. &quot;Information Measures, Information and its Description in Science and Engineering&quot; (Springer Series: Signals and Communication Technology), 2004, 
* Gallager, R. &quot;Information Theory and Reliable Communication.&quot; New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1968. 
* Goldman, S. &quot;Information Theory&quot;. New York: Prentice Hall, 1953. New York: Dover 1968 , 2005 
* Csiszar, I, Korner, J. &quot;Information Theory: Coding Theorems for Discrete Memoryless Systems&quot; Akademiai Kiado: 2nd edition, 1997. 
* MacKay, David J. C. &quot;Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms&quot; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2003. 
* Mansuripur, M. &quot;Introduction to Information Theory&quot;. New York: Prentice Hall, 1987. 
* McEliece, R. &quot;The Theory of Information and Coding&quot;. Cambridge, 2002. 
* Pierce, JR. &quot;An introduction to information theory: symbols, signals and noise&quot;. Dover (2nd Edition). 1961 (reprinted by Dover 1980).
* 
* Stone, JV. Chapter 1 of book &quot;Information Theory: A Tutorial Introduction&quot;, University of Sheffield, England, 2014. .
* Yeung, RW. &quot;A First Course in Information Theory&quot; Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, 2002. .
* Yeung, RW. &quot;Information Theory and Network Coding&quot; Springer 2008, 2002. 
===Other books===

* Leon Brillouin, &quot;Science and Information Theory&quot;, Mineola, N.Y.: Dover, [1956, 1962] 2004. 
* A. I. Khinchin, &quot;Mathematical Foundations of Information Theory&quot;, New York: Dover, 1957. 
* H. S. Leff and A. F. Rex, Editors, &quot;Maxwell&#x27;s Demon: Entropy, Information, Computing&quot;, Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey (1990). 
* Robert K. Logan. &quot;What is Information? - Propagating Organization in the Biosphere, the Symbolosphere, the Technosphere and the Econosphere&quot;, Toronto: DEMO Publishing.
* Tom Siegfried, &quot;The Bit and the Pendulum&quot;, Wiley, 2000. 
* Charles Seife, &quot;Decoding the Universe&quot;, Viking, 2006. 
* Jeremy Campbell, &quot;Grammatical Man&quot;, Touchstone/Simon &amp; Schuster, 1982, 
* Henri Theil, &quot;Economics and Information Theory&quot;, Rand McNally &amp; Company - Chicago, 1967.
* Escolano, Suau, Bonev, &quot;Information Theory in Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition&quot;, Springer, 2009. 
* Vlatko Vedral, &quot;Decoding Reality: The Universe as Quantum Information&quot;, Oxford University Press 2010. 
== External links ==
* 
* Lambert F. L. (1999), &quot;Shuffled Cards, Messy Desks, and Disorderly Dorm Rooms - Examples of Entropy Increase? Nonsense!&quot;, &quot;Journal of Chemical Education&quot;
* IEEE Information Theory Society and ITSOC Monographs, Surveys, and Reviews </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131222" start="0" end="18" title="Information theory" label="Information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12769938" start="52" end="66" title="quantification (science)" label="quantification"/>
<link wikidata="Q57515336" start="68" end="75" title="Data storage" label="storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="81" end="94" title="telecommunications" label="communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028" start="98" end="109" title="information" label="information"/>
<link wikidata="Q92760" start="155" end="169" title="Claude Shannon" label="Claude Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q316022" start="255" end="268" title="Harry Nyquist" label="Harry Nyquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q529886" start="273" end="286" title="Ralph Hartley" label="Ralph Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q126095" start="317" end="339" title="electronic engineering" label="electronic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="341" end="352" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="354" end="364" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="366" end="382" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="384" end="396" title="Neuroscience" label="neurobiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="398" end="405" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="411" end="433" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q204570" start="475" end="482" title="information entropy" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q176623" start="556" end="571" title="random variable" label="random variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q176737" start="592" end="606" title="random process" label="random process"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429954" start="650" end="654" title="Fair coin" label="fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q825367" start="655" end="664" title="coin flip" label="coin flip"/>
<link wikidata="Q45089" start="811" end="814" title="dice" label="die"/>
<link wikidata="Q252973" start="912" end="930" title="mutual information" label="mutual information"/>
<link wikidata="Q870845" start="932" end="948" title="channel capacity" label="channel capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5395710" start="950" end="964" title="error exponent" label="error exponent"/>
<link wikidata="Q255166" start="971" end="987" title="relative entropy" label="relative entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="1040" end="1053" title="source coding" label="source coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456811" start="1055" end="1084" title="algorithmic complexity theory" label="algorithmic complexity theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757543" start="1086" end="1116" title="algorithmic information theory" label="algorithmic information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510462" start="1121" end="1151" title="information-theoretic security" label="information-theoretic security"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="1233" end="1249" title="data compression" label="data compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q136218" start="1260" end="1269" title="ZIP (file format)" label="ZIP files"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062839" start="1291" end="1321" title="error detection and correction" label="error detection and correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q104534" start="1332" end="1335" title="digital subscriber line" label="DSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q155311" start="1388" end="1395" title="Voyager program" label="Voyager"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="1441" end="1453" title="compact disc" label="compact disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="1515" end="1523" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="1528" end="1551" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q938438" start="1618" end="1639" title="statistical inference" label="statistical inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q8789" start="1641" end="1653" title="cryptography" label="cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="1655" end="1667" title="neurobiology" label="neurobiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="1669" end="1679" title="perception" label="perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q208163" start="1681" end="1698" title="signal processing" label="signal processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="1700" end="1711" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q128570" start="1760" end="1774" title="bioinformatics" label="bioinformatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q619452" start="1777" end="1792" title="thermal physics" label="thermal physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q901663" start="1794" end="1812" title="molecular dynamics" label="molecular dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="1814" end="1824" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q17995793" start="1827" end="1844" title="quantum computing" label="quantum computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q816826" start="1846" end="1867" title="information retrieval" label="information retrieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q4488757" start="1869" end="1891" title="Intelligence (Information Gathering)" label="intelligence gathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986238" start="1893" end="1913" title="plagiarism detection" label="plagiarism detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q378859" start="1915" end="1934" title="pattern recognition" label="pattern recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560506" start="1936" end="1953" title="anomaly detection" label="anomaly detection"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="1971" end="1976" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q735" start="1978" end="1990" title="Art" label="art creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q115180053" start="1992" end="2006" title="imaging system" label="imaging system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169" start="2024" end="2035" title="outer space" label="outer space"/>
<link wikidata="Q107" start="2059" end="2064" title="space" label="space"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="2070" end="2082" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028" start="2186" end="2197" title="information" label="information"/>
<link wikidata="Q92760" start="2389" end="2403" title="Claude Shannon" label="Claude Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q724029" start="2430" end="2468" title="A Mathematical Theory of Communication" label="A Mathematical Theory of Communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345282" start="2746" end="2774" title="noisy-channel coding theorem" label="noisy-channel coding theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062839" start="3306" end="3322" title="error-correction" label="error-correction"/>
<link wikidata="Q141090" start="3500" end="3523" title="cryptographic algorithm" label="cryptographic algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994879" start="3531" end="3535" title="code (cryptography)" label="code"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681865" start="3541" end="3547" title="cipher" label="cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q897511" start="3659" end="3672" title="cryptanalysis" label="cryptanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q324923" start="3686" end="3694" title="Ban (unit)" label="unit ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q127815" start="3979" end="4008" title="Bell System Technical Journal" label="Bell System Technical Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q113105" start="4051" end="4063" title="James Gleick" label="James Gleick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="4210" end="4220" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q299595" start="4388" end="4401" title="Vannevar Bush" label="Vannevar Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="4483" end="4492" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q316022" start="4547" end="4560" title="Harry Nyquist" label="Harry Nyquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5962" start="4827" end="4845" title="Boltzmann constant" label="Boltzmann constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q529886" start="5037" end="5050" title="Ralph Hartley" label="Ralph Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="5233" end="5252" title="sequence of symbols" label="sequence of symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q82990" start="5460" end="5473" title="decimal digit" label="decimal digit"/>
<link wikidata="Q324923" start="5517" end="5524" title="Hartley (unit)" label="hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251" start="5584" end="5595" title="Alan Turing" label="Alan Turing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665859" start="5706" end="5712" title="Cryptanalysis of the Enigma" label="Enigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="5844" end="5858" title="thermodynamics" label="thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q84296" start="5862" end="5878" title="Ludwig Boltzmann" label="Ludwig Boltzmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q153243" start="5883" end="5899" title="J. Willard Gibbs" label="J. Willard Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q69412" start="6019" end="6032" title="Rolf Landauer" label="Rolf Landauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380803" start="6069" end="6117" title="Entropy in thermodynamics and information theory" label="Entropy in thermodynamics and information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q204570" start="6644" end="6663" title="information entropy" label="information entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q122192" start="6668" end="6678" title="redundancy (information theory)" label="redundancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411312" start="6722" end="6743" title="source coding theorem" label="source coding theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q252973" start="6751" end="6769" title="mutual information" label="mutual information"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756194" start="6946" end="6965" title="Shannon–Hartley law" label="Shannon–Hartley law"/>
<link wikidata="Q353292" start="6996" end="7012" title="Gaussian channel" label="Gaussian channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="7031" end="7034" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5862903" start="7159" end="7177" title="probability theory" label="probability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070563" start="7200" end="7222" title="Quantities of information" label="quantified information"/>
<link wikidata="Q204570" start="7432" end="7439" title="Entropy (information theory)" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q733553" start="8147" end="8154" title="Communication channel" label="channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q47574" start="8334" end="8338" title="units of measurement" label="unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q15551713" start="8419" end="8426" title="shannon (unit)" label="shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q581168" start="8441" end="8457" title="binary logarithm" label="binary logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q376660" start="8483" end="8486" title="nat (unit)" label="nat"/>
<link wikidata="Q204037" start="8510" end="8527" title="natural logarithm" label="natural logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q324923" start="8537" end="8550" title="deciban" label="decimal digit"/>
<link wikidata="Q966582" start="8574" end="8590" title="common logarithm" label="common logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q869887" start="8810" end="8835" title="probability mass function" label="probability mass function"/>
<link wikidata="Q204570" start="8890" end="8897" title="Entropy (information theory)" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15551713" start="9223" end="9230" title="Shannon (unit)" label="shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="9626" end="9630" title="byte" label="byte"/>
<link wikidata="Q324923" start="9720" end="9728" title="Hartley (unit)" label="hartleys"/>
<link wikidata="Q378542" start="9985" end="10024" title="independent and identically distributed" label="independent and identically distributed"/>
<link wikidata="Q735075" start="10781" end="10797" title="self-information" label="self-information"/>
<link wikidata="Q200125" start="10880" end="10894" title="expected value" label="expected value"/>
<link wikidata="Q15551713" start="11217" end="11224" title="Shannon (unit)" label="shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q625303" start="11384" end="11395" title="statistical independence" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q252973" start="12331" end="12349" title="Mutual information" label="Mutual information"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798612" start="12713" end="12741" title="pointwise mutual information" label="pointwise mutual information"/>
<link wikidata="Q981351" start="12959" end="12968" title="symmetric function" label="symmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q278079" start="13094" end="13128" title="posterior probability" label="posterior probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q278090" start="13187" end="13205" title="prior probability" label="prior distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q585740" start="13587" end="13612" title="likelihood-ratio test" label="log-likelihood ratio test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147928" start="13658" end="13682" title="multinomial distribution" label="multinomial distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336256" start="13690" end="13712" title="Pearson&amp;#x27;s chi-squared test" label="Pearson&amp;#x27;s χ2 test"/>
<link wikidata="Q255166" start="13933" end="13960" title="Kullback–Leibler divergence" label="Kullback–Leibler divergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="14130" end="14154" title="probability distribution" label="probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="14570" end="14576" title="Metric (mathematics)" label="metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q208216" start="14628" end="14647" title="triangle inequality" label="triangle inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q278090" start="14981" end="14986" title="prior probability" label="prior"/>
<link wikidata="Q735075" start="15037" end="15046" title="Information content" label="surprised"/>
<link wikidata="Q735075" start="15190" end="15199" title="Information content" label="surprisal"/>
<link wikidata="Q28455697" start="15487" end="15507" title="Directed information" label="Directed information"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028" start="15580" end="15591" title="information" label="information"/>
<link wikidata="Q251262" start="15722" end="15734" title="James Massey" label="James Massey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159269" start="15790" end="15820" title="conditional mutual information" label="conditional mutual information"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="16103" end="16112" title="causality" label="causality"/>
<link wikidata="Q870845" start="16145" end="16164" title="channel capacity" label="capacity of channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q176750" start="16201" end="16211" title="memoryless" label="memoryless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506462" start="16236" end="16244" title="sports gambling" label="gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="16275" end="16286" title="Data compression" label="compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988" start="16317" end="16334" title="real-time control" label="real-time control"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433083" start="16472" end="16485" title="Rényi entropy" label="Rényi entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849341" start="16494" end="16509" title="Tsallis entropy" label="Tsallis entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055345" start="16555" end="16575" title="differential entropy" label="differential entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159269" start="16661" end="16691" title="conditional mutual information" label="conditional mutual information"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237639" start="16699" end="16720" title="pragmatic information" label="pragmatic information"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="17168" end="17184" title="Data compression" label="Data compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q55542" start="17261" end="17286" title="lossless data compression" label="lossless data compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q55564" start="17331" end="17353" title="lossy data compression" label="lossy data compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q843483" start="17521" end="17543" title="rate–distortion theory" label="rate–distortion theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611017" start="17553" end="17574" title="Error-correcting code" label="Error-correcting code"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078788" start="18300" end="18317" title="broadcast channel" label="broadcast channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310895" start="18360" end="18373" title="relay channel" label="relay channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="18392" end="18400" title="computer network" label="networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q378542" start="18624" end="18675" title="Independent identically distributed random variables" label="independent identically distributed random variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498822" start="18703" end="18713" title="ergodic theory" label="ergodicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192209" start="18718" end="18730" title="stationary process" label="stationarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q176737" start="18789" end="18799" title="stochastic process" label="stochastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345213" start="18909" end="18913" title="Entropy rate" label="rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q194158" start="19432" end="19448" title="information rate" label="information rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q327069" start="20332" end="20355" title="conditional probability" label="conditional probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q11306265" start="20534" end="20539" title="Signal noise" label="noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q174984" start="20852" end="20858" title="Signal (electrical engineering)" label="signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q602136" start="21684" end="21698" title="Channel code" label="Channel coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725903" start="21983" end="21997" title="Gaussian noise" label="Gaussian noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756194" start="22002" end="22025" title="Shannon–Hartley theorem" label="Shannon–Hartley theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q863510" start="22031" end="22055" title="binary symmetric channel" label="binary symmetric channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q864142" start="22316" end="22338" title="binary erasure channel" label="binary erasure channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q252973" start="22962" end="22980" title="mutual information" label="mutual information"/>
<link wikidata="Q28455697" start="23030" end="23050" title="Directed information" label="Directed information"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028" start="23243" end="23254" title="information" label="information"/>
<link wikidata="Q188889" start="23278" end="23286" title="encoding" label="encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q324923" start="23657" end="23660" title="Ban (unit)" label="ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q825712" start="23678" end="23683" title="Ultra (cryptography)" label="Ultra"/>
<link wikidata="Q150758" start="23713" end="23727" title="Enigma machine" label="Enigma machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q622365" start="23751" end="23780" title="Victory in Europe Day" label="end of World War II in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640661" start="23842" end="23858" title="unicity distance" label="unicity distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162538" start="23891" end="23900" title="plaintext" label="plaintext"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589480" start="23942" end="23952" title="ciphertext" label="ciphertext"/>
<link wikidata="Q869370" start="24109" end="24127" title="brute force attack" label="brute force attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q201339" start="24155" end="24180" title="public-key cryptography" label="asymmetric key algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q327675" start="24217" end="24241" title="symmetric-key algorithm" label="symmetric key algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q543151" start="24292" end="24304" title="block cipher" label="block cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510462" start="24434" end="24464" title="Information theoretic security" label="Information theoretic security"/>
<link wikidata="Q150474" start="24495" end="24507" title="one-time pad" label="one-time pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q471771" start="24677" end="24680" title="key (cryptography)" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q696328" start="25144" end="25158" title="Venona project" label="Venona project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623338" start="25299" end="25328" title="Pseudorandom number generator" label="Pseudorandom number generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790389" start="25612" end="25666" title="cryptographically secure pseudorandom number generator" label="cryptographically secure pseudorandom number generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886131" start="25691" end="25702" title="random seed" label="random seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422192" start="25776" end="25786" title="Extractor (mathematics)" label="extractors"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103874" start="25861" end="25872" title="min-entropy" label="min-entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433083" start="25917" end="25930" title="Rényi entropy" label="Rényi entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q173142" start="26470" end="26495" title="digital signal processing" label="digital signal processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q60195" start="26601" end="26613" title="Semiotics" label="Semioticians"/>
<link wikidata="Q124624" start="26618" end="26631" title="Winfried Nöth" label="Winfried Nöth"/>
<link wikidata="Q187520" start="26648" end="26670" title="Charles Sanders Peirce" label="Charles Sanders Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q12807" start="26992" end="27003" title="Umberto Eco" label="Umberto Eco"/>
<link wikidata="Q147638" start="27368" end="27385" title="cognitive science" label="cognitive science"/>
<link wikidata="Q863678" start="27477" end="27492" title="binding problem" label="binding problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138951" start="27496" end="27518" title="cognitive neuroscience" label="cognitive neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q271766" start="27589" end="27603" title="Gerald Edelman" label="Gerald Edelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080557" start="27608" end="27621" title="Giulio Tononi" label="Giulio Tononi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042884" start="27710" end="27739" title="integrated information theory" label="integrated information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6371926" start="28011" end="28026" title="Karl J. Friston" label="Karl J. Friston"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014702" start="28034" end="28055" title="free energy principle" label="free energy principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874464" start="28213" end="28227" title="Bayesian brain" label="Bayesian brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q484587" start="28323" end="28363" title="search for extraterrestrial intelligence" label="search for extraterrestrial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471710" start="28365" end="28376" title="black hole information paradox" label="black holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q128570" start="28378" end="28392" title="bioinformatics" label="bioinformatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519695" start="28398" end="28406" title="Gambling and information theory" label="gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724365" start="28424" end="28447" title="Algorithmic probability" label="Algorithmic probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q812535" start="28450" end="28468" title="Bayesian inference" label="Bayesian inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q83966" start="28471" end="28491" title="Communication theory" label="Communication theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005753" start="28494" end="28512" title="Constructor theory" label="Constructor theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q816264" start="28590" end="28604" title="Formal science" label="Formal science"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050471" start="28607" end="28628" title="Inductive probability" label="Inductive probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q48998519" start="28631" end="28643" title="Info-metrics" label="Info-metrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4428882" start="28646" end="28668" title="Minimum message length" label="Minimum message length"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417790" start="28671" end="28697" title="Minimum description length" label="Minimum description length"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629585" start="28700" end="28725" title="Philosophy of information" label="Philosophy of information"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677571" start="28748" end="28765" title="Active networking" label="Active networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q897511" start="28768" end="28781" title="Cryptanalysis" label="Cryptanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8789" start="28784" end="28796" title="Cryptography" label="Cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q123637" start="28799" end="28810" title="Cybernetics" label="Cybernetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380803" start="28813" end="28861" title="Entropy in thermodynamics and information theory" label="Entropy in thermodynamics and information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11416" start="28864" end="28872" title="Gambling" label="Gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4488757" start="28875" end="28911" title="Intelligence (information gathering)" label="Intelligence (information gathering)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500431" start="28914" end="28933" title="reflection seismology" label="Seismic exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q529886" start="28950" end="28965" title="Ralph Hartley" label="Hartley, R.V.L."/>
<link wikidata="Q5868014" start="28968" end="28997" title="History of information theory" label="History of information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q92760" start="29000" end="29013" title="Claude Elwood Shannon" label="Shannon, C.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q3698567" start="29016" end="29046" title="Timeline of information theory" label="Timeline of information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q13636788" start="29049" end="29061" title="Hubert Yockey" label="Yockey, H.P."/>
<link wikidata="Q153224" start="29064" end="29081" title="Andrey Kolmogorov" label="Andrey Kolmogorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q602136" start="29099" end="29112" title="Coding theory" label="Coding theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q120811" start="29115" end="29131" title="Detection theory" label="Detection theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376021" start="29134" end="29151" title="Estimation theory" label="Estimation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420659" start="29154" end="29172" title="Fisher information" label="Fisher information"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030963" start="29175" end="29194" title="Information algebra" label="Information algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q431965" start="29197" end="29218" title="Information asymmetry" label="Information asymmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597589" start="29221" end="29245" title="Information field theory" label="Information field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798604" start="29248" end="29268" title="Information geometry" label="Information geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6031263" start="29271" end="29308" title="Information theory and measure theory" label="Information theory and measure theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456811" start="29311" end="29332" title="Kolmogorov complexity" label="Kolmogorov complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q18208307" start="29335" end="29382" title="List of unsolved problems in information theory" label="List of unsolved problems in information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667468" start="29385" end="29405" title="Logic of information" label="Logic of information"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089578" start="29408" end="29422" title="Network coding" label="Network coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629585" start="29425" end="29450" title="Philosophy of information" label="Philosophy of information"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122216" start="29453" end="29480" title="Quantum information science" label="Quantum information science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="29483" end="29496" title="Source coding" label="Source coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q324923" start="29515" end="29525" title="Ban (unit)" label="Ban (unit)"/>
<link wikidata="Q870845" start="29528" end="29544" title="Channel capacity" label="Channel capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q733553" start="29547" end="29568" title="Communication channel" label="Communication channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q974688" start="29571" end="29591" title="Communication source" label="Communication source"/>
<link wikidata="Q813908" start="29594" end="29613" title="Conditional entropy" label="Conditional entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476964" start="29616" end="29630" title="Covert channel" label="Covert channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493" start="29633" end="29649" title="Data compression" label="Data compression"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055345" start="29662" end="29682" title="Differential entropy" label="Differential entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131222" start="29685" end="29705" title="Fungible information" label="Fungible information"/>
<link wikidata="Q92770918" start="29708" end="29742" title="Information fluctuation complexity" label="Information fluctuation complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q204570" start="29745" end="29764" title="Information entropy" label="Information entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364826" start="29767" end="29780" title="Joint entropy" label="Joint entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q255166" start="29783" end="29810" title="Kullback–Leibler divergence" label="Kullback–Leibler divergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q252973" start="29813" end="29831" title="Mutual information" label="Mutual information"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798612" start="29834" end="29862" title="Pointwise mutual information" label="Pointwise mutual information"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339255" start="29871" end="29900" title="Receiver (information theory)" label="Receiver (information theory)"/>
<link wikidata="Q122192" start="29903" end="29913" title="Redundancy (information theory)" label="Redundancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433083" start="29916" end="29929" title="Rényi entropy" label="Rényi entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q735075" start="29932" end="29948" title="Self-information" label="Self-information"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640661" start="29951" end="29967" title="Unicity distance" label="Unicity distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729295" start="29970" end="29977" title="Variety (cybernetics)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q272172" start="29980" end="29996" title="Hamming distance" label="Hamming distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q372193" start="29999" end="30009" title="Perplexity" label="Perplexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q92760" start="30075" end="30088" title="Claude Elwood Shannon" label="Shannon, C.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q724029" start="30103" end="30141" title="A Mathematical Theory of Communication" label="A Mathematical Theory of Communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q153224" start="30393" end="30410" title="Andrey Kolmogorov" label="Andrey Kolmogorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q13359486" start="30503" end="30548" title="International Journal of Computer Mathematics" label="International Journal of Computer Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q461687" start="31265" end="31276" title="Gallager, R" label="Gallager, R"/>
<link wikidata="Q873734" start="31483" end="31493" title="Csiszar, I" label="Csiszar, I"/>
<link wikidata="Q446862" start="31625" end="31644" title="David J. C. MacKay" label="MacKay, David J. C."/>
<link wikidata="Q840535" start="31857" end="31868" title="Robert McEliece" label="McEliece, R"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340677" start="31940" end="31950" title="John R. Pierce" label="Pierce, JR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346230" start="32797" end="32812" title="Robert K. Logan" label="Robert K. Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q152739" start="33046" end="33059" title="Charles Seife" label="Charles Seife"/>
<link wikidata="Q21079065" start="33067" end="33088" title="Decoding the Universe" label="Decoding the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593688" start="33136" end="33151" title="Grammatical Man" label="Grammatical Man"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14774" wikidata="Q1662554" url="?curid=14774" title="Information explosion">
<text>The information explosion is the rapid increase in the amount of published information or data and the effects of this abundance. As the amount of available data grows, the problem of managing the information becomes more difficult, which can lead to information overload. The Online Oxford English Dictionary indicates use of the phrase in a March 1964 &quot;New Statesman&quot; article. &quot;The New York Times&quot; first used the phrase in its editorial content in an article by Walter Sullivan on June 7, 1964, in which he described the phrase as &quot;much discussed&quot;. (p11.) The earliest known use of the phrase was in a speech about television by NBC president Pat Weaver at the Institute of Practitioners of Advertising in London on September 27, 1955. The speech was rebroadcast on radio station WSUI in Iowa City and excerpted in the &quot;Daily Iowan&quot; newspaper two months later.

Many sectors are seeing this rapid increase in the amount of information available such as healthcare, supermarkets, and governments. Another sector that is being affected by this phenomenon is journalism. Such a profession, which in the past was responsible for the dissemination of information, may be suppressed by the overabundance of information today.

Techniques to gather knowledge from an overabundance of electronic information (e.g., data fusion may help in data mining) have existed since the 1970s. Another common technique to deal with such amount of information is qualitative research. Such approaches aim to organize the information, synthesizing, categorizing and systematizing in order to be more usable and easier to search.

==Growth patterns==
* The world&#x27;s technological capacity to store information grew from, optimally compressed, 2.6 exabytes in 1986 to 15.7 in 1993, over 54.5 in 2000, and to 295 exabytes in 2007. 
* The world&#x27;s technological capacity to receive information through one-way broadcast networks was 432 exabytes of (optimally compressed) information in 1986, 715 (optimally compressed) exabytes in 1993, 1,200 (optimally compressed) exabytes in 2000, and 1,900 in 2007.
* The world&#x27;s effective capacity to exchange information through two-way telecommunications networks was 0.281 exabytes of (optimally compressed) information in 1986, 0.471 in 1993, 2.2 in 2000, and 65 (optimally compressed) exabytes in 2007.

A new metric that is being used in an attempt to characterize the growth in person-specific information, is the disk storage per person (DSP), which is measured in megabytes/person (where megabytes is 106 bytes and is abbreviated MB). Global DSP (GDSP) is the total rigid disk drive space (in MB) of new units sold in a year divided by the world population in that year. The GDSP metric is a crude measure of how much disk storage could possibly be used to collect person-specific data on the world population. 
In 1983, one million fixed drives with an estimated total of 90 terabytes were sold worldwide; 30MB drives had the largest market segment. In 1996, 105 million drives, totaling 160,623 terabytes were sold with 1 and 2 gigabyte drives leading the industry. By the year 2000, with 20GB drive leading the industry, rigid drives sold for the year are projected to total 2,829,288 terabytes Rigid disk drive sales to top $34 billion in 1997.

According to Latanya Sweeney, there are three trends in data gathering today:

Type 1. Expansion of the number of fields being collected, known as the “collect more” trend.

Type 2. Replace an existing aggregate data collection with a person-specific one, known as the “collect specifically” trend.

Type 3. Gather information by starting a new person-specific data collection, known as the “collect it if you can” trend.

==Related terms==
Since &quot;information&quot; in electronic media is often used synonymously with &quot;data&quot;, the term &quot;information explosion&quot; is closely related to the concept of &quot;data flood&quot; (also dubbed &quot;data deluge&quot;). Sometimes the term &quot;information flood&quot; is used as well. All of those basically boil down to the ever-increasing amount of electronic data exchanged per time unit. A term that covers the potential negative effects of information explosion is &quot;information inflation&quot;. The awareness about non-manageable amounts of data grew along with the advent of ever more powerful data processing since the mid-1960s.

==Challenges==
Even though the abundance of information can be beneficial in several levels, some problems may be of concern such as privacy, legal and ethical guidelines, filtering and data accuracy. Filtering refers to finding useful information in the middle of so much data, which relates to the job of data scientists. A typical example of a necessity of data filtering (data mining) is in healthcare since in the next years is due to have EHRs (Electronic Health Records) of patients available. With so much information available, the doctors will need to be able to identify patterns and select important data for the diagnosis of the patient. On the other hand, according to some experts, having so much public data available makes it difficult to provide data that is actually anonymous.
Another point to take into account is the legal and ethical guidelines, which relates to who will be the owner of the data and how frequently he/she is obliged to the release this and for how long.
With so many sources of data, another problem will be accuracy of such. An untrusted source may be challenged by others, by ordering a new set of data, causing a repetition in the information.
According to Edward Huth, another concern is the accessibility and cost of such information. The accessibility rate could be improved by either reducing the costs or increasing the utility of the information. The reduction of costs according to the author, could be done by associations, which should assess which information was relevant and gather it in a more organized fashion.

==Web servers==

As of August 2005, there were over 70 million web servers. there were over 135 million web servers.

==Blogs==
According to Technorati, the number of blogs doubles about every 6 months with a total of 35.3 million blogs . This is an example of the early stages of logistic growth, where growth is approximately exponential, since blogs are a recent innovation. As the number of blogs approaches the number of possible producers (humans), saturation occurs, growth declines, and the number of blogs eventually stabilizes.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==References==
==External links==
*Conceptualizing Information Systems and Cognitive Sustainability in 21st Century &#x27;Attention&#x27; Economies (Includes Syllabus)
*How Much Information? 2003 
*&quot;Surviving the Information Explosion: How People Find Their Electronic Information&quot; 
*&quot;Why the Information Explosion Can Be Bad for Data Mining, and How Data Fusion Provides a Way Out&quot; 
*Information Explosion, Largest databases</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1662554" start="4" end="25" title="Information explosion" label="information explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q732577" start="65" end="74" title="publication" label="published"/>
<link wikidata="Q11028" start="75" end="86" title="information" label="information"/>
<link wikidata="Q42848" start="90" end="94" title="data" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q579488" start="184" end="208" title="information management" label="managing the information"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130191" start="251" end="271" title="information overload" label="information overload"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566255" start="360" end="373" title="New Statesman" label="New Statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247520" start="675" end="685" title="Pat Weaver" label="Pat Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955975" start="812" end="816" title="WSUI" label="WSUI"/>
<link wikidata="Q487977" start="820" end="829" title="Iowa City, Iowa" label="Iowa City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728663" start="857" end="868" title="The Daily Iowan" label="Daily Iowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q456962" start="1349" end="1360" title="data fusion" label="data fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q172491" start="1373" end="1384" title="data mining" label="data mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q839486" start="1484" end="1504" title="qualitative research" label="qualitative research"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078788" start="1934" end="1943" title="broadcast" label="broadcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068715" start="2206" end="2232" title="telecommunications network" label="telecommunications network"/>
<link wikidata="Q79735" start="2565" end="2574" title="megabytes" label="megabytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="2582" end="2587" title="bytes" label="bytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11188" start="2717" end="2733" title="world population" label="world population"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="2953" end="2962" title="terabytes" label="terabytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q79738" start="3107" end="3115" title="gigabyte" label="gigabyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q16499775" start="3340" end="3355" title="Latanya Sweeney" label="Latanya Sweeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q173285" start="4142" end="4157" title="Digital data" label="electronic data"/>
<link wikidata="Q188728" start="4567" end="4574" title="privacy" label="privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172491" start="4810" end="4821" title="data mining" label="data mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q10871684" start="4885" end="4910" title="Electronic Health Records" label="Electronic Health Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288" start="6068" end="6078" title="web server" label="web server"/>
<link wikidata="Q389701" start="6146" end="6156" title="Technorati" label="Technorati"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="6172" end="6177" title="blogs" label="blogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052379" start="6286" end="6301" title="logistic growth" label="logistic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q582659" start="6333" end="6344" title="Exponential growth" label="exponential"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14775" wikidata="Q218593" url="?curid=14775" title="Inch">
<text>The inch (symbol: in or [[prime (symbol)|]]) is a unit of length in the British Imperial and the United States customary systems of measurement. It is equal to yard or of a foot. Derived from the Roman uncia (&quot;twelfth&quot;), the word &quot;inch&quot; is also sometimes used to translate similar units in other measurement systems, usually understood as deriving from the width of the human thumb.

Standards for the exact length of an inch have varied in the past, but since the adoption of the international yard during the 1950s and 1960s the inch has been based on the metric system and defined as exactly 25.4mm.

==Name==
The English word &quot;inch&quot; () was an early borrowing from Latin &quot;&quot; (&quot;one-twelfth; Roman inch; Roman ounce&quot;). The vowel change from Latin to Old English (which became Modern English ) is known as umlaut. The consonant change from the Latin (spelled &quot;c&quot;) to English is palatalisation. Both were features of Old English phonology; see and for more information.

&quot;Inch&quot; is cognate with &quot;ounce&quot; (), whose separate pronunciation and spelling reflect its reborrowing in Middle English from Anglo-Norman &quot;unce&quot; and &quot;ounce&quot;.

In many other European languages, the word for &quot;inch&quot; is the same as or derived from the word for &quot;thumb&quot;, as a man&#x27;s thumb is about an inch wide (and this was even sometimes used to define the inch). In the Dutch language a term for inch is &quot;engelse duim&quot; (english thumb). Examples include (&quot;inch&quot;) and &#x27; (&quot;thumb&quot;); (&quot;thumb&quot;); Danish and (&quot;inch&quot;) &#x27; (&quot;thumb&quot;); (whence and ); ; , ; ; (&quot;inch&quot;) and &#x27; (&quot;thumb&quot;); (&quot;duim&quot;); (&quot;thumb&quot;); (&quot;inch&quot;) and &#x27; (&quot;thumb&quot;); and (&quot;inch&quot;) and &quot;tumme&quot; (&quot;thumb&quot;).

== Usage ==
===Imperial or hybrid countries===
The inch is a commonly used customary unit of length in the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom. For the United Kingdom, guidance on public sector use states that, since 1 October 1995, without time limit, the inch (along with the foot) is to be used as a primary unit for road signs and related measurements of distance (with the possible exception of clearance heights and widths) and may continue to be used as a secondary or supplementary indication following a metric measurement for other purposes.

===Worldwide===
Inches are used for display screens (e.g. televisions and computer monitors) worldwide. It is the official Japanese standard for electronic parts, especially display screens, and is the industry standard throughout continental Europe for display screens (Germany being one of few countries to supplement it with centimetres in most stores).

Inches are commonly used to specify the diameter of vehicle wheel rims, and the corresponding inner diameter of tyres in tyre codes.

===SI countries===

Both inch-based and millimeter-based hex keys are widely available for sale in Europe.

===Technical details===

The international standard symbol for inch is in (see ISO 31-1, Annex A) but traditionally the inch is denoted by a double prime, which is often approximated by a double quote symbol, and the foot by a prime, which is often approximated by an apostrophe. For example; &quot;&quot; can be written as 3 2. (This is akin to how the first and second &quot;cuts&quot; of the hour are likewise indicated by prime and double prime symbols, and also the first and second cuts of the degree.)

Subdivisions of an inch are typically written using dyadic fractions with odd number numerators; for example, &quot;&quot; would be written as and not as 2.375 nor as . However, for engineering purposes fractions are commonly given to three or four places of decimals and have been for many years.

=== Equivalents===
 international inch is equal to:

* centimeters (1 inch is exactly 2.54 cm)
* millimetres (1 inch is exactly 25.4 mm)
* or feet
* or yards 
* &#x27;tenths&#x27;
* thou or mil
* points or gries
* PostScript points
* , , or lines
* computer picas
* barleycorns
* US Survey inches
* or palms 
* or hands
== History ==
The earliest known reference to the inch in England is from the &quot;Laws of Æthelberht&quot; dating to the early 7th century, surviving in a single manuscript, the &quot;Textus Roffensis&quot; from 1120. Paragraph LXVII sets out the fine for wounds of various depths: one inch, one shilling; two inches, two shillings, etc.

An Anglo-Saxon unit of length was the barleycorn. After 1066, 1 inch was equal to 3 barleycorns, which continued to be its legal definition for several centuries, with the barleycorn being the base unit. One of the earliest such definitions is that of 1324, where the legal definition of the inch was set out in a statute of Edward II of England, defining it as &quot;three grains of barley, dry and round, placed end to end, lengthwise&quot;.

Similar definitions are recorded in both English and Welsh medieval law tracts. One, dating from the first half of the 10th century, is contained in the Laws of Hywel Dda which superseded those of Dyfnwal, an even earlier definition of the inch in Wales. Both definitions, as recorded in &quot;Ancient Laws and Institutes of Wales&quot; (vol i., pp. 184, 187, 189), are that &quot;three lengths of a barleycorn is the inch&quot;.

King David I of Scotland in his Assize of Weights and Measures (c. 1150) is said to have defined the Scottish inch as the width of an average man&#x27;s thumb at the base of the nail, even including the requirement to calculate the average of a small, a medium, and a large man&#x27;s measures. However, the oldest surviving manuscripts date from the early 14th century and appear to have been altered with the inclusion of newer material.

In 1814, Charles Butler, a mathematics teacher at Cheam School, recorded the old legal definition of the inch to be &quot;three grains of sound ripe barley being taken out the middle of the ear, well dried, and laid end to end in a row&quot;, and placed the barleycorn, not the inch, as the base unit of the English Long Measure system, from which all other units were derived. John Bouvier similarly recorded in his 1843 law dictionary that the barleycorn was the fundamental measure. Butler observed, however, that &quot;[a]s the length of the barley-corn cannot be fixed, so the inch according to this method will be uncertain&quot;, noting that a standard inch measure was now [i.e. by 1843] kept in the Exchequer chamber, Guildhall, and &quot;that&quot; was the legal definition of the inch.

This was a point also made by George Long in his 1842 &quot;Penny Cyclopædia&quot;, observing that standard measures had since surpassed the barleycorn definition of the inch, and that to recover the inch measure from its original definition, in case the standard measure were destroyed, would involve the measurement of large numbers of barleycorns and taking their average lengths. He noted that this process would not perfectly recover the standard, since it might introduce errors of anywhere between one hundredth and one tenth of an inch in the definition of a yard.

Before the adoption of the international yard and pound, various definitions were in use. In the United Kingdom and most countries of the British Commonwealth, the inch was defined in terms of the Imperial Standard Yard. The United States adopted the conversion factor 1 metre = 39.37 inches by an act in 1866. In 1893, Mendenhall ordered the physical realization of the inch to be based on the international prototype metres numbers 21 and 27, which had been received from the CGPM, together with the previously adopted conversion factor.

As a result of the definitions above, the U.S. inch was effectively defined as 25.4000508 mm (with a reference temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit) and the UK inch at 25.399977 mm (with a reference temperature of 62 degrees Fahrenheit). When Carl Edvard Johansson started manufacturing gauge blocks in inch sizes in 1912, Johansson&#x27;s compromise was to manufacture gauge blocks with a nominal size of 25.4mm, with a reference temperature of 20 degrees Celsius, accurate to within a few parts per million of both official definitions. Because Johansson&#x27;s blocks were so popular, his blocks became the &quot;de facto&quot; standard for manufacturers internationally, with other manufacturers of gauge blocks following Johansson&#x27;s definition by producing blocks designed to be equivalent to his.

In 1930, the British Standards Institution adopted an inch of exactly 25.4 mm. The American Standards Association followed suit in 1933. By 1935, industry in 16 countries had adopted the &quot;industrial inch&quot; as it came to be known, effectively endorsing Johansson&#x27;s pragmatic choice of conversion ratio.

In 1946, the Commonwealth Science Congress recommended a yard of exactly 0.9144 metres for adoption throughout the British Commonwealth. This was adopted by Canada in 1951; the United States on 1 July 1959; Australia in 1961, effective 1 January 1964; and the United Kingdom in 1963, effective on 1 January 1964. The new standards gave an inch of exactly 25.4 mm, 1.7 millionths of an inch longer than the old imperial inch and 2 millionths of an inch shorter than the old US inch.

==Related units==

===US survey inches===
The United States retained the -metre definition for surveying, producing a 2 millionth part difference between standard and US survey inches. This is approximately  inch per mile; 12.7 kilometres is exactly standard inches and exactly survey inches. This difference is substantial when doing calculations in State Plane Coordinate Systems with coordinate values in the hundreds of thousands or millions of feet.

In 2020, the National Institute of Standards and Technology announced that the U.S. survey foot would &quot;be phased out&quot; on 1 January 2023 and be superseded by the international foot (also known as the foot) equal to 0.3048 metres exactly, for all further applications. This implies that the survey inch was replaced by the international inch.

===Continental inches===

Before the adoption of the metric system, several European countries had customary units whose name translates into &quot;inch&quot;. The French &quot;pouce&quot; measured roughly 27.0 mm, at least when applied to describe the calibre of artillery pieces. The Amsterdam foot (&quot;voet&quot;) consisted of 11 Amsterdam inches (&quot;duim&quot;). The Amsterdam foot is about 8% shorter than an English foot.

=== Scottish inch ===
The now obsolete Scottish inch (), of a Scottish foot, was about 1.0016 imperial inches (about ).

== See also ==

* English units
* Square inch and Cubic inch
* International yard and pound
* Anthropic units
* Pyramid inch
* Digit and Line
==Notes==
== References ==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q218593" start="4" end="8" title="Inch" label="inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q218593" start="18" end="20" title="Inch" label="in"/>
<link wikidata="Q218593" start="24" end="43" title="Inch" label="[[prime (symbol)|]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q47574" start="50" end="54" title="Units of measurement" label="unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q36253" start="58" end="64" title="length" label="length"/>
<link wikidata="Q641227" start="72" end="88" title="imperial units" label="British Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116609" start="97" end="120" title="United States customary units" label="United States customary"/>
<link wikidata="Q932268" start="121" end="143" title="System of measurement" label="systems of measurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q482798" start="160" end="164" title="yard" label="yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710" start="173" end="177" title="foot (unit)" label="foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645564" start="196" end="207" title="Uncia (unit)" label="Roman uncia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773881" start="337" end="367" title="anthropic units" label="usually understood as deriving"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055316" start="501" end="519" title="international yard" label="international yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q232405" start="578" end="591" title="metric system" label="metric system"/>
<link wikidata="Q174789" start="619" end="621" title="Millimetre" label="mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="698" end="703" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645564" start="737" end="747" title="Roman inch" label="Roman inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645564" start="749" end="760" title="Roman ounce" label="Roman ounce"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621167" start="855" end="861" title="Germanic umlaut" label="umlaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q207874" start="937" end="951" title="Palatalization (sound change)" label="palatalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083928" start="975" end="996" title="Old English phonology" label="Old English phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q48013" start="1068" end="1073" title="ounce" label="ounce"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="1153" end="1167" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35214" start="1173" end="1185" title="Anglo-Norman language" label="Anglo-Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="1460" end="1474" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch language"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="2537" end="2547" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2602" end="2619" title="Japanese units of measurement#Imperial units" label="Japanese standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2750" end="2757" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378449" start="2958" end="2967" title="tyre code" label="tyre code"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953" start="3028" end="3035" title="hex key" label="hex key"/>
<link wikidata="Q834684" start="3158" end="3166" title="ISO 31-1" label="ISO 31-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q914681" start="3220" end="3232" title="Prime (symbol)" label="double prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043" start="3267" end="3279" title="quotation mark" label="double quote"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710" start="3296" end="3300" title="Foot (unit)" label="foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q914681" start="3306" end="3311" title="Prime (symbol)" label="prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q436048" start="3347" end="3357" title="apostrophe (mark)" label="apostrophe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727" start="3433" end="3438" title="minute" label="first"/>
<link wikidata="Q11574" start="3443" end="3449" title="second" label="second"/>
<link wikidata="Q25235" start="3474" end="3478" title="hour" label="hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="3550" end="3555" title="Minute of arc" label="first"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="3560" end="3566" title="Second of arc" label="second"/>
<link wikidata="Q28390" start="3579" end="3585" title="Degree (angle)" label="degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281400" start="3641" end="3657" title="dyadic rational" label="dyadic fractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q174728" start="3943" end="3953" title="centimeter" label="centimeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q174789" start="3985" end="3995" title="millimetre" label="millimetre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710" start="4030" end="4034" title="foot (unit)" label="feet"/>
<link wikidata="Q482798" start="4040" end="4044" title="yard" label="yard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4055" end="4061" title="Thousandth of an inch#Tenths" label="tenths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165799" start="4070" end="4074" title="Thousandth of an inch" label="thou"/>
<link wikidata="Q156389" start="4102" end="4118" title="Point (typography)" label="PostScript point"/>
<link wikidata="Q649848" start="4129" end="4134" title="line (unit)" label="lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718629" start="4137" end="4151" title="Pica (typography)" label="computer picas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861171" start="4154" end="4165" title="Barleycorn (unit)" label="barleycorns"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4168" end="4184" title="#US survey inches" label="US Survey inches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048279" start="4190" end="4195" title="palm (unit)" label="palms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552740" start="4202" end="4207" title="hand (unit)" label="hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184958" start="4292" end="4310" title="Laws of Æthelberht" label="Laws of Æthelberht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799161" start="4394" end="4410" title="Textus Roffensis" label="Textus Roffensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16782623" start="4587" end="4597" title="English units" label="barleycorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="4874" end="4894" title="Edward II of England" label="Edward II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="4933" end="4939" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q422205" start="5155" end="5164" title="Hywel Dda" label="Hywel Dda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4161271" start="5191" end="5198" title="Dyfnwal Moelmud" label="Dyfnwal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088830" start="5916" end="5928" title="Cheam School" label="Cheam School"/>
<link wikidata="Q15515699" start="6244" end="6256" title="John Bouvier" label="John Bouvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q81279" start="6593" end="6602" title="Guildhall, London" label="Guildhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374788" start="6724" end="6740" title="Penny Cyclopædia" label="Penny Cyclopædia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055316" start="7265" end="7293" title="international yard and pound" label="international yard and pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="7376" end="7396" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="British Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7435" end="7457" title="Yard#19th-century Britain" label="Imperial Standard Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920330" start="7558" end="7576" title="Mendenhall Order" label="Mendenhall ordered"/>
<link wikidata="Q215650" start="7716" end="7720" title="CGPM" label="CGPM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270019" start="8022" end="8043" title="Carl Edvard Johansson" label="Carl Edvard Johansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340688" start="8066" end="8078" title="gauge blocks" label="gauge blocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778585" start="8601" end="8630" title="BSI Group" label="British Standards Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q180003" start="8671" end="8701" title="American National Standards Institute" label="American Standards Association"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9555" end="9564" title="United States customary units#Length" label="US survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603460" start="9739" end="9768" title="State Plane Coordinate System" label="State Plane Coordinate System"/>
<link wikidata="Q176691" start="9857" end="9903" title="National Institute of Standards and Technology" label="National Institute of Standards and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027947" start="10373" end="10378" title="pouce" label="pouce"/>
<link wikidata="Q81103" start="10470" end="10476" title="Cannon" label="pieces"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974294" start="10482" end="10496" title="Dutch units of measurement" label="Amsterdam foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075526" start="10670" end="10683" title="Obsolete Scottish units of measurement" label="Scottish inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16782623" start="10770" end="10783" title="English units" label="English units"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063786" start="10786" end="10797" title="Square inch" label="Square inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140397" start="10802" end="10812" title="Cubic inch" label="Cubic inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055316" start="10815" end="10843" title="International yard and pound" label="International yard and pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773881" start="10846" end="10861" title="Anthropic units" label="Anthropic units"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263286" start="10864" end="10876" title="Pyramid inch" label="Pyramid inch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399533" start="10879" end="10884" title="Digit (unit)" label="Digit"/>
<link wikidata="Q649848" start="10889" end="10893" title="Line (unit)" label="Line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14776" wikidata="Q256020" url="?curid=14776" title="Inn">
<text>Inns are generally establishments or buildings where travelers can seek lodging, and usually, food and drink. Inns are typically located in the country or along a highway. Before the advent of motorized transportation, they also provided accommodation for horses.

An innkeeper is the person who runs an inn.

==History==


Inns in Europe were possibly first established when the Romans built their system of Roman roads 2,000 years ago. Many inns in Europe are several centuries old. In addition to providing for the needs of travelers, inns traditionally acted as community gathering places.

Historically, inns provided not only food and lodging, but stabling and fodder for the travelers&#x27; horses, as well. Famous London examples of inns include The George and The Tabard. However, there is no longer a formal distinction between an inn and several other kinds of establishments: many pubs use the name &quot;inn&quot;, either because they are long established and may have been formerly coaching inns, or to summon up a particular kind of image.

Inns were like bed and breakfasts, with a community dining room which was also used for town meetings or rented for wedding parties. The front, facing the road, was ornamental and welcoming for travelers. The back also usually had at least one livery barn for travelers to keep their horses. There were no lobbies as in modern inns; rather, the innkeeper would answer the door for each visitor and judge the people whom he decided to accommodate, it was up to the visitors to convince the innkeeper for accommodation. In some English towns, bye-laws would require innkeepers to offer all visitors a bed. Many inns were simply large houses that had extra rooms for renting.

In 14th-century England, the courtyards of the inns were often not paved or cobbled but rather flattened earth or mud. These inns would be made of two-story timber framed buildings with steep shingle roofs. Stable boys were in charge of stabling horses at the rear yard of the inn where they are watered and fed. Usual foods served included pottage, bread and cheese with ale for drinking. In some towns, innkeepers are only allowed to offer food and drinks to guests. The better managed inns would place fresh rushes on the floor, mixed with rose petals, lavender and herbs. Lighting would be dim, as candles were made of tallow. For toilet facilities, inns would simply provide a seat and a barrel which were emptied every morning. Beds would accommodate more than one man, sometimes even a dozen.

During the 19th century, the inn played a major role in the growing transportation system of England. Industry was on the rise, and people were traveling more in order to keep and maintain business. The English inn was considered an important part of English infrastructure, as it helped maintain a smooth flow of travel throughout the country.

As modes of transport have evolved, tourist lodging has adapted to serve each generation of traveler. A stagecoach made frequent stops at roadside coaching inns for water, food, and horses. A passenger train stopped only at designated stations in the city center, around which were built grand railway hotels. Motorcar traffic on old-style two-lane highways might have paused at any camp, cabin court, or motel along the way, while freeway traffic was restricted to access from designated off-ramps to side roads which quickly become crowded with hotel chain operators.

The original functions of an inn are now usually split among separate establishments. For example, hotels, lodges and motels might provide the traditional functions of an inn but focus more on lodging customers than on other services; public houses (pubs) are primarily alcohol-serving establishments; and restaurants and taverns serve food and drink. (Hotels often contain restaurants serving full breakfasts and meals, thus providing all of the functions of traditional inns. Economy, limited service properties, however, lack a kitchen and bar, and therefore claim at most an included continental breakfast.)

The lodging aspect of the word &quot;inn&quot; lives on in some hotel brand names, like Holiday Inn, and the Inns of Court in London were once accommodations for members of the legal profession. Some laws refer to lodging operators as &quot;innkeepers&quot;.

==Forms==
Other forms of inns exist throughout the world. Among them are the honjin and ryokan of Japan, caravanserai of Central Asia and the Middle East, and jiuguan in ancient China.

In Asia Minor, during the periods of rule by the Seljuk and Ottoman Turks, impressive structures functioning as inns () were built because inns were considered socially significant. These inns provided accommodations for people and either their vehicles or animals, and served as a resting place to those traveling on foot or by other means.

These inns were built between towns if the distance between municipalities was too far for one day&#x27;s travel. These structures, called caravansarais, were inns with large courtyards and ample supplies of water for drinking and other uses. They typically contained a café, in addition to supplies of food and fodder. After the caravans traveled a while they would take a break at these caravansarais, and often spend the night to rest the human travelers and their animals.

==Usage of the term==
The term &quot;inn&quot; historically characterized a rural hotel which provided lodging, food and refreshments, and accommodations for travelers&#x27; horses. To capitalize on this nostalgic image many typically lower end and middling modern motor hotel operators seek to distance themselves from similar motels by styling themselves &quot;inns&quot;, regardless of services and accommodations provided. Examples are Comfort Inn, Days Inn, Holiday Inn, Knights Inn, and Premier Inn.

The term &quot;inn&quot; is also retained in its historic use in many laws governing motels and hotels, often known as &quot;innkeeper&#x27;s acts&quot;, or refer to hôteliers and motel operators as &quot;innkeepers&quot; in the body of the legislation These laws typically define the innkeepers&#x27; liability for valuables entrusted to them by clients and determine whether an innkeeper holds any lien against such goods. In some jurisdictions, an offense named as &quot;defrauding an innkeeper&quot; prohibits fraudulently obtaining &quot;food, lodging, or other accommodation at any hotel, inn, boarding house, or eating house&quot;; in this context, the term is often an anachronism as the majority of modern restaurants are free-standing and not attached to coaching inns or tourist lodging.

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Bed and breakfast
* Caravanserai, the Middle Eastern equivalent
* Hostel
* Hostler, a groom who takes care of a traveler&#x27;s horse

==References==
==Further reading==
* Burke, Thomas (1927) &quot;The Book of the Inn: being two hundred pictures of the English inn from the earliest times to the coming of the railway hotel&quot;; selected and edited by Thomas Burke. London: Constable
* Burke, Thomas (1930) &quot;The English Inn&quot;. (English Heritage.) London: Herbert Jenkins
** (1947) Revised. (The Country Books.) London: Herbert Jenkins
* Everitt, Alan (1985) &quot;The English Urban Inn&quot;, in his: &quot;Landscape and Community in England&quot;. London: Hambledon Press (&quot;The Oxford Companion to Local and Family History&quot; (ed. David Hey), 1996, describes this as &quot;the starting point for modern studies [of inns]&quot;; Everitt described most of the previous literature on the topic as &quot;a wretched farrago of romantic legends, facetious humour and irritating errors&quot;)
* Douch, H. L. (1966) &quot;Old Cornish Inns and their place in the social history of the County&quot;. Truro: D. Bradford Barton
* Monson-Fitzjohn, G. J. (1926) &quot;Quaint Signs of Olde Inns&quot;. London: Herbert Jenkins (reissued by Senate, London, 1994 )
* Richardson, A. E. (1934) &quot;The Old Inns of England&quot;. London: B. T. Batsford
* Sherry, John (1972) &quot;The Laws of Innkeepers; for hotels, motels, restaurants and clubs&quot;. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press 

==External links==

* Congleton&#x27;s ancient Inn Signs
* The Lost Pubs Project: Lost and closed pubs of the UK.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q256020" start="0" end="4" title="Inn" label="Inns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056668" start="72" end="79" title="lodging" label="lodging"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095" start="94" end="98" title="food" label="food"/>
<link wikidata="Q40050" start="103" end="108" title="drink" label="drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="256" end="261" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q256020" start="268" end="277" title="Inn" label="innkeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q194029" start="409" end="419" title="Roman road" label="Roman road"/>
<link wikidata="Q211439" start="667" end="673" title="fodder" label="fodder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12058464" start="754" end="764" title="The George Inn, Southwark" label="The George"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103238" start="769" end="779" title="The Tabard" label="The Tabard"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="893" end="896" title="pub" label="pub"/>
<link wikidata="Q966002" start="996" end="1008" title="coaching inn" label="coaching inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q367914" start="1071" end="1088" title="bed and breakfast" label="bed and breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q339249" start="2981" end="2991" title="stagecoach" label="stagecoach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3165" end="3185" title="Hotel#Railway hotels" label="grand railway hotels"/>
<link wikidata="Q216212" start="3282" end="3287" title="motel" label="motel"/>
<link wikidata="Q27686" start="3424" end="3435" title="hotel chain" label="hotel chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056668" start="3555" end="3561" title="Lodging" label="lodges"/>
<link wikidata="Q216212" start="3566" end="3571" title="motel" label="motel"/>
<link wikidata="Q154250" start="3770" end="3776" title="tavern" label="tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q27686" start="3926" end="3950" title="Economy limited service" label="Economy, limited service"/>
<link wikidata="Q108796194" start="4036" end="4057" title="continental breakfast" label="continental breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717882" start="4149" end="4160" title="Holiday Inn" label="Holiday Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q278697" start="4170" end="4183" title="Inns of Court" label="Inns of Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q994817" start="4398" end="4404" title="honjin" label="honjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q562930" start="4409" end="4415" title="ryokan" label="ryokan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="4419" end="4424" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q186347" start="4426" end="4438" title="caravanserai" label="caravanserai"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="4510" end="4520" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708255" start="4556" end="4562" title="Seljuk dynasty" label="Seljuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359535" start="4567" end="4580" title="Ottoman Turks" label="Ottoman Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q203494" start="5180" end="5188" title="Caravan (travellers)" label="caravans"/>
<link wikidata="Q216212" start="5656" end="5661" title="motel" label="motel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075788" start="5768" end="5779" title="Choice Hotels" label="Comfort Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047239" start="5781" end="5789" title="Days Inn" label="Days Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717882" start="5791" end="5802" title="Holiday Inn" label="Holiday Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422409" start="5804" end="5815" title="Knights Inn" label="Knights Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108626" start="5821" end="5832" title="Premier Inn" label="Premier Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q184170" start="6309" end="6332" title="Dine and dash" label="defrauding an innkeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q367914" start="6662" end="6679" title="Bed and breakfast" label="Bed and breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q186347" start="6682" end="6694" title="Caravanserai" label="Caravanserai"/>
<link wikidata="Q654772" start="6728" end="6734" title="Hostel" label="Hostel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909463" start="6737" end="6744" title="Hostler" label="Hostler"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14777" wikidata="Q742584" url="?curid=14777" title="International Olympiad in Informatics">
<text>The International Olympiad in [[Informatics]] (IOI) is an annual competitive programming competition and one of the International Science Olympiads for secondary school students. The first IOI was held in 1989 in Pravetz, Bulgaria.

Each country sends a team of up to four students, plus one team leader, one deputy leader, and guests. Students in each country are selected for their country&#x27;s team through national computing contests. Students at the IOI compete on an individual basis. There is no official team ranking.

The contest consists of two days of solving six complicated algorithmic tasks by writing computer programs in C++. All task materials are published on each year&#x27;s contest website soon after the competition ends.

== Competition structure and participation ==


On each of the two competition days, the competitors are typically given three problems which they have to solve in five hours. Each student works on their own to solve the problems with no outside help, specifically no communication with other contestants, books, web access, etc. Contestants are typically allowed to bring no programable wired keyboards and mice. Usually to solve a task the contestant has to write a computer program (in C++) and submit it before the five-hour competition time ends. The program is graded based on secret test data. Since IOI 2010, tasks are divided into subtasks with graduated difficulty, and points are awarded only when all tests for a particular subtask yield correct results, within specific time and memory limits. In some cases, the contestant&#x27;s program has to interact with a secret computer library, which allows problems where the input is not fixed, but depends on the program&#x27;s actions – for example in game problems (a.k.a interactive problems). Another type of problem has the inputs publicly available, for these, the contestants have to submit an output file instead of a program, and it is up to them whether they obtain the output files by writing a program (possibly exploiting special characteristics of the input), or by hand, or by a combination of these means. Pascal has been removed as an available programming language as of 2019.:11

IOI 2010 for the first time had a live web scoreboard with real-time provisional results. Submissions will be scored as soon as possible during the contest, and the results posted. Contestants will be aware of their scores, but not others&#x27;, and may resubmit to improve their scores. Starting from 2012, IOI has been using the Contest Management System (CMS) for developing and monitoring the contest.

The scores from the two competition days and all problems are summed up separately for each contestant. Medals are awarded depending on their relative total score. The top 50% of the contestants are awarded medals, such that the relative number of gold : silver : bronze : no medal is approximately 1:2:3:6 (thus 1/12 of the contestants get a gold medal).

Prior to IOI 2010, students who did not receive medals did not have their scores published, although the scores of students who did not receive medals are still not available in the official results, they are known from the live web scoreboard. In IOI 2012 the top 3 nations ranked by aggregate score (Russia, China and USA) were subsequently awarded during the closing ceremony.

Analysis of female performance shows 77.9% of women obtain no medal, while 49.2% of men obtain no medal. &quot;The average female participation was 4.4% in 1989–1994 and 2.2% in 1996–2014.&quot; It also suggests much higher participation of women on the national level, claiming sometimes double-digit percentages in total participation on the first stage. President of the IOI (2011-2014), Richard Forster, says the competition has difficulty attracting women and that in spite of trying to solve it, &quot;none of us have hit on quite what the problem is, let alone the solution.&quot; The European Girls’ Olympiad in Informatics (EGOI), which was first held in 2021 was started with the goal to increscent female participants at IOI and other Informatics Olympiads.

In IOI 2017 held in Iran, due to not being able to participate in Iran, the Israeli students participated in an offsite competition organized by IOI in Russia.:11 Due to visa issues, the full USA team was unable to attend, although one contestant Zhezheng Luo was able to attend by traveling with the Chinese team and winning gold medal and 3rd place in standings.

In IOI 2019 held in Azerbaijan, the Armenia team did not participate due to the dispute between the two countries, despite the guarantees provided and official invitation letter sent by the host Azerbaijan.

Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, both the IOI 2020 and IOI 2021, originally scheduled to be hosted by Singapore, were held as online contests. The IOI 2022, hosted by Indonesia, was held as a hybrid event, with around 25% of the contestants participating online.

In response to the invasion of Ukraine, students from Russia and Belarus can only participate as individuals under the IOI flag but not as national delegations starting from IOI 2022, and they would only participate online for IOI 2022, but they may return on-site from IOI 2023 onwards.

In response to the conflict and humanitarian crisis in Gaza, students from Israel can only participate as individuals under the IOI flag but not as a national delegation from IOI 2025 onwards. Over two thirds of the delegations voted in favour of the sanction in the IOI General Assembly.

== Members ==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*


=== Former members ===
*
*
*
*
*


== Summary ==
==All-time medal table==

==Multiple IOI winners==

The following is a list of the top performers in the history of the IOI. The P sign indicates a perfect score, a rare achievement in IOI history. The U sign indicates an unofficial participation, where a contestant participated in a host&#x27;s second team. Also, first (I), second (II) and third (III) places among gold medalists are indicated where appropriate. 


== Feeder competitions ==
Most participating countries use feeder competitions to select their team. A number of these are listed below:


== Notes ==
:1.IOI 2020 virtual closing ceremony was held on September 23, 2020.

== See also ==

* List of computer science awards
* International Science Olympiad
* International Collegiate Programming Contest
* Central European Olympiad in Informatics
* Competitive programming
* International Mathematical Olympiad

== References ==
== External links ==

* International Olympiad in Informatics (IOI) community (hosted on Commonlounge)
* IOI International Committee Website
* IOI Statistics
* IOI Secretariat Website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q742584" start="4" end="45" title="International Olympiad in Informatics" label="International Olympiad in [[Informatics]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q742584" start="47" end="50" title="International Olympiad in Informatics" label="IOI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112179" start="65" end="88" title="competitive programming" label="competitive programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q671111" start="116" end="147" title="International Science Olympiads" label="International Science Olympiads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510454" start="148" end="177" title="Student competition" label="for secondary school students"/>
<link wikidata="Q387864" start="213" end="220" title="Pravetz" label="Pravetz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="412" end="439" title="#Feeder competitions" label="national computing contests"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="589" end="598" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="639" end="642" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="1236" end="1239" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3982" end="3986" title="EGOI" label="EGOI"/>
<link wikidata="Q16954835" start="4565" end="4598" title="Karabakh conflict" label="dispute between the two countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="4704" end="4721" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="4792" end="4801" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="4857" end="4866" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q85779407" start="6350" end="6381" title="List of computer science awards" label="List of computer science awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q671111" start="6384" end="6414" title="International Science Olympiad" label="International Science Olympiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q288568" start="6417" end="6461" title="International Collegiate Programming Contest" label="International Collegiate Programming Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q190470" start="6464" end="6504" title="Central European Olympiad in Informatics" label="Central European Olympiad in Informatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112179" start="6507" end="6530" title="Competitive programming" label="Competitive programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7983" start="6533" end="6568" title="International Mathematical Olympiad" label="International Mathematical Olympiad"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14779" wikidata="Q14399" url="?curid=14779" title="Iota">
<text>Iota (; uppercase Ι, lowercase ι; ) is the ninth letter of the Greek alphabet. It was derived from the Phoenician letter Yodh. Letters that arose from this letter include the Latin I and J, the Cyrillic І (І, і), Yi (Ї, ї), and Je (Ј, ј), and iotated letters (e.g. Yu (Ю, ю)). In the system of Greek numerals, iota has a value of 10.

Iota represents the close front unrounded vowel . In early forms of ancient Greek, it occurred in both long and short versions, but this distinction was lost in Koine Greek. Iota participated as the second element in falling diphthongs, with both long and short vowels as the first element. Where the first element was long, the iota was lost in pronunciation at an early date, and was written in polytonic orthography as iota subscript, in other words as a very small ι under the main vowel. Examples include ᾼ ᾳ ῌ ῃ ῼ ῳ. The former diphthongs became digraphs for simple vowels in Koine Greek.

The word is used in a common English phrase, &quot;not one iota&quot;, meaning &quot;not the slightest amount&quot;. This refers to iota, the smallest letter, or possibly yodh, י, the smallest letter in the Hebrew alphabet. The English word &quot;&quot; derives from iota. The German, Polish, Portuguese, and Spanish name for the letter J (&quot;&quot; / &quot;&quot;) is derived from iota.

==Symbol==

* In some programming languages (e.g., A+, APL, C++, Go), iota (either as the lowercase symbol codice_1 or the identifier codice_2) is used to represent and generate an array of consecutive integers. For example, in APL codice_3 gives codice_4.
* The lowercase iota symbol is sometimes used to write the imaginary unit, but more often Roman i or j is used.
* In mathematics, the inclusion map of one space into another is sometimes denoted by the lowercase iota.
* In logic, the lowercase iota denotes the definite descriptor.
* The lowercase iota symbol has Unicode code point U+03B9 and the uppercase U+0399.

==Unicode==
For accented Greek characters, see Greek diacritics: Computer encoding.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* ( in TeX)
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==See also==
*Hurricane Iota

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14399" start="0" end="4" title="Iota" label="Iota"/>
<link wikidata="Q14399" start="18" end="19" title="Iota" label="Ι"/>
<link wikidata="Q14399" start="31" end="32" title="Iota" label="ι"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="63" end="77" title="Greek alphabet" label="Greek alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q26752" start="103" end="113" title="Phoenician alphabet" label="Phoenician"/>
<link wikidata="Q17525361" start="121" end="125" title="Yodh" label="Yodh"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="175" end="180" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9893" start="181" end="182" title="I" label="I"/>
<link wikidata="Q9773" start="187" end="188" title="J" label="J"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="194" end="202" title="Cyrillic" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134105" start="203" end="204" title="І" label="І"/>
<link wikidata="Q236977" start="213" end="215" title="Yi (Cyrillic)" label="Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q134100" start="228" end="230" title="Je (Cyrillic)" label="Je"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252743" start="243" end="250" title="Iotation" label="iotated"/>
<link wikidata="Q186250" start="265" end="267" title="Yu (Cyrillic)" label="Yu"/>
<link wikidata="Q108645" start="294" end="308" title="Greek numerals" label="Greek numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q320021" start="355" end="382" title="close front unrounded vowel" label="close front unrounded vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088688" start="496" end="507" title="Koine Greek phonology" label="Koine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q102532" start="552" end="569" title="falling diphthong" label="falling diphthong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475332" start="732" end="753" title="polytonic orthography" label="polytonic orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344221" start="757" end="771" title="iota subscript" label="iota subscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q191494" start="887" end="894" title="digraph (orthography)" label="digraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="917" end="928" title="Koine Greek" label="Koine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q17525361" start="1102" end="1106" title="yodh" label="yodh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="1345" end="1365" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q277710" start="1374" end="1376" title="A+ (programming language)" label="A+"/>
<link wikidata="Q296187" start="1378" end="1381" title="APL (programming language)" label="APL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="1383" end="1386" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q37227" start="1388" end="1390" title="Go (programming language)" label="Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q193796" start="1639" end="1653" title="imaginary unit" label="imaginary unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9893" start="1676" end="1677" title="i" label="i"/>
<link wikidata="Q9773" start="1681" end="1682" title="j" label="j"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="1697" end="1708" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663694" start="1714" end="1727" title="inclusion map" label="inclusion map"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="1803" end="1808" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1841" end="1860" title="Definite description#Symbolic form" label="definite descriptor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1994" end="2029" title="Greek diacritics#Computer encoding" label="Greek diacritics: Computer encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q101717374" start="2101" end="2115" title="Hurricane Iota" label="Hurricane Iota"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14780" wikidata="Q233427" url="?curid=14780" title="ISP (disambiguation)">
<text>ISP often refers to Internet service provider. ISP may also refer to:
==Places==
* Islip railway station (Network Rail station code ISP), England
* Long Island MacArthur Airport (IATA Airport code ISP), New York, US

===Education===
* Information Society Project, at Yale Law School
* Institute of Southern Punjab, a university in Pakistan
* Instituto Superior Politécnico, a university in São Tomé and Príncipe
* &quot;Institut supérieur de philosophie&quot;, the Higher Institute of Philosophy in Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium
* Integrated science program, an honors program at Northwestern University
* International School of Panama
* International School of Paris, France
* International School of Prague, Czech Republic
* Petnica Science Center (Istraživačka Stanica Petnica)

===Law enforcement===
* Idaho State Police
* Illinois State Police
* Indiana State Police
* Iowa State Patrol
* Iowa State Penitentiary, Fort Madison, Iowa, US

==Organizations and agencies==
* Illinois State Police
* Indiana State Police
* Independence for Scotland Party
* Independent Socialist Party (disambiguation), in several countries
* ISP Sports, US marketing and broadcast company
* National Inspectorate of Strategic Products (Sweden) ()
* Integrated Service Provider, a type of logistics services firm
* Intesa Sanpaolo, Italian bank
* Sovereign and Popular Italy (&quot;Italia Sovrana e Popolare&quot;), Italian political party

==Science and technology==
===Computing===
* Image signal processor
* In-system programming, of programmable logic devices in-circuit
* Information Systems Professional, an information technology title and post-nominal
* Interface segregation principle, a principle of object-oriented design
* Internet service provider, an organization that provides services for accessing, using, or participating in the Internet
* ISP Formal Verification Tool, a verification tool for MPI (Message Passing Interface) programs

===Other uses in science and technology===
* Imperial smelting process, in zinc smelting
* Polarization in astronomy, interstellar polarization
* Specific impulse (&quot;I&quot;sp), a measure of rocket and jet efficiency</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q233427" start="0" end="3" title="ISP (disambiguation)" label="ISP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="20" end="45" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q233427" start="47" end="50" title="ISP (disambiguation)" label="ISP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1847555" start="83" end="104" title="Islip railway station" label="Islip railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q937590" start="148" end="177" title="Long Island MacArthur Airport" label="Long Island MacArthur Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030857" start="235" end="262" title="Information Society Project" label="Information Society Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q15983437" start="285" end="313" title="Institute of Southern Punjab" label="Institute of Southern Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041504" start="342" end="372" title="Instituto Superior Politécnico" label="Instituto Superior Politécnico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278047" start="420" end="453" title="Higher Institute of Philosophy" label="Institut supérieur de philosophie"/>
<link wikidata="Q309350" start="527" end="553" title="Integrated science program" label="Integrated science program"/>
<link wikidata="Q21072121" start="602" end="632" title="International School of Panama" label="International School of Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666875" start="635" end="664" title="International School of Paris" label="International School of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6053025" start="675" end="705" title="International School of Prague" label="International School of Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178472" start="724" end="746" title="Petnica Science Center" label="Petnica Science Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987459" start="803" end="821" title="Idaho State Police" label="Idaho State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148730" start="824" end="845" title="Illinois State Police" label="Illinois State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023438" start="848" end="868" title="Indiana State Police" label="Indiana State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q6064647" start="871" end="888" title="Iowa State Patrol" label="Iowa State Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q14687623" start="891" end="914" title="Iowa State Penitentiary" label="Iowa State Penitentiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3148730" start="973" end="994" title="Illinois State Police" label="Illinois State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023438" start="997" end="1017" title="Indiana State Police" label="Indiana State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q97959714" start="1020" end="1051" title="Independence for Scotland Party" label="Independence for Scotland Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017219" start="1054" end="1098" title="Independent Socialist Party (disambiguation)" label="Independent Socialist Party (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972014" start="1123" end="1133" title="ISP Sports" label="ISP Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411912" start="1172" end="1224" title="National Inspectorate of Strategic Products (Sweden)" label="National Inspectorate of Strategic Products (Sweden)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042973" start="1230" end="1257" title="Integrated Service Provider" label="Integrated Service Provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343118" start="1295" end="1310" title="Intesa Sanpaolo" label="Intesa Sanpaolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q113490502" start="1327" end="1354" title="Sovereign and Popular Italy" label="Sovereign and Popular Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q861004" start="1466" end="1488" title="Image processor" label="Image signal processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q373805" start="1491" end="1512" title="In-system programming" label="In-system programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030866" start="1557" end="1589" title="Information Systems Professional" label="Information Systems Professional"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666034" start="1642" end="1673" title="Interface segregation principle" label="Interface segregation principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="1715" end="1740" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q5974482" start="1838" end="1866" title="ISP Formal Verification Tool" label="ISP Formal Verification Tool"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2009" end="2022" title="zinc smelting#Blast furnace process (Imperial Smelting Process)" label="zinc smelting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394057" start="2025" end="2050" title="Polarization in astronomy" label="Polarization in astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q51504" start="2080" end="2096" title="Specific impulse" label="Specific impulse"/>
</links>
</doc>
