<doc id="11188" wikidata="Q6534" url="?curid=11188" title="French Revolution">
<text>The French Revolution ( ) was a period of political and societal change in France which began with the Estates General of 1789 and ended with the Coup of 18 Brumaire on 9 November 1799. Many of the revolution&#x27;s ideas are considered fundamental principles of liberal democracy, and its values remain central to modern French political discourse.

The causes of the revolution were a combination of social, political, and economic factors which the &quot;ancien régime&quot; (&quot;old regime&quot;) proved unable to manage. A financial crisis and widespread social distress led to the convocation of the Estates General in May 1789, its first meeting since 1614. The representatives of the Third Estate broke away and re-constituted themselves as a National Assembly in June. The Storming of the Bastille in Paris on 14 July was followed by radical measures by the Assembly, among them the abolition of feudalism, state control over the Catholic Church, and a declaration of rights. The next three years were dominated by a struggle for political control. King Louis XVI&#x27;s attempted flight to Varennes in June 1791 further discredited the monarchy, and military defeats after the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars in April 1792 led to an armed insurrection on 10 August 1792. The monarchy was replaced by the French First Republic in September, and Louis XVI was executed in January 1793.

After another revolt in June 1793, the constitution was suspended, and political power passed from the National Convention to the Committee of Public Safety, dominated by radical Jacobins led by Maximilien Robespierre. About 16,000 people were sentenced by the Revolutionary Tribunal and executed in the Reign of Terror, which ended in July 1794 with the Thermidorian Reaction. Weakened by external threats and internal opposition, the Committee of Public Safety was replaced in November 1795 by the Directory. Its instability ended in the coup of 18 Brumaire and the establishment of the Consulate, with Napoleon Bonaparte as First Consul.

== Causes ==
The Revolution resulted from multiple long-term and short-term factors, culminating in a social, economic, financial and political crisis in the late 1780s. Combined with resistance to reform by the ruling elite and indecisive policy by Louis XVI and his ministers, the result was a crisis the state was unable to manage.

Between 1715 and 1789, the French population grew from 21 to 28 million, 20% of whom lived in towns or cities, Paris alone having over 600,000 inhabitants. This was accompanied by a tripling in the size of the middle class, which comprised almost 10% of the population by 1789. Despite increases in overall prosperity, its benefits were largely restricted to the rentier and mercantile classes, while the living standards fell for wage labourers and peasant farmers who rented their land. Economic recession from 1785, combined with bad harvests in 1787 and 1788, led to high unemployment and food prices, causing a financial and political crisis.

While the state also experienced a debt crisis, the level of debt itself was not high compared with Britain&#x27;s. A significant problem was that tax rates varied widely from one region to another, were often different from the official amounts, and were collected inconsistently. Its complexity meant uncertainty over the amount contributed by any authorised tax caused resentment among all taxpayers. Attempts to simplify the system were blocked by the regional &quot;Parlements&quot; which approved financial policy. The resulting impasse led to the calling of the Estates General of 1789, which became radicalised by the struggle for control of public finances.

Louis XVI was willing to consider reforms, but he often backed down when faced with opposition from conservative elements within the nobility. Enlightenment critiques of social institutions were widely discussed among the educated French elite. At the same time, the American Revolution and the European revolts of the 1780s inspired public debate on issues such as patriotism, liberty, equality, and democracy. These shaped the response of the educated public to the crisis, while scandals such as the Affair of the Diamond Necklace fuelled widespread anger at the court, nobility, and church officials.

== Crisis of the &quot;Ancien Régime&quot; ==

=== Financial and political crisis ===
France faced a series of budgetary crises during the 18th century as revenues failed to keep pace with expenditure. Although the economy grew solidly, the increase was not reflected in a proportional growth in taxes, their collection being contracted to tax farmers who kept much of it as personal profit. As the nobility and Church benefited from many exemptions, the tax burden fell mainly on peasants. Reform was difficult because new tax laws had to be registered with regional judicial bodies or &quot;parlements&quot; that were able to block them. The king could impose laws by decree, but this risked open conflict with the &quot;parlements&quot;, the nobility, and those subject to new taxes.

France primarily funded the Anglo-French War of 1778–1783 through loans. Following the peace, the monarchy borrowed heavily, culminating in a debt crisis. By 1788, half of state revenue was required to service its debt. In 1786, the French finance minister, Calonne, proposed a package of reforms including a universal land tax, the abolition of grain controls and internal tariffs, and new provincial assemblies appointed by the king. The new taxes were rejected, first by a hand-picked Assembly of Notables dominated by the nobility, then by the &quot;parlements&quot; when submitted by Calonne&#x27;s successor Brienne. The notables and &quot;parlements&quot; argued that the proposed taxes could only be approved by an Estates-General, a representative body that had last met in 1614.

The conflict between the Crown and the &quot;parlements&quot; became a national political crisis. Both sides issued a series of public statements, the government arguing that it was combating privilege and the &quot;parlement&quot; defending the ancient rights of the nation. Public opinion was firmly on the side of the &quot;parlements&quot;, and riots broke out in several towns. Brienne&#x27;s attempts to raise new loans failed, and on 8 August 1788, he announced that the king would summon an Estates-General to convene the following May. Brienne resigned and was replaced by Jacques Necker.

In September 1788, the Parlement of Paris ruled that the Estates-General should convene in the same form as in 1614, meaning that the three estates (the clergy, nobility, and Third Estate or &quot;commons&quot;) would meet and vote separately, with votes counted by estate rather than by head. As a result, the clergy and nobility could combine to outvote the Third Estate despite representing less than 5% of the population.

Following the relaxation of censorship and laws against political clubs, a group of liberal nobles and middle class activists known as the Society of Thirty launched a campaign for the doubling of Third Estate representation and individual voting. The public debate sparked an average of 25 new political pamphlets published each week from 25 September 1788. The Abbé Sieyès issued influential pamphlets titled &quot;What Is the Third Estate?&quot;denouncing the privilege of the clergy and nobility, and arguing the Third Estate represented the nation and should sit alone as a National Assembly. Activists such as Jean Joseph Mounier, Antoine Barnave and Maximilien Robespierre organised regional meetings, petitions and literature in support of these demands. In December, the king agreed to double the representation of the Third Estate but left the question of counting votes for the Estates-General to decide.

=== Estates-General of 1789 ===

The Estates-General contained three separate bodies, the First Estate representing 100,000 clergy, the Second the nobility, and the Third the &quot;commons&quot;. Since each met separately, and any proposals had to be approved by at least two, the First and Second Estates could outvote the Third despite representing less than 5% of the population.

Although the Catholic Church in France owned nearly 10% of all land, as well as receiving annual tithes paid by peasants, three-quarters of the 303 clergy elected were parish priests, many of whom earned less than unskilled labourers and had more in common with their poor parishioners than with the bishops of the first estate. The Second Estate elected 322 deputies, representing about 400,000 men and women, who owned about 25% of the land and collected seigneurial dues and rents from their tenants. Most delegates were town-dwelling members of the &quot;noblesse d&#x27;épée&quot;, or traditional aristocracy. Courtiers and representatives of the (those who derived rank from judicial or administrative posts) were underrepresented. Of the 610 deputies of the Third Estate, about two-thirds held legal qualifications and almost half were venal office holders. Less than 100 were in trade or industry, and none were peasants or artisans. To assist delegates, each region completed a list of grievances, known as &quot;Cahiers de doléances&quot;. Tax inequality and seigneurial dues (feudal payments owed to landowners) headed the grievances in the &quot;cahiers de doleances&quot; for the estate.

On 5 May 1789 the Estates-General convened at Versailles. Necker outlined the state budget and reiterated the king&#x27;s decision that each estate should decide on which matters it would agree to meet and vote in common with the other estates. On the following day, each estate was to separately verify the credentials of their representatives. The Third Estate, however, voted to invite the other estates to join them in verifying all the representatives of the Estates-General in common and to agree that votes should be counted by head. Fruitless negotiations lasted to 12 June when the Third Estate began verifying its own members. On 17 June, the Third Estate declared itself to be the National Assembly of France and that all existing taxes were illegal. Within two days, more than 100 members of the clergy had joined them.
Shaken by this challenge to his authority, the king agreed to a reform package that he would announce at a royal session of the Estates-General. The &quot;Salle des États&quot; was closed to prepare for the joint session, but the members of the Estates-General were not informed in advance. On 20 June, when the members of the Third Estate found their meeting place closed, they moved to a nearby tennis court and swore not to disperse until a new constitution had been agreed.

At the royal session the king announced a series of tax and other reforms and stated that no new taxes or loans would be implemented without the consent of the Estates-General. However, he stated that the three estates were sacrosanct and it was up to each estate to agree to end their privileges and decide on which matters they would vote in common with the other estates. At the end of the session the Third Estate refused to leave the hall and reiterated their oath not to disperse until a constitution had been agreed. Over the next days more members of the clergy joined the National Assembly. On 27 June, faced with popular demonstrations and mutinies in his French Guards, Louis XVI capitulated. He commanded the members of the first and second estates to join the third in the National Assembly.

== Constitutional monarchy (July 1789 – September 1792) ==
=== Abolition of the &quot;Ancien Régime&quot; ===

Even the limited reforms the king had announced went too far for Marie Antoinette and Louis&#x27; younger brother the Comte d&#x27;Artois. On their advice, Louis dismissed Necker again as chief minister on 11 July. On 12 July, the Assembly went into a non-stop session after rumours circulated he was planning to use the Swiss Guards to force it to close. The news brought crowds of protestors into the streets, and soldiers of the elite regiment refused to disperse them.

On the 14th, many of these soldiers joined the mob in attacking the Bastille, a royal fortress with large stores of arms and ammunition. Its governor, Bernard-René de Launay, surrendered after several hours of fighting that cost the lives of 83 attackers. Taken to the , he was executed, his head placed on a pike and paraded around the city; the fortress was then torn down in a remarkably short time. Although rumoured to hold many prisoners, the Bastille held only seven: four forgers, a lunatic, a failed assassin, and a deviant nobleman. Nevertheless, as a potent symbol of the , its destruction was viewed as a triumph and Bastille Day is still celebrated every year. In French culture, some see its fall as the start of the Revolution.

Alarmed by the prospect of losing control of the capital, Louis appointed the Marquis de Lafayette commander of the National Guard, with Jean-Sylvain Bailly as head of a new administrative structure known as the Commune. On 17 July, Louis visited Paris accompanied by 100 deputies, where he was greeted by Bailly and accepted a tricolore cockade to loud cheers. However, it was clear power had shifted from his court; he was welcomed as &#x27;Louis XVI, father of the French and king of a free people.&#x27;

The short-lived unity enforced on the Assembly by a common threat quickly dissipated. Deputies argued over constitutional forms, while civil authority rapidly deteriorated. On 22 July, former Finance Minister Joseph Foullon and his son were lynched by a Parisian mob, and neither Bailly nor Lafayette could prevent it. In rural areas, wild rumours and paranoia resulted in the formation of militia and an agrarian insurrection known as . The breakdown of law and order and frequent attacks on aristocratic property led much of the nobility to flee abroad. These &quot;émigrés&quot; funded reactionary forces within France and urged foreign monarchs to back a counter-revolution.

In response, the Assembly published the August Decrees which abolished feudalism. Over 25% of French farmland was subject to feudal dues, providing the nobility with most of their income; these were now cancelled, along with church tithes. While their former tenants were supposed to pay them compensation, collecting it proved impossible, and the obligation was annulled in 1793. Other decrees included equality before the law, opening public office to all, freedom of worship, and cancellation of special privileges held by provinces and towns.

With the suspension of the 13 regional in November, the key institutional pillars of the old regime had all been abolished in less than four months. From its early stages, the Revolution therefore displayed signs of its radical nature; what remained unclear was the constitutional mechanism for turning intentions into practical applications.

=== Creating a new constitution ===

On 9 July, the National Assembly declared itself the National Constituent Assembly and appointed a committee to draft a constitution and statement of rights. Twenty drafts were submitted, which were used by a sub-committee to create a Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen, with Mirabeau being the most prominent member. The Declaration was approved by the Assembly and published on 26 August as a statement of principle.

The Assembly now concentrated on the constitution itself. Mounier and his monarchist supporters advocated a bicameral system, with an upper house appointed by the king, who would also have the right to appoint ministers and veto legislation. On 10 September, the majority of the Assembly, led by Sieyès and Talleyrand, voted in favour of a single body, and the following day approved a &quot;suspensive veto&quot; for the king, meaning Louis could delay implementation of a law, but not block it indefinitely. In October, the Assembly voted to restrict political rights, including voting rights, to &quot;active citizens&quot;, defined as French males over the age of 25 who paid direct taxes equal to three days&#x27; labour. The remainder were designated &quot;passive citizens&quot;, restricted to &quot;civil rights&quot;, a distinction opposed by a significant minority, including the Jacobin clubs. By mid-1790, the main elements of a constitutional monarchy were in place, although the constitution was not accepted by Louis until 1791.

Food shortages and the worsening economy caused frustration at the lack of progress, and led to popular unrest in Paris. This came to a head in late September 1789, when the Flanders Regiment arrived in Versailles to reinforce the royal bodyguard, and were welcomed with a formal banquet as was common practice. The radical press described this as a &#x27;gluttonous orgy&#x27;, and claimed the tricolour cockade had been abused, while the Assembly viewed their arrival as an attempt to intimidate them.

On 5 October, crowds of women assembled outside the &quot;Hôtel de Ville&quot;, agitating against high food prices and shortages. These protests quickly turned political, and after seizing weapons stored at the &quot;Hôtel de Ville,&quot; some 7,000 of them marched on Versailles, where they entered the Assembly to present their demands. They were followed to Versailles by 15,000 members of the National Guard under Lafayette, who was virtually &quot;a prisoner of his own troops&quot;.

When the National Guard arrived later that evening, Lafayette persuaded Louis the safety of his family required their relocation to Paris. Next morning, some of the protestors broke into the royal apartments, searching for Marie Antoinette, who escaped. They ransacked the palace, killing several guards. Order was eventually restored, and the royal family and Assembly left for Paris, escorted by the National Guard. Louis had announced his acceptance of the August Decrees and the Declaration, and his official title changed from &#x27;King of France&#x27; to &#x27;King of the French&#x27;.

===The Revolution and the Church ===
Historian John McManners argues &quot;in eighteenth-century France, throne and altar were commonly spoken of as in close alliance; their simultaneous collapse ... would one day provide the final proof of their interdependence.&quot; One suggestion is that after a century of persecution, some French Protestants actively supported an anti-Catholic regime, a resentment fuelled by Enlightenment thinkers such as Voltaire. Jean-Jacques Rousseau, considered a philosophical founder of the revolution, wrote it was &quot;manifestly contrary to the law of nature... that a handful of people should gorge themselves with superfluities, while the hungry multitude goes in want of necessities.&quot;

The Revolution caused a massive shift of power from the Catholic Church to the state; although the extent of religious belief has been questioned, elimination of tolerance for religious minorities meant by 1789 being French also meant being Catholic. The church was the largest individual landowner in France, controlling nearly 10% of all estates and levied tithes, effectively a 10% tax on income, collected from peasant farmers in the form of crops. In return, it provided a minimal level of social support.

The August decrees abolished tithes, and on 2 November the Assembly confiscated all church property, the value of which was used to back a new paper currency known as . In return, the state assumed responsibilities such as paying the clergy and caring for the poor, the sick and the orphaned. On 13 February 1790, religious orders and monasteries were dissolved, while monks and nuns were encouraged to return to private life.

The Civil Constitution of the Clergy of 12 July 1790 made them employees of the state, as well as establishing rates of pay and a system for electing priests and bishops. Pope Pius VI and many French Catholics objected to this since it denied the authority of the Pope over the French Church. In October, thirty bishops wrote a declaration denouncing the law, further fuelling opposition.

When clergy were required to swear loyalty to the Civil Constitution in November 1790, it split the church between the 24% who complied, and the majority who refused. This stiffened popular resistance against state interference, especially in traditionally Catholic areas such as Normandy, Brittany and the Vendée, where only a few priests took the oath and the civilian population turned against the revolution. The result was state-led persecution of &quot;Refractory clergy&quot;, many of whom were forced into exile, deported, or executed.

=== Political divisions ===
The period from October 1789 to spring 1791 is usually seen as one of relative tranquility, when some of the most important legislative reforms were enacted. However, conflict over the source of legitimate authority was more apparent in the provinces, where officers of the had been swept away, but not yet replaced by new structures. This was less obvious in Paris, since the National Guard made it the best policed city in Europe, but disorder in the provinces inevitably affected members of the Assembly.

Centrists led by Sieyès, Lafayette, Mirabeau and Bailly created a majority by forging consensus with like Mounier, and independents including Adrien Duport, Barnave and Alexandre Lameth. At one end of the political spectrum, reactionaries like Cazalès and Maury denounced the Revolution in all its forms, with radicals like Maximilien Robespierre at the other. He and Jean-Paul Marat opposed the criteria for &quot;active citizens&quot;, gaining them substantial support among the Parisian proletariat, many of whom had been disenfranchised by the measure.

On 14 July 1790, celebrations were held throughout France commemorating the fall of the Bastille, with participants swearing an oath of fidelity to &quot;the nation, the law and the king.&quot; The in Paris was attended by the royal family, with Talleyrand performing a mass. Despite this show of unity, the Assembly was increasingly divided, while external players like the Paris Commune and National Guard competed for power. One of the most significant was the Jacobin club; originally a forum for general debate, by August 1790 it had over 150 members, split into different factions.

The Assembly continued to develop new institutions; in September 1790, the regional were abolished and their legal functions replaced by a new independent judiciary, with jury trials for criminal cases. However, moderate deputies were uneasy at popular demands for universal suffrage, labour unions and cheap bread, and over the winter of 1790 and 1791, they passed a series of measures intended to disarm popular radicalism. These included exclusion of poorer citizens from the National Guard, limits on use of petitions and posters, and the June 1791 Le Chapelier Law suppressing trade guilds and any form of worker organisation.

The traditional force for preserving law and order was the army, which was increasingly divided between officers, who largely came from the nobility, and ordinary soldiers. In August 1790, the loyalist General Bouillé suppressed a serious mutiny at Nancy; although congratulated by the Assembly, he was criticised by Jacobin radicals for the severity of his actions. Growing disorder meant many professional officers either left or became émigrés, further destabilising the institution.

===Varennes and after===

Held in the Tuileries Palace under virtual house arrest, Louis XVI was urged by his brother and wife to re-assert his independence by taking refuge with Bouillé, who was based at Montmédy with 10,000 soldiers considered loyal to the Crown. The royal family left the palace in disguise on the night of 20 June 1791; late the next day, Louis was recognised as he passed through Varennes, arrested and taken back to Paris. The attempted escape had a profound impact on public opinion; since it was clear Louis had been seeking refuge in Austria, the Assembly now demanded oaths of loyalty to the regime, and began preparing for war, while fear of &#x27;spies and traitors&#x27; became pervasive.

Despite calls to replace the monarchy with a republic, Louis retained his position but was generally regarded with acute suspicion and forced to swear allegiance to the constitution. A new decree stated retracting this oath, making war upon the nation, or permitting anyone to do so in his name would be considered abdication. However, radicals led by Jacques Pierre Brissot prepared a petition demanding his deposition, and on 17 July, an immense crowd gathered in the Champ de Mars to sign. Led by Lafayette, the National Guard was ordered to &quot;preserve public order&quot; and responded to a barrage of stones by firing into the crowd, killing between 13 and 50 people.

The massacre badly damaged Lafayette&#x27;s reputation: the authorities responded by closing radical clubs and newspapers, while their leaders went into exile or hiding, including Marat. On 27 August, Emperor Leopold II and King Frederick William II of Prussia issued the Declaration of Pillnitz declaring their support for Louis and hinting at an invasion of France on his behalf. In reality, the meeting between Leopold and Frederick was primarily to discuss the Partitions of Poland; the Declaration was intended to satisfy Comte d&#x27;Artois and other French émigrés but the threat rallied popular support behind the regime.

Based on a motion proposed by Robespierre, existing deputies were barred from elections held in early September for the French Legislative Assembly. Although Robespierre himself was one of those excluded, his support in the clubs gave him a political power base not available to Lafayette and Bailly, who resigned respectively as head of the National Guard and the Paris Commune. The new laws were gathered together in the 1791 Constitution, and submitted to Louis XVI, who pledged to defend it &quot;from enemies at home and abroad&quot;. On 30 September, the Constituent Assembly was dissolved, and the Legislative Assembly convened the next day.

=== Fall of the monarchy ===
The Legislative Assembly is often dismissed by historians as an ineffective body, compromised by divisions over the role of the monarchy, an issue exacerbated when Louis attempted to prevent or reverse limitations on his powers. At the same time, restricting the vote to those who paid a minimal amount of tax disenfranchised a significant proportion of the 6 million Frenchmen over 25, while only 10% of those able to vote actually did so. Finally, poor harvests and rising food prices led to unrest among the urban class known as &quot;Sans-culottes&quot;, who saw the new regime as failing to meet their demands for bread and work.

This meant the new constitution was opposed by significant elements inside and outside the Assembly, itself split into three main groups. 264 members were affiliated with Barnave&#x27;s , constitutional monarchists who considered the Revolution had gone far enough, while another 136 were Jacobin leftists who supported a republic, led by Brissot and usually referred to as . The remaining 345 belonged to , a centrist faction who switched votes depending on the issue, but many of whom shared doubts as to whether Louis was committed to the Revolution. After he officially accepted the new Constitution, one recorded response was &quot;&quot;, or &quot;Long live the king – if he keeps his word&quot;.

Although a minority in the Assembly, control of key committees allowed the to provoke Louis into using his veto. They first managed to pass decrees confiscating émigré property and threatening them with the death penalty. This was followed by measures against non-juring priests, whose opposition to the Civil Constitution led to a state of near civil war in southern France, which Barnave tried to defuse by relaxing the more punitive provisions. On 29 November, the Assembly approved a decree giving refractory clergy eight days to comply, or face charges of &#x27;conspiracy against the nation&#x27;, an act opposed even by Robespierre. When Louis vetoed both, his opponents were able to portray him as opposed to reform in general.

Brissot accompanied this with a campaign for war against Austria and Prussia, often interpreted as a mixture of calculation and idealism. While exploiting popular anti-Austrianism, it reflected a genuine belief in exporting the values of political liberty and popular sovereignty. Simultaneously, conservatives headed by Marie Antoinette also favoured war, seeing it as a way to regain control of the military, and restore royal authority. In December 1791, Louis made a speech in the Assembly giving foreign powers a month to disband the émigrés or face war, an act greeted with enthusiasm by supporters, but suspicion from opponents.

Barnave&#x27;s inability to build a consensus in the Assembly resulted in the appointment of a new government, chiefly composed of . On 20 April 1792, the French Revolutionary Wars began when French armies attacked Austrian and Prussian forces along their borders, before suffering a series of disastrous defeats. In an effort to mobilise popular support, the government ordered non-juring priests to swear the oath or be deported, dissolved the Constitutional Guard and replaced it with 20,000 ; Louis agreed to disband the Guard, but vetoed the other two proposals, while Lafayette called on the Assembly to suppress the clubs.

Popular anger increased when details of the Brunswick Manifesto reached Paris on 1 August, threatening &#x27;unforgettable vengeance&#x27; should any oppose the Allies in seeking to restore the power of the monarchy. On the morning of 10 August, a combined force of the Paris National Guard and provincial fédérés attacked the Tuileries Palace, killing many of the Swiss Guards protecting it. Louis and his family took refuge with the Assembly and shortly after 11:00 am, the deputies present voted to &#x27;temporarily relieve the king&#x27;, effectively suspending the monarchy.

== First Republic (1792–1795) ==
=== Proclamation of the First Republic ===

In late August, elections were held for the National Convention. New restrictions on the franchise meant the number of votes cast fell to 3.3 million, versus 4 million in 1791, while intimidation was widespread. The &quot;Brissotins&quot; now split between moderate &quot;Girondins&quot; led by Brissot, and radical &quot;Montagnards&quot;, headed by Robespierre, Georges Danton and Jean-Paul Marat. While loyalties constantly shifted, voting patterns suggest roughly 160 of the 749 deputies can generally be categorised as &quot;Girondists&quot;, with another 200 &quot;Montagnards&quot;. The remainder were part of a centrist faction known as &quot;La Plaine&quot;, headed by Bertrand Barère, Pierre Joseph Cambon and Lazare Carnot.

In the September Massacres, between 1,100 and 1,600 prisoners held in Parisian jails were summarily executed, the vast majority being common criminals. A response to the capture of Longwy and Verdun by Prussia, the perpetrators were largely National Guard members and &quot;fédérés&quot; on their way to the front. While responsibility is still disputed, even moderates expressed sympathy for the action, which soon spread to the provinces. One suggestion is that the killings stemmed from concern over growing lawlessness, rather than political ideology.

On 20 September, the French defeated the Prussians at the Battle of Valmy, in what was the first major victory by the army of France during the Revolutionary Wars. Emboldened by this, on 22 September the Convention replaced the monarchy with the French First Republic (1792–1804) and introduced a new calendar, with 1792 becoming &quot;Year One&quot;. The next few months were taken up with the trial of &quot;Citoyen Louis Capet&quot;, formerly Louis XVI. While evenly divided on the question of his guilt, members of the convention were increasingly influenced by radicals based within the Jacobin clubs and Paris Commune. The Brunswick Manifesto made it easy to portray Louis as a threat to the Revolution, especially when extracts from his personal correspondence showed him conspiring with Royalist exiles.

On 17 January 1793, Louis was sentenced to death for &quot;conspiracy against public liberty and general safety&quot;. 361 deputies were in favour, 288 against, while another 72 voted to execute him, subject to delaying conditions. The sentence was carried out on 21 January on the &quot;Place de la Révolution&quot;, now the Place de la Concorde. Conservatives across Europe now called for the destruction of revolutionary France, and in February the Convention responded by declaring war on Britain and the Dutch Republic. Together with Austria and Prussia, these two countries were later joined by Spain, Portugal, Naples, and Tuscany in the War of the First Coalition (1792–1797).

=== Political crisis and fall of the Girondins ===

The Girondins hoped war would unite the people behind the government and provide an excuse for rising prices and food shortages, but found themselves the target of popular anger. Many left for the provinces. The first conscription measure or &quot;levée en masse&quot; on 24 February sparked riots in Paris and other regional centres. Already unsettled by changes imposed on the church, in March the traditionally conservative and royalist Vendée rose in revolt. On 18th, Dumouriez was defeated at Neerwinden and defected to the Austrians. Uprisings followed in Bordeaux, Lyon, Toulon, Marseille and Caen. The Republic seemed on the verge of collapse.

The crisis led to the creation on 6 April 1793 of the Committee of Public Safety, an executive committee accountable to the convention. The Girondins made a fatal political error by indicting Marat before the Revolutionary Tribunal for allegedly directing the September massacres; he was quickly acquitted, further isolating the Girondins from the &quot;sans-culottes&quot;. When Jacques Hébert called for a popular revolt against the &quot;henchmen of Louis Capet&quot; on 24 May, he was arrested by the Commission of Twelve, a Girondin-dominated tribunal set up to expose &#x27;plots&#x27;. In response to protests by the Commune, the Commission warned &quot;if by your incessant rebellions something befalls the representatives of the nation, Paris will be obliterated&quot;.

Growing discontent allowed the clubs to mobilise against the Girondins. Backed by the Commune and elements of the National Guard, on 31 May they attempted to seize power in a coup. Although the coup failed, on 2 June the convention was surrounded by a crowd of up to 80,000, demanding cheap bread, unemployment pay and political reforms, including restriction of the vote to the &quot;sans-culottes&quot;, and the right to remove deputies at will. Ten members of the commission and another twenty-nine members of the Girondin faction were arrested, and on 10 June, the Montagnards took over the Committee of Public Safety.

Meanwhile, a committee led by Robespierre&#x27;s close ally Saint-Just was tasked with preparing a new Constitution. Completed in only eight days, it was ratified by the convention on 24 June, and contained radical reforms, including universal male suffrage. However, normal legal processes were suspended following the assassination of Marat on 13 July by the Girondist Charlotte Corday, which the Committee of Public Safety used as an excuse to take control. The 1793 Constitution was suspended indefinitely in October.

Key areas of focus for the new government included creating a new state ideology, economic regulation and winning the war. They were helped by divisions among their internal opponents; while areas like the Vendée and Brittany wanted to restore the monarchy, most supported the Republic but opposed the regime in Paris. On 17 August, the Convention voted a second &quot;levée en masse&quot;; despite initial problems in equipping and supplying such large numbers, by mid-October Republican forces had re-taken Lyon, Marseille and Bordeaux, while defeating Coalition armies at Hondschoote and Wattignies. The new class of military leaders included a young colonel named Napoleon Bonaparte, who was appointed commander of artillery at the siege of Toulon thanks to his friendship with Augustin Robespierre. His success in that role resulted in promotion to the Army of Italy in April 1794, and the beginning of his rise to military and political power.

=== Reign of Terror ===
Although intended to bolster revolutionary fervour, the Reign of Terror rapidly degenerated into the settlement of personal grievances. At the end of July, the Convention set price controls on a wide range of goods, with the death penalty for hoarders. On 9 September, &#x27;revolutionary groups&#x27; were established to enforce these controls, while the Law of Suspects on 17th approved the arrest of suspected &quot;enemies of freedom&quot;. This initiated what has become known as the &quot;Terror&quot;. From September 1793 to July 1794, around 300,000 were arrested, with some 16,600 people executed on charges of counter-revolutionary activity, while another 40,000 may have been summarily executed, or died awaiting trial.

Price controls made farmers reluctant to sell their produce in Parisian markets, and by early September, the city was suffering acute food shortages. At the same time, the war increased public debt, which the Assembly tried to finance by selling confiscated property. However, few would buy assets that might be repossessed by their former owners, a concern that could only be achieved by military victory. This meant the financial position worsened as threats to the Republic increased, while printing &quot;assignats&quot; to deal with the deficit further increased inflation.

On 10 October, the Convention recognised the Committee of Public Safety as the supreme Revolutionary Government, and suspended the Constitution until peace was achieved. In mid-October, Marie Antoinette was convicted of a long list of crimes, and guillotined; two weeks later, the Girondist leaders arrested in June were also executed, along with Philippe Égalité. The &quot;Terror&quot; was not confined to Paris, with over 2,000 killed in Lyons after its recapture.

At Cholet on 17 October, the Republican army won a decisive victory over the Vendée rebels, and the survivors escaped into Brittany. Another defeat at Le Mans on 23 December ended the rebellion as a major threat, although the insurgency continued until 1796. The extent of the repression that followed has been debated by French historians since the mid-19th century. Between November 1793 to February 1794, over 4,000 were drowned in the Loire at Nantes under the supervision of Jean-Baptiste Carrier. Historian Reynald Secher claims that as many as 117,000 died between 1793 and 1796. Although those numbers have been challenged, François Furet concluded it &quot;not only revealed massacre and destruction on an unprecedented scale, but a zeal so violent that it has bestowed as its legacy much of the region&#x27;s identity.&quot; 

At the height of the Terror, not even its supporters were immune from suspicion, leading to divisions within the &quot;Montagnard&quot; faction between radical &quot;Hébertists&quot; and moderates led by Danton. Robespierre saw their dispute as de-stabilising the regime, and, as a deist, objected to the anti-religious policies advocated by the atheist Hébert, who was arrested and executed on 24 March with 19 of his colleagues, including Carrier. To retain the loyalty of the remaining Hébertists, Danton was arrested and executed on 5 April with Camille Desmoulins, after a show trial that arguably did more damage to Robespierre than any other act in this period.

The Law of 22 Prairial (10 June) denied &quot;enemies of the people&quot; the right to defend themselves. Those arrested in the provinces were now sent to Paris for judgement; from March to July, executions in Paris increased from five to twenty-six a day. Many Jacobins ridiculed the festival of the Cult of the Supreme Being on 8 June, a lavish and expensive ceremony led by Robespierre, who was also accused of circulating claims he was a second Messiah. Relaxation of price controls and rampant inflation caused increasing unrest among the &quot;sans-culottes&quot;, but the improved military situation reduced fears the Republic was in danger. Fearing their own survival depended on Robespierre&#x27;s removal, on 29 June three members of the Committee of Public Safety openly accused him of being a dictator.

Robespierre responded by refusing to attend Committee meetings, allowing his opponents to build a coalition against him. In a speech made to the convention on 26 July, he claimed certain members were conspiring against the Republic, an almost certain death sentence if confirmed. When he refused to provide names, the session broke up in confusion. That evening he repeated these claims at the Jacobins club, where it was greeted with demands for execution of the &#x27;traitors&#x27;. Fearing the consequences if they did not act first, his opponents attacked Robespierre and his allies in the Convention next day. When Robespierre attempted to speak, his voice failed, one deputy crying &quot;The blood of Danton chokes him!&quot;

After the Convention authorised his arrest, he and his supporters took refuge in the &quot;Hotel de Ville&quot;, which was defended by elements of the National Guard. Other units loyal to the Convention stormed the building that evening and detained Robespierre, who severely injured himself attempting suicide. He was executed on 28 July with 19 colleagues, including Saint-Just and Georges Couthon, followed by 83 members of the Commune. The Law of 22 Prairial was repealed, any surviving Girondists reinstated as deputies, and the Jacobin Club was closed and banned.

There are various interpretations of the Terror and the violence with which it was conducted. François Furet argues that the intense ideological commitment of the revolutionaries and their utopian goals required the extermination of any opposition. A middle position suggests violence was not inevitable but the product of a series of complex internal events, exacerbated by war.

=== Thermidorian reaction ===
The bloodshed did not end with the death of Robespierre; Southern France saw a wave of revenge killings, directed against alleged Jacobins, Republican officials and Protestants. Although the victors of Thermidor asserted control over the Commune by executing their leaders, some of those closely involved in the &quot;Terror&quot; retained their positions. They included Paul Barras, later chief executive of the French Directory, and Joseph Fouché, director of the killings in Lyon who served as Minister of Police under the Directory, the Consulate and Empire. Despite his links to Augustin Robespierre, military success in Italy meant Napoleon Bonaparte escaped censure.

The December 1794 Treaty of La Jaunaye ended the Chouannerie in western France by allowing freedom of worship and the return of non-juring priests. This was accompanied by military success; in January 1795, French forces helped the Dutch Patriots set up the Batavian Republic, securing their northern border. The war with Prussia was concluded in favour of France by the Peace of Basel in April 1795, while Spain made peace shortly thereafter.

However, the Republic still faced a crisis at home. Food shortages arising from a poor 1794 harvest were exacerbated in Northern France by the need to supply the army in Flanders, while the winter was the worst since 1709. By April 1795, people were starving and the &quot;assignat&quot; was worth only 8% of its face value; in desperation, the Parisian poor rose again. They were quickly dispersed and the main impact was another round of arrests, while Jacobin prisoners in Lyon were summarily executed.

A committee drafted a new constitution, approved by plebiscite on 23 September 1795 and put into place on 27th. Largely designed by Pierre Daunou and Boissy d&#x27;Anglas, it established a bicameral legislature, intended to slow down the legislative process, ending the wild swings of policy under the previous unicameral systems. The Council of 500 was responsible for drafting legislation, which was reviewed and approved by the Council of Ancients, an upper house containing 250 men over the age of 40. Executive power was in the hands of five Directors, selected by the Council of Ancients from a list provided by the lower house, with a five-year mandate.

Deputies were chosen by indirect election, a total franchise of around 5 million voting in primaries for 30,000 electors, or 0.6% of the population. Since they were also subject to stringent property qualification, it guaranteed the return of conservative or moderate deputies. In addition, rather than dissolving the previous legislature as in 1791 and 1792, the so-called &#x27;law of two-thirds&#x27; ruled only 150 new deputies would be elected each year. The remaining 600 &quot;Conventionnels&quot; kept their seats, a move intended to ensure stability.

== The Directory (1795–1799) ==

Jacobin sympathisers viewed the Directory as a betrayal of the Revolution, while Bonapartists later justified Napoleon&#x27;s coup by emphasising its corruption. The regime also faced internal unrest, a weak economy, and an expensive war, while the Council of 500 could block legislation at will. Since the Directors had no power to call new elections, the only way to break a deadlock was rule by decree or use force. As a result, the Directory was characterised by &quot;chronic violence, ambivalent forms of justice, and repeated recourse to heavy-handed repression.&quot;

Retention of the ensured the Thermidorians held a majority in the legislature and three of the five Directors, but they were increasingly challenged by the right. On 5 October, Convention troops led by Napoleon put down a royalist rising in Paris; when the first elections were held two weeks later, over 100 of the 150 new deputies were royalists of some sort. The power of the Parisian had been broken by the suppression of the May 1795 revolt; relieved of pressure from below, the Jacobin clubs became supporters of the Directory, largely to prevent restoration of the monarchy.

Removal of price controls and a collapse in the value of the led to inflation and soaring food prices. By April 1796, over 500,000 Parisians were unemployed, resulting in the May insurrection known as the Conspiracy of the Equals. Led by the revolutionary François-Noël Babeuf, their demands included immediate implementation of the 1793 Constitution, and a more equitable distribution of wealth. Despite support from sections of the military, the revolt was easily crushed, while Babeuf and other leaders were executed. Nevertheless, by 1799 the economy had been stabilised, and important reforms made allowing steady expansion of French industry. Many of these remained in place for much of the 19th century.

Prior to 1797, three of the five Directors were firmly Republican; Barras, Révellière-Lépeaux and Jean-François Rewbell, as were around 40% of the legislature. The same percentage were broadly centrist or unaffiliated, along with two Directors, Étienne-François Letourneur and Lazare Carnot. Although only 20% were committed Royalists, many centrists supported the restoration of the exiled Louis XVIII of France in the belief this would bring peace. The elections of May 1797 resulted in significant gains for the right, with Royalists Jean-Charles Pichegru elected President of the Council of 500, and Barthélemy appointed a Director.

With Royalists apparently on the verge of power, Republicans attempted a pre-emptive coup on 4 September. Using troops from Napoleon&#x27;s Army of Italy under Pierre Augereau, the Council of 500 was forced to approve the arrest of Barthélemy, Pichegru and Carnot. The elections were annulled, sixty-three leading Royalists deported to French Guiana, and new laws passed against émigrés, Royalists and ultra-Jacobins. The removal of his conservative opponents opened the way for direct conflict between Barras, and those on the left.

Fighting continued despite general war weariness, and the 1798 elections saw a resurgence in Jacobin strength. Napoleon&#x27;s invasion of Egypt in July 1798 confirmed European fears of French expansionism, and the War of the Second Coalition began in November. Without a majority in the legislature, the Directors relied on the army to enforce decrees, and extract revenue from conquered territories. Generals like Napoleon and Joubert were now central to the political process, while both the army and Directory became notorious for their corruption.

It has been suggested the Directory collapsed because by 1799, many &#x27;preferred the uncertainties of authoritarian rule to the continuing ambiguities of parliamentary politics&#x27;. The architect of its end was Sieyès, who when asked what he had done during the Terror allegedly answered &quot;I survived&quot;. Nominated to the Directory, his first action was to remove Barras, with the help of allies including Talleyrand, and Napoleon&#x27;s brother Lucien, President of the Council of 500. On 9 November 1799, the Coup of 18 Brumaire replaced the five Directors with the French Consulate, which consisted of three members, Napoleon, Sieyès, and Roger Ducos. Most historians consider this the end point of the French Revolution.

==Role of ideology ==

The role of ideology in the Revolution is controversial with Jonathan Israel stating that the &quot;radical Enlightenment&quot; was the primary driving force of the Revolution. Cobban, however, argues &quot;[t]he actions of the revolutionaries were most often prescribed by the need to find practical solutions to immediate problems, using the resources at hand, not by pre-conceived theories.&quot;

The identification of ideologies is complicated by the profusion of revolutionary clubs, factions and publications, absence of formal political parties, and individual flexibility in the face of changing circumstances. In addition, although the Declaration of the Rights of Man was a fundamental document for all revolutionary factions, its interpretation varied widely.

While all revolutionaries professed their devotion to liberty in principle, &quot;it appeared to mean whatever those in power wanted.&quot; For example, the liberties specified in the Rights of Man were limited by law when they might &quot;cause harm to others, or be abused&quot;. Prior to 1792, Jacobins and others frequently opposed press restrictions on the grounds these violated a basic right. However, the radical National Convention passed laws in September 1793 and July 1794 imposing the death penalty for offences such as &quot;disparaging the National Convention&quot;, and &quot;misleading public opinion.&quot;

While revolutionaries also endorsed the principle of equality, few advocated equality of wealth since property was also viewed as a right. The National Assembly opposed equal political rights for women, while the abolition of slavery in the colonies was delayed until February 1794 because it conflicted with the property rights of slave owners, and many feared it would disrupt trade. Political equality for male citizens was another divisive issue, with the 1791 constitution limiting the right to vote and stand for office to males over 25 who met a property qualification, so-called &quot;active citizens&quot;. This restriction was opposed by many activists, including Robespierre, the Jacobins, and Cordeliers.

The principle that sovereignty resided in the nation was a key concept of the Revolution. However, Israel argues this obscures ideological differences over whether the will of the nation was best expressed through representative assemblies and constitutions, or direct action by revolutionary crowds, and popular assemblies such as the sections of the Paris commune. Many considered constitutional monarchy as incompatible with the principle of popular sovereignty, but prior to 1792, there was a strong bloc with an ideological commitment to such a system, based on the writings of Hobbes, Locke, Montesquieu and Voltaire.

Israel argues the nationalisation of church property and the establishment of the Constitutional Church reflected an ideological commitment to secularism, and a determination to undermine a bastion of old regime privilege. While Cobban agrees the Constitutional Church was motivated by ideology, he sees its origins in the anti-clericalism of Voltaire and other Enlightenment figures.

Jacobins were hostile to formal political parties and factions which they saw as a threat to national unity and the general will, with &quot;political virtue&quot; and &quot;love of country&quot; key elements of their ideology. They viewed the ideal revolutionary as selfless, sincere, free of political ambition, and devoted to the nation. The disputes leading to the departure first of the &quot;Feuillants&quot;, then later the &quot;Girondists&quot;, were conducted in terms of the relative political virtue and patriotism of the disputants. In December 1793, all members of the Jacobin clubs were subject to a &quot;purifying scrutiny&quot;, to determine whether they were &quot;men of virtue&quot;.

== French Revolutionary Wars ==


The Revolution initiated a series of conflicts that began in 1792 and ended only with Napoleon&#x27;s defeat at Waterloo in 1815. In its early stages, this seemed unlikely; the 1791 Constitution specifically disavowed &quot;war for the purpose of conquest&quot;, and although traditional tensions between France and Austria re-emerged in the 1780s, Emperor Joseph II cautiously welcomed the reforms. Austria was at war with the Ottomans, as were the Russians, while both were negotiating with Prussia over partitioning Poland. Most importantly, Britain preferred peace, and as Emperor Leopold II stated after the Declaration of Pillnitz, &quot;without England, there is no case&quot;.

In late 1791, factions within the Assembly came to see war as a way to unite the country and secure the Revolution by eliminating hostile forces on its borders and establishing its &quot;natural frontiers&quot;. France declared war on Austria in April 1792 and issued the first conscription orders, with recruits serving for twelve months. By the time peace finally came in 1815, the conflict had involved every major European power as well as the United States, redrawn the map of Europe and expanded into the Americas, the Middle East, and the Indian Ocean.

From 1701 to 1801, the population of Europe grew from 118 to 187 million; combined with new mass production techniques, this allowed belligerents to support large armies, requiring the mobilisation of national resources. It was a different kind of war, fought by nations rather than kings, intended to destroy their opponents&#x27; ability to resist, but also to implement deep-ranging social change. While all wars are political to some degree, this period was remarkable for the emphasis placed on reshaping boundaries and the creation of entirely new European states.

In April 1792, French armies invaded the Austrian Netherlands but suffered a series of setbacks before victory over an Austrian-Prussian army at Valmy in September. After defeating a second Austrian army at Jemappes on 6 November, they occupied the Netherlands, areas of the Rhineland, Nice and Savoy. Emboldened by this success, in February 1793 France declared war on the Dutch Republic, Spain and Britain, beginning the War of the First Coalition. However, the expiration of the 12-month term for the 1792 recruits forced the French to relinquish their conquests. In August, new conscription measures were passed and by May 1794 the French army had between 750,000 and 800,000 men. Despite high rates of desertion, this was large enough to manage multiple internal and external threats; for comparison, the combined Prussian-Austrian army was less than 90,000.

By February 1795, France had annexed the Austrian Netherlands, established their frontier on the left bank of the Rhine and replaced the Dutch Republic with the Batavian Republic, a satellite state. These victories led to the collapse of the anti-French coalition; Prussia made peace in April 1795, followed soon after by Spain, leaving Britain and Austria as the only major powers still in the war. In October 1797, a series of defeats by Bonaparte in Italy led Austria to agree to the Treaty of Campo Formio, in which they formally ceded the Netherlands and recognised the Cisalpine Republic.

Fighting continued for two reasons; first, French state finances had come to rely on indemnities levied on their defeated opponents. Second, armies were primarily loyal to their generals, for whom the wealth achieved by victory and the status it conferred became objectives in themselves. Leading soldiers like Hoche, Pichegru and Carnot wielded significant political influence and often set policy; Campo Formio was approved by Bonaparte, not the Directory, which strongly objected to terms it considered too lenient.

Despite these concerns, the Directory never developed a realistic peace programme, fearing the destabilising effects of peace and the consequent demobilisation of hundreds of thousands of young men. As long as the generals and their armies stayed away from Paris, they were happy to allow them to continue fighting, a key factor behind sanctioning Bonaparte&#x27;s invasion of Egypt. This resulted in aggressive and opportunistic policies, leading to the War of the Second Coalition in November 1798.

==Slavery and the colonies==
In 1789, the most populous French colonies were Saint-Domingue (today Haiti), Martinique, Guadeloupe, the Île Bourbon (Réunion) and the Île de la France. These colonies produced commodities such as sugar, coffee and cotton for exclusive export to France. There were about 700,000 slaves in the colonies, of which about 500,000 were in Saint-Domingue. Colonial products accounted for about a third of France&#x27;s exports.

In February 1788, the &quot;Société des Amis des Noirs&quot; (Society of the Friends of Blacks) was formed in France with the aim of abolishing slavery in the empire. In August 1789, colonial slave owners and merchants formed the rival &quot;Club de Massiac&quot; to represent their interests. When the Constituent Assembly adopted the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen in August 1789, delegates representing the colonial landowners successfully argued that the principles should not apply in the colonies as they would bring economic ruin and disrupt trade. Colonial landowners also gained control of the Colonial Committee of the Assembly from where they exerted a powerful influence against abolition.

People of colour also faced social and legal discrimination in mainland France and its colonies, including a bar on their access to professions such as law, medicine and pharmacy. In 1789–90, a delegation of free coloureds, led by Vincent Ogé and Julien Raimond, unsuccessfully lobbied the Assembly to end discrimination against free coloureds. Ogé left for Saint-Domingue where an uprising against white landowners broke out in October 1790. The revolt failed and Ogé was killed.

In May 1791, the National Assembly granted full political rights to coloureds born of two free parents, but left the rights of freed slaves to be determined by the colonial assemblies. The assemblies refused to implement the decree and fighting broke out between the coloured population of Saint-Domingue and white colonists, each side recruiting slaves to their forces. A major slave revolt followed in August.

In March 1792, the Legislative Assembly responded to the revolt by granting citizenship to all free coloureds and sending two commissioners, Sonthonax and Polvérel, and 6,000 troops to Saint-Domingue to enforce the decree. On arrival in September, the commissioners announced that slavery would remain in force. Over 72,000 slaves were still in revolt, mostly in the north.

Brissot and his supporters envisaged an eventual abolition of slavery but their immediate concern was securing trade and the support of merchants for the revolutionary wars. After Brissot&#x27;s fall, the new constitution of June 1793 included a new Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen but excluded the colonies from its provisions. In any event, the new constitution was suspended until France was at peace.

In early 1793, royalist planters from Guadeloupe and Saint-Domingue formed an alliance with Britain. The Spanish supported insurgent slaves, led by Jean-François Papillon and Georges Biassou, in the north of Saint-Domingue. White planters loyal to the republic sent representatives to Paris to convince the Jacobin controlled Convention that those calling for the abolition of slavery were British agents and supporters of Brissot, hoping to disrupt trade.

In June, the commissioners in Saint-Domingue freed 10,000 slaves fighting for the republic. As the royalists and their British and Spanish supporters were also offering freedom for slaves willing to fight for their cause, the commissioners outbid them by abolishing slavery in the north in August, and throughout the colony in October. Representatives were sent to Paris to gain the approval of the convention for the decision.

The Convention voted for the abolition of slavery in the colonies on 4 February 1794 and decreed that all residents of the colonies had the full rights of French citizens irrespective of colour. An army of 1,000 sans-culottes led by Victor Hugues was sent to Guadeloupe to expel the British and enforce the decree. The army recruited former slaves and eventually numbered 11,000, capturing Guadeloupe and other smaller islands. Abolition was also proclaimed on Guyane. Martinique remained under British occupation, while colonial landowners in Réunion and the Îles Mascareignes repulsed the republicans. Black armies drove the Spanish out of Saint-Domingue in 1795, and the last of the British withdrew in 1798.

In republican controlled areas from 1793 to 1799, freed slaves were required to work on their former plantations or for their former masters if they were in domestic service. They were paid a wage and gained property rights. Black and coloured generals were effectively in control of large areas of Guadeloupe and Saint-Domingue, including Toussaint Louverture in the north of Saint-Domingue, and André Rigaud in the south. Historian Fréderic Régent states that the restrictions on the freedom of employment and movement of former slaves meant that, &quot;only whites, persons of color already freed before the decree, and former slaves in the army or on warships really benefited from general emancipation.&quot;

== Media and symbolism ==
=== Newspapers ===
Newspapers and pamphlets played a central role in stimulating and defining the Revolution. Prior to 1789, there have been a small number of heavily censored newspapers that needed a royal licence to operate, but the Estates-General created an enormous demand for news, and over 130 newspapers appeared by the end of the year. Among the most significant were Marat&#x27;s &quot;L&#x27;Ami du peuple&quot; and Elysée Loustallot&#x27;s &quot;. Over the next decade, more than 2,000 newspapers were founded, 500 in Paris alone. Most lasted only a matter of weeks but they became the main communication medium, combined with the very large pamphlet literature.

Newspapers were read aloud in taverns and clubs, and circulated hand to hand. There was a widespread assumption that writing was a vocation, not a business, and the role of the press was the advancement of civic republicanism. By 1793 the radicals were most active but initially the royalists flooded the country with their publication the &quot; (Friends of the King) until they were suppressed.

===Revolutionary symbols===
To illustrate the differences between the new Republic and the old regime, the leaders needed to implement a new set of symbols to be celebrated instead of the old religious and monarchical symbols. To this end, symbols were borrowed from historic cultures and redefined, while those of the old regime were either destroyed or reattributed acceptable characteristics. These revised symbols were used to instil in the public a new sense of tradition and reverence for the Enlightenment and the Republic.

====La Marseillaise====

&quot; () became the national anthem of France. The song was written and composed in 1792 by Claude Joseph Rouget de Lisle, and was originally titled &quot;. The French National Convention adopted it as the First Republic&#x27;s anthem in 1795. It acquired its nickname after being sung in Paris by volunteers from Marseille marching on the capital.

The song is the first example of the &quot;European march&quot; anthemic style, while the evocative melody and lyrics led to its widespread use as a song of revolution and incorporation into many pieces of classical and popular music. De Lisle was instructed to &#x27;produce a hymn which conveys to the soul of the people the enthusiasm which it (the music) suggests.&#x27;
====Guillotine====
The guillotine remains &quot;the principal symbol of the Terror in the French Revolution.&quot; Invented by a physician during the Revolution as a quicker, more efficient and more distinctive form of execution, the guillotine became a part of popular culture and historic memory. It was celebrated on the left as the people&#x27;s avenger, for example in the revolutionary song &quot;La guillotine permanente&quot;, and cursed as the symbol of the Terror by the right.

Its operation became a popular entertainment that attracted great crowds of spectators. Vendors sold programmes listing the names of those scheduled to die. Many people came day after day and vied for the best locations from which to observe the proceedings; knitting women (tricoteuses) formed a cadre of hardcore regulars, inciting the crowd. Parents often brought their children. By the end of the Terror, the crowds had thinned drastically. Repetition had staled even this most grisly of entertainments, and audiences grew bored.

====Cockade, &quot;tricolore&quot;, and liberty cap====
Cockades were widely worn by revolutionaries beginning in 1789. They now pinned the blue-and-red cockade of Paris onto the white cockade of the &quot;Ancien Régime&quot;. Camille Desmoulins asked his followers to wear green cockades on 12 July 1789. The Paris militia, formed on 13 July, adopted a blue and red cockade. Blue and red are the traditional colours of Paris, and they are used on the city&#x27;s coat of arms. Cockades with various colour schemes were used during the storming of the Bastille on 14 July.

The Liberty cap, also known as the Phrygian cap, or pileus, is a brimless, felt cap that is conical in shape with the tip pulled forward. It reflects Roman republicanism and liberty, alluding to the Roman ritual of manumission, in which a freed slave receives the bonnet as a symbol of his newfound liberty.

== Role of women ==

Deprived of political rights by the &quot;Ancien Régime&quot;, the Revolution initially allowed women to participate, although only to a limited degree. Activists included Girondists like Olympe de Gouges, author of the Declaration of the Rights of Woman and of the Female Citizen, and Charlotte Corday, killer of Marat. Others like Théroigne de Méricourt, Pauline Léon and the Society of Revolutionary Republican Women supported the Jacobins, staged demonstrations in the National Assembly and took part in the October 1789 March to Versailles. Despite this, the 1791 and 1793 constitutions denied them political rights and democratic citizenship.

In 1793, the Society of Revolutionary Republican Women campaigned for strict price controls on bread, and a law that would compel all women to wear the tricolour cockade. Although both demands were successful, in October the male-dominated Jacobins who then controlled the government denounced the Society as dangerous rabble-rousers and made all women&#x27;s clubs and associations illegal. Organised women were permanently shut out of the French Revolution after 30 October 1793.

At the same time, especially in the provinces, women played a prominent role in resisting social changes introduced by the Revolution. This was particularly so in terms of the reduced role of the Catholic Church; for those living in rural areas, closing of the churches meant a loss of normality. This sparked a counter-revolutionary movement led by women; while supporting other political and social changes, they opposed the dissolution of the Catholic Church and revolutionary cults like the Cult of the Supreme Being. Olwen Hufton argues some wanted to protect the Church from heretical changes enforced by revolutionaries, viewing themselves as &quot;defenders of faith&quot;.

=== Prominent women ===

Olympe de Gouges was an author whose publications emphasised that while women and men were different, this should not prevent equality under the law. In her Declaration of the Rights of Woman and of the Female Citizen she insisted women deserved rights, especially in areas concerning them directly, such as divorce and recognition of illegitimate children. Along with other Girondists, she was executed in November 1793 during the Terror.

Madame Roland, also known as Manon or Marie Roland, was another important female activist whose political focus was not specifically women but other aspects of the government. A Girondist, her personal letters to leaders of the Revolution influenced policy; in addition, she often hosted political gatherings of the Brissotins, a political group which allowed women to join. She too was executed in November 1793.

== Economic policies ==
The Revolution abolished many economic constraints imposed by the &quot;Ancien Régime&quot;, including church tithes and feudal dues although tenants often paid higher rents and taxes. All church lands were nationalised, along with those owned by Royalist exiles, which were used to back paper currency known as assignats, and the feudal guild system eliminated. It also abolished the highly inefficient system of tax farming, whereby private individuals would collect taxes for a hefty fee. The government seized the foundations that had been set up (starting in the 13th century) to provide an annual stream of revenue for hospitals, poor relief, and education. The state sold the lands but typically local authorities did not replace the funding and so most of the nation&#x27;s charitable and school systems were massively disrupted.

Between 1790 and 1796, industrial and agricultural output dropped, foreign trade plunged, and prices soared, forcing the government to finance expenditure by issuing ever increasing quantities &quot;assignats&quot;. When this resulted in escalating inflation, the response was to impose price controls and persecute private speculators and traders, creating a black market. Between 1789 and 1793, the annual deficit increased from 10% to 64% of gross national product, while annual inflation reached 3,500% after a poor harvest in 1794 and the removal of price controls. The assignats were withdrawn in 1796 but inflation continued until the introduction of the gold-based &quot;Franc germinal&quot; in 1803.

== Impact ==
The French Revolution had a major impact on western history, by ending feudalism in France and creating a path for advances in individual freedoms throughout Europe. The revolution represented the most significant challenge to political absolutism up to that point in history and spread democratic ideals throughout Europe and ultimately the world. Its impact on French nationalism was profound, while also stimulating nationalist movements throughout Europe. Some modern historians argue the concept of the nation state was a direct consequence of the revolution. As such, the revolution is often seen as marking the start of modernity and the modern period.

=== France ===
The long-term impact on France was profound, shaping politics, society, religion and ideas, and polarising politics for more than a century. Historian François Aulard wrote:&quot;From the social point of view, the Revolution consisted in the suppression of what was called the feudal system, in the emancipation of the individual, in greater division of landed property, the abolition of the privileges of noble birth, the establishment of equality, the simplification of life... The French Revolution differed from other revolutions in being not merely national, for it aimed at benefiting all humanity.&quot;The revolution permanently crippled the power of the aristocracy and drained the wealth of the Church, although the two institutions survived. Hanson suggests the French underwent a fundamental transformation in self-identity, evidenced by the elimination of privileges and their replacement by intrinsic human rights. After the collapse of the First French Empire in 1815, the French public lost many of the rights and privileges earned since the revolution, but remembered the participatory politics that characterised the period. According to Paul Hanson, &quot;Revolution became a tradition, and republicanism an enduring option.&quot;

The Revolution meant an end to arbitrary royal rule and held out the promise of rule by law under a constitutional order. Napoleon as emperor set up a constitutional system and the restored Bourbons were forced to retain one. After the abdication of Napoleon III in 1871, the French Third Republic was launched with a deep commitment to upholding the ideals of the Revolution. The Vichy regime (1940–1944), tried to undo the revolutionary heritage, but retained the republic. However, there were no efforts by the Bourbons, Vichy or any other government to restore the privileges that had been stripped away from the nobility in 1789. France permanently became a society of equals under the law.

Agriculture was transformed by the Revolution. With the breakup of large estates controlled by the Church and the nobility and worked by hired hands, rural France became more a land of small independent farms. Harvest taxes were ended, such as the tithe and seigneurial dues. Primogeniture was ended both for nobles and peasants, thereby weakening the family patriarch, and led to a fall in the birth rate since all children had a share in the family property. Cobban argues the Revolution bequeathed to the nation &quot;a ruling class of landowners.&quot;

Economic historians are divided on the economic impact of the Revolution. One suggestion is the resulting fragmentation of agricultural holdings had a significant negative impact in the early years of 19th century, then became positive in the second half of the century because it facilitated the rise in human capital investments. Others argue the redistribution of land had an immediate positive impact on agricultural productivity, before the scale of these gains gradually declined over the course of the 19th century.

In the cities, entrepreneurship on a small scale flourished, as restrictive monopolies, privileges, barriers, rules, taxes and guilds gave way. However, the British blockade virtually ended overseas and colonial trade, hurting the cities and their supply chains. Overall, the Revolution did not greatly change the French business system, and probably helped freeze in place the horizons of the small business owner. The typical businessman owned a small store, mill or shop, with family help and a few paid employees; large-scale industry was less common than in other industrialising nations.

=== Europe outside France ===
Historians often see the impact of the Revolution as through the institutions and ideas exported by Napoleon. Economic historians Dan Bogart, Mauricio Drelichman, Oscar Gelderblom, and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal describe Napoleon&#x27;s codified law as the French Revolution&#x27;s &quot;most significant export.&quot; According to Daron Acemoglu, Davide Cantoni, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson the French Revolution had long-term effects in Europe. They suggest that &quot;areas that were occupied by the French and that underwent radical institutional reform experienced more rapid urbanization and economic growth, especially after 1850. There is no evidence of a negative effect of French invasion.&quot;

The Revolution sparked intense debate in Britain. The Revolution Controversy was a &quot;pamphlet war&quot; set off by the publication of &quot;A Discourse on the Love of Our Country&quot;, a speech given by Richard Price to the Revolution Society on 4 November 1789, supporting the French Revolution. Edmund Burke responded in November 1790 with his own pamphlet, &quot;Reflections on the Revolution in France&quot;, attacking the French Revolution as a threat to the aristocracy of all countries. William Coxe opposed Price&#x27;s premise that one&#x27;s country is principles and people, not the State itself.

Conversely, two seminal political pieces of political history were written in Price&#x27;s favour, supporting the general right of the French people to replace their State. One of the first of these &quot;pamphlets&quot; into print was &quot;A Vindication of the Rights of Men&quot; by Mary Wollstonecraft . Wollstonecraft&#x27;s title was echoed by Thomas Paine&#x27;s &quot;Rights of Man&quot;, published a few months later. In 1792 Christopher Wyvill published &quot;Defence of Dr. Price and the Reformers of England&quot;, a plea for reform and moderation. This exchange of ideas has been described as &quot;one of the great political debates in British history&quot;.

In Ireland, the effect was to transform what had been an attempt by Protestant settlers to gain some autonomy into a mass movement led by the Society of United Irishmen involving Catholics and Protestants. It stimulated the demand for further reform throughout Ireland, especially in Ulster. The upshot was a revolt in 1798, led by Wolfe Tone, that was crushed by Britain.

German reaction to the Revolution swung from favourable to antagonistic. At first it brought liberal and democratic ideas, the end of guilds, serfdom and the Jewish ghetto. It brought economic freedoms and agrarian and legal reform. Above all the antagonism helped stimulate and shape German nationalism.

France invaded Switzerland and turned it into the &quot;Helvetic Republic&quot; (1798–1803), a French puppet state. French interference with localism and traditions was deeply resented in Switzerland, although some reforms took hold and survived in the later period of restoration.

During the Revolutionary Wars, the French invaded and occupied the region now known as Belgium between 1794 and 1814. The new government enforced reforms, incorporating the region into France. Resistance was strong in every sector, as Belgian nationalism emerged to oppose French rule. The French legal system, however, was adopted, with its equal legal rights, and abolition of class distinctions.

The Kingdom of Denmark adopted liberalising reforms in line with those of the French Revolution. Reform was gradual and the regime itself carried out agrarian reforms that had the effect of weakening absolutism by creating a class of independent peasant freeholders. Much of the initiative came from well-organised liberals who directed political change in the first half of the 19th century.

The Constitution of Norway of 1814 was inspired by the French Revolution, and was considered to be one of the most liberal and democratic constitutions at the time.

=== North America ===
Initially, most people in the Province of Quebec were favourable toward the revolutionaries&#x27; aims. The Revolution took place against the background of an ongoing campaign for constitutional reform in the colony by Loyalist emigrants from the United States. Public opinion began to shift against the Revolution after the Flight to Varennes and further soured after the September Massacres and the subsequent execution of Louis XVI. French migration to the Canadas experienced a substantial decline during and after the Revolution. Only a limited number of artisans, professionals, and religious emigres were allowed to settle in the region during this period. Most emigres settled in Montreal or Quebec City. The influx of religious emigres also revitalised the local Catholic Church, with exiled priests establishing a number of parishes across the Canadas.

In the United States, the French Revolution deeply polarised American politics, and this polarisation led to the creation of the First Party System. In 1793, as war broke out in Europe, the Democratic-Republican Party led by former American minister to France Thomas Jefferson favored revolutionary France and pointed to the 1778 treaty that was still in effect. George Washington and his unanimous cabinet, including Jefferson, decided that the treaty did not bind the United States to enter the war. Washington proclaimed neutrality instead.

== Historiography ==

The first writings on the French revolution were near contemporaneous with events and mainly divided along ideological lines. These included Edmund Burke&#x27;s conservative critique Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) and Thomas Paine&#x27;s response Rights of Man (1791). From 1815, narrative histories dominated, often based on first-hand experience of the revolutionary years. By the mid-nineteenth century, more scholarly histories appeared, written by specialists and based on original documents and a more critical assessment of contemporary accounts.
Dupuy identifies three main strands in nineteenth century historiography of the Revolution. The first is represented by reactionary writers who rejected the revolutionary ideals of popular sovereignty, civil equality, and the promotion of rationality, progress and personal happiness over religious faith. The second stream is those writers who celebrated its democratic, and republican values. The third were liberals like Germaine de Staël and Guizot, who accepted the necessity of reforms establishing a constitution and the rights of man, but rejected state interference with private property and individual rights, even when supported by a democratic majority.

Jules Michelet was a leading 19th-century historian of the democratic republican strand, and Thiers, Mignet and Tocqueville were prominent in the liberal strand. Hippolyte Taine&#x27;s &quot;Origins of Contemporary France&quot; (1875–1894) was modern in its use of departmental archives, but Dupuy sees him as reactionary, given his contempt for the crowd, and Revolutionary values.

The broad distinction between conservative, democratic-republican and liberal interpretations of the Revolution persisted in the 20th-century, although historiography became more nuanced, with greater attention to critical analysis of documentary evidence. Alphonse Aulard (1849–1928) was the first professional historian of the Revolution; he promoted graduate studies, scholarly editions, and learned journals. His major work, &quot;The French Revolution, a Political History, 1789–1804&quot; (1905), was a democratic and republican interpretation of the Revolution.

Socio-economic analysis and a focus on the experiences of ordinary people dominated French studies of the Revolution from the 1930s. Georges Lefebvre elaborated a Marxist socio-economic analysis of the revolution with detailed studies of peasants, the rural panic of 1789, and the behaviour of revolutionary crowds. Albert Soboul, also writing in the Marxist-Republican tradition, published a major study of the &quot;sans-culottes&quot; in 1958.

Alfred Cobban challenged Jacobin-Marxist social and economic explanations of the revolution in two important works, &quot;The Myth of the French Revolution&quot; (1955) and &quot;Social Interpretation of the French Revolution&quot; (1964). He argued the Revolution was primarily a political conflict, which ended in a victory for conservative property owners, a result which retarded economic development.

In their 1965 work, &quot;La Revolution française&quot;, François Furet and Denis Richet also argued for the primacy of political decisions, contrasting the reformist period of 1789 to 1790 with the following interventions of the urban masses which led to radicalisation and an ungovernable situation.

From the 1990s, Western scholars largely abandoned Marxist interpretations of the revolution in terms of bourgeoisie-proletarian class struggle as anachronistic. However, no new explanatory model has gained widespread support. The historiography of the Revolution has expanded into areas such as cultural and regional histories, visual representations, transnational interpretations, and decolonisation.

== See also ==
* Age of Revolution
* Bourgeois revolution
* Cordeliers
* Democracy in Europe
* Glossary of the French Revolution
* History of France
* List of people associated with the French Revolution
* List of political groups in the French Revolution
* List of films set during the French Revolution and French Revolutionary Wars
* Musée de la Révolution française
* Paris in the 18th century
* Timeline of the French Revolution

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* in .
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* in .
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* in .
* 
* in .
* 
* 
* 
* 
* in .
* 
* 
* in .
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* in .
* 
* 
* 
* 
* in .
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==

* Museum of the French Revolution (French)
* Primary source documents from The Internet Modern History Sourcebook.
* Liberty, Equality, Fraternity: Exploring the French Revolution, a collaborative site by the Center for History and New Media (George Mason University) and the American Social History Project (City University of New York).
* Vancea, S. The Cahiers de Doleances of 1789, Clio History Journal, 2008.
* French Revolution Digital Archive a collaboration of the Stanford University Libraries and the Bibliothèque nationale de France, containing 12000 digitised images
* The guillotined of the French Revolution factsheets of all the sentenced to death of the French Revolution
* Jean-Baptiste Lingaud papers, Kislak Center for Special Collections, Rare Books and Manuscripts, University of Pennsylvania. Includes a vast number of name lists and secret surveillance records as well as arrest warrants for aristocrats and their sympathisers. Most notable in this part of the collection are letters and documents from the Revolutionary Committee and the Surveillance Committee.
* French Revolution Pamphlets, Division of Special Collections, University of Alabama Libraries. Over 300 digitised pamphlets, from writers including Robespierre, St. Juste, Desmoulins, and Danton.
* &quot;The French Revolution&#x27;s Legacy&quot; BBC Radio 4 discussion with Stefan Collini, Anne Janowitz and Andrew Roberts (&quot;In Our Time&quot;, 14 June 2001)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="4" end="21" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="75" end="81" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463941" start="103" end="126" title="Estates General of 1789" label="Estates General of 1789"/>
<link wikidata="Q620965" start="146" end="165" title="Coup of 18 Brumaire" label="Coup of 18 Brumaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="263" end="280" title="liberal democracy" label="liberal democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747486" start="351" end="379" title="Causes of the French Revolution" label="The causes of the revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q234081" start="458" end="471" title="ancien régime" label="ancien régime"/>
<link wikidata="Q657326" start="694" end="706" title="Estates of the realm" label="Third Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q784689" start="753" end="770" title="National Assembly (French Revolution)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6539" start="784" end="808" title="Storming of the Bastille" label="Storming of the Bastille"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="812" end="817" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622002" start="894" end="916" title="Abolition of feudalism in France" label="abolition of feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q795240" start="941" end="956" title="Catholic Church in France" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q169759" start="962" end="985" title="Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen" label="a declaration of rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="1065" end="1074" title="Louis XVI" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192894" start="1092" end="1110" title="flight to Varennes" label="flight to Varennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="1205" end="1230" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154330" start="1252" end="1291" title="insurrection of 10 August 1792" label="an armed insurrection on 10 August 1792"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="1297" end="1305" title="House of Bourbon" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="1326" end="1347" title="French First Republic" label="French First Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062714" start="1366" end="1388" title="execution of Louis XVI" label="Louis XVI was executed"/>
<link wikidata="Q15784403" start="1421" end="1440" title="Insurrection of 31 May – 2 June 1793" label="revolt in June 1793"/>
<link wikidata="Q219825" start="1510" end="1529" title="National Convention" label="National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q724922" start="1537" end="1563" title="Committee of Public Safety" label="Committee of Public Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q179885" start="1586" end="1594" title="Jacobins" label="Jacobins"/>
<link wikidata="Q44197" start="1602" end="1624" title="Maximilien Robespierre" label="Maximilien Robespierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q248122" start="1668" end="1690" title="Revolutionary Tribunal" label="Revolutionary Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q193547" start="1711" end="1726" title="Reign of Terror" label="Reign of Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q474757" start="1762" end="1783" title="Thermidorian Reaction" label="Thermidorian Reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q219817" start="1907" end="1916" title="French Directory" label="Directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q877619" start="1996" end="2005" title="French Consulate" label="Consulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="2012" end="2030" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="2299" end="2308" title="Louis XVI" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936090" start="3505" end="3514" title="Parlement" label="Parlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463941" start="3603" end="3626" title="Estates General of 1789" label="Estates General of 1789"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="3845" end="3858" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="3969" end="3988" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q465744" start="4205" end="4235" title="Affair of the Diamond Necklace" label="Affair of the Diamond Necklace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379785" start="4648" end="4659" title="Farm (revenue leasing)" label="tax farmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936090" start="4901" end="4910" title="parlement" label="parlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651696" start="5124" end="5140" title="Anglo-French War (1778–1783)" label="Anglo-French War"/>
<link wikidata="Q437832" start="5354" end="5361" title="Charles Alexandre de Calonne" label="Calonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q705069" start="5584" end="5604" title="Assembly of Notables" label="Assembly of Notables"/>
<link wikidata="Q289522" start="5710" end="5717" title="Étienne Charles de Loménie de Brienne" label="Brienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q123062" start="6468" end="6482" title="Jacques Necker" label="Jacques Necker"/>
<link wikidata="Q294344" start="7275" end="7286" title="Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès" label="Abbé Sieyès"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141613" start="7329" end="7354" title="What Is the Third Estate?" label="What Is the Third Estate?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340801" start="7528" end="7547" title="Jean Joseph Mounier" label="Jean Joseph Mounier"/>
<link wikidata="Q551481" start="7549" end="7564" title="Antoine Barnave" label="Antoine Barnave"/>
<link wikidata="Q44197" start="7569" end="7591" title="Maximilien Robespierre" label="Maximilien Robespierre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7919" end="7931" title="Estates of the realm#First Estate" label="First Estate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7965" end="7971" title="Estates of the realm#Second Estate" label="Second"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7994" end="7999" title="Estates of the realm#Third Estate" label="Third"/>
<link wikidata="Q795240" start="8226" end="8251" title="Catholic Church in France" label="Catholic Church in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q184664" start="8310" end="8316" title="tithes" label="tithes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11055475" start="8772" end="8792" title="Nobles of the Sword" label="noblesse d&amp;#x27;épée"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025768" start="9235" end="9255" title="Cahiers de doléances" label="Cahiers de doléances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="9282" end="9293" title="Manorialism" label="seigneurial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="9461" end="9471" title="Palace of Versailles" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q60022" start="10644" end="10666" title="Tennis Court Oath" label="tennis court and swore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079501" start="11392" end="11405" title="French Guards Regiment" label="French Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q47365" start="11708" end="11724" title="Marie Antoinette" label="Marie Antoinette"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758" start="11761" end="11780" title="Charles X of France" label="Comte d&amp;#x27;Artois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055735" start="11964" end="11976" title="Swiss Guards" label="Swiss Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865480" start="12185" end="12193" title="Bastille" label="Bastille"/>
<link wikidata="Q822225" start="12268" end="12290" title="Bernard-René de Launay" label="Bernard-René de Launay"/>
<link wikidata="Q326724" start="12746" end="12758" title="Bastille Day" label="Bastille Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q186652" start="12939" end="12959" title="Gilbert du Motier, Marquis de Lafayette" label="Marquis de Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059047" start="12977" end="12991" title="Garde Nationale" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685301" start="12998" end="13017" title="Jean-Sylvain Bailly" label="Jean-Sylvain Bailly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249756" start="13073" end="13080" title="Paris Commune (French Revolution)" label="Commune"/>
<link wikidata="Q43192" start="13189" end="13198" title="Flag of France" label="tricolore"/>
<link wikidata="Q285272" start="13199" end="13206" title="cockade" label="cockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411844" start="13579" end="13593" title="Joseph Foullon de Doué" label="Joseph Foullon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4989857" start="13938" end="13944" title="émigré" label="émigré"/>
<link wikidata="Q12716225" start="14029" end="14047" title="counter-revolution" label="counter-revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622002" start="14090" end="14104" title="August Decrees" label="August Decrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622002" start="14111" end="14130" title="Abolition of feudalism in France" label="abolished feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="14175" end="14186" title="Manorialism" label="feudal dues"/>
<link wikidata="Q876424" start="15032" end="15061" title="National Constituent Assembly (France)" label="National Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q169759" start="15214" end="15265" title="Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen" label="Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q218747" start="15272" end="15280" title="Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, comte de Mirabeau" label="Mirabeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340801" start="15474" end="15481" title="Jean Joseph Mounier" label="Mounier"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="15524" end="15533" title="bicameral" label="bicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q637846" start="15550" end="15561" title="upper house" label="upper house"/>
<link wikidata="Q160499" start="15723" end="15733" title="Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord" label="Talleyrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q178074" start="15808" end="15823" title="suspensive veto" label="suspensive veto"/>
<link wikidata="Q179885" start="16306" end="16318" title="Jacobin club" label="Jacobin club"/>
<link wikidata="Q640968" start="17024" end="17038" title="Hôtel de Ville, Paris" label="Hôtel de Ville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151917" start="17224" end="17245" title="Women&amp;#x27;s March on Versailles" label="marched on Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q720196" start="18098" end="18112" title="John McManners" label="John McManners"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="18381" end="18399" title="Huguenots" label="French Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="18499" end="18507" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="18509" end="18530" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Jean-Jacques Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="18632" end="18645" title="natural law" label="law of nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q184664" start="19140" end="19145" title="tithe" label="tithe"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="19628" end="19639" title="monasteries" label="monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="19662" end="19666" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q191808" start="19672" end="19675" title="nun" label="nun"/>
<link wikidata="Q206979" start="19725" end="19757" title="Civil Constitution of the Clergy" label="Civil Constitution of the Clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q128019" start="19892" end="19904" title="Pope Pius VI" label="Pope Pius VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="19985" end="19989" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q611644" start="20033" end="20040" title="Bishop (Catholic Church)" label="bishops"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="20391" end="20399" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12130" start="20401" end="20409" title="Brittany (administrative region)" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q12798" start="20418" end="20424" title="Vendée" label="Vendée"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978942" start="20570" end="20587" title="Refractory clergy" label="Refractory clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q377006" start="21335" end="21348" title="Adrien Duport" label="Adrien Duport"/>
<link wikidata="Q551481" start="21350" end="21357" title="Antoine Pierre Joseph Marie Barnave" label="Barnave"/>
<link wikidata="Q215025" start="21362" end="21378" title="Alexandre Lameth" label="Alexandre Lameth"/>
<link wikidata="Q192957" start="21418" end="21431" title="Reactionary" label="reactionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677888" start="21437" end="21444" title="Jacques Antoine Marie de Cazalès" label="Cazalès"/>
<link wikidata="Q561729" start="21449" end="21454" title="Jean-Sifrein Maury" label="Maury"/>
<link wikidata="Q44197" start="21517" end="21539" title="Maximilien Robespierre" label="Maximilien Robespierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q122290" start="21561" end="21576" title="Jean-Paul Marat" label="Jean-Paul Marat"/>
<link wikidata="Q160499" start="21997" end="22007" title="Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord" label="Talleyrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="22021" end="22025" title="mass (liturgy)" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q179885" start="22215" end="22222" title="Jacobin" label="Jacobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13368786" start="22511" end="22521" title="jury trial" label="jury trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518796" start="22893" end="22909" title="Le Chapelier Law 1791" label="Le Chapelier Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q964210" start="23183" end="23190" title="François Claude Amour, marquis de Bouillé" label="Bouillé"/>
<link wikidata="Q40898" start="23222" end="23227" title="Nancy, France" label="Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q234364" start="23499" end="23515" title="Tuileries Palace" label="Tuileries Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q229792" start="23666" end="23674" title="Montmédy" label="Montmédy"/>
<link wikidata="Q59220" start="23863" end="23871" title="Varennes-en-Argonne" label="Varennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q314984" start="24533" end="24555" title="Jacques Pierre Brissot" label="Jacques Pierre Brissot"/>
<link wikidata="Q217925" start="24651" end="24664" title="Champ de Mars" label="Champ de Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089686" start="24800" end="24821" title="Champ de Mars massacre" label="firing into the crowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q151321" start="25067" end="25077" title="Leopold II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Leopold II"/>
<link wikidata="Q152229" start="25087" end="25118" title="Frederick William II of Prussia" label="Frederick William II of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q688951" start="25130" end="25153" title="Declaration of Pillnitz" label="Declaration of Pillnitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="25323" end="25343" title="Partitions of Poland" label="Partitions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059448" start="25567" end="25576" title="1791 French legislative election" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q780457" start="25609" end="25636" title="French Legislative Assembly" label="French Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q971176" start="25912" end="25929" title="French Constitution of 1791" label="1791 Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q208412" start="26706" end="26719" title="Sans-culottes" label="Sans-culottes"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="29037" end="29062" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29176" end="29194" title="Louis XVI and the Legislative Assembly#The initial disasters of war" label="disastrous defeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3095388" start="29328" end="29348" title="Constitutional Guard" label="Constitutional Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q708407" start="29557" end="29576" title="Brunswick Manifesto" label="Brunswick Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154330" start="29730" end="29757" title="Insurrection of 10 August 1792" label="On the morning of 10 August"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055735" start="29878" end="29890" title="Swiss Guards" label="Swiss Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060399" start="30188" end="30197" title="1792 French National Convention election" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q219825" start="30216" end="30235" title="National Convention" label="National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q207776" start="30444" end="30453" title="Girondins" label="Girondins"/>
<link wikidata="Q820122" start="30494" end="30505" title="Montagnard (French Revolution)" label="Montagnards"/>
<link wikidata="Q184623" start="30536" end="30550" title="Georges Danton" label="Georges Danton"/>
<link wikidata="Q122290" start="30555" end="30570" title="Jean-Paul Marat" label="Jean-Paul Marat"/>
<link wikidata="Q708891" start="30850" end="30865" title="Bertrand Barère" label="Bertrand Barère"/>
<link wikidata="Q649038" start="30867" end="30887" title="Pierre Joseph Cambon" label="Pierre Joseph Cambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q310767" start="30892" end="30905" title="Lazare Carnot" label="Lazare Carnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q862586" start="30915" end="30934" title="September Massacres" label="September Massacres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717573" start="30998" end="31016" title="extrajudicial killings" label="summarily executed"/>
<link wikidata="Q318535" start="31089" end="31095" title="Longwy" label="Longwy"/>
<link wikidata="Q572883" start="31100" end="31106" title="Battle of Verdun (1792)" label="Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511549" start="31182" end="31189" title="fédérés" label="fédérés"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411" start="31523" end="31538" title="Battle of Valmy" label="Battle of Valmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="31609" end="31627" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="31711" end="31732" title="French First Republic" label="French First Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181974" start="31766" end="31774" title="French Republican Calendar" label="calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q924233" start="32209" end="32232" title="Armoire de fer" label="personal correspondence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062714" start="32527" end="32538" title="Execution of Louis XVI" label="carried out"/>
<link wikidata="Q189503" start="32604" end="32624" title="Place de la Concorde" label="Place de la Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="32771" end="32778" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="32787" end="32801" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322229" start="32879" end="32884" title="Enlightenment Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="32886" end="32894" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q173065" start="32896" end="32902" title="Kingdom of Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q154849" start="32908" end="32915" title="Grand Duchy of Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q18817" start="32923" end="32949" title="War of the First Coalition" label="War of the First Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821974" start="33264" end="33278" title="levée en masse" label="levée en masse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12798" start="33456" end="33462" title="Vendée" label="Vendée"/>
<link wikidata="Q378572" start="33488" end="33497" title="Charles François Dumouriez" label="Dumouriez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085392" start="33514" end="33524" title="Battle of Neerwinden (1793)" label="Neerwinden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="33578" end="33586" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="33588" end="33592" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q44160" start="33594" end="33600" title="Toulon" label="Toulon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="33602" end="33611" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q41185" start="33616" end="33620" title="Caen" label="Caen"/>
<link wikidata="Q724922" start="33723" end="33749" title="Committee of Public Safety" label="Committee of Public Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q248122" start="33878" end="33900" title="Revolutionary Tribunal" label="Revolutionary Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q209901" start="34049" end="34063" title="Jacques Hébert" label="Jacques Hébert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986622" start="34174" end="34194" title="Commission of Twelve" label="Commission of Twelve"/>
<link wikidata="Q15784403" start="34624" end="34628" title="Insurrection of 31 May-2 June 1793" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q27764" start="35133" end="35143" title="Louis Antoine de Saint-Just" label="Saint-Just"/>
<link wikidata="Q598887" start="35176" end="35188" title="French Constitution of 1793" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895489" start="35307" end="35330" title="universal male suffrage" label="universal male suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q216063" start="35444" end="35460" title="Charlotte Corday" label="Charlotte Corday"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="35813" end="35821" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054868" start="36171" end="36182" title="Battle of Hondschoote" label="Hondschoote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059732" start="36187" end="36197" title="Battle of Wattignies" label="Wattignies"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="36264" end="36282" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q815228" start="36332" end="36347" title="Siege of Toulon (1793)" label="siege of Toulon"/>
<link wikidata="Q554278" start="36378" end="36398" title="Augustin Robespierre" label="Augustin Robespierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q860109" start="36454" end="36467" title="Army of Italy (France)" label="Army of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193547" start="36627" end="36642" title="Reign of Terror" label="Reign of Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092643" start="36746" end="36760" title="General maximum" label="price controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574972" start="36927" end="36942" title="Law of Suspects" label="Law of Suspects"/>
<link wikidata="Q281914" start="37812" end="37821" title="assignats" label="assignats"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37970" end="37994" title="National Convention#Revolutionary government" label="Revolutionary Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q311637" start="38230" end="38246" title="Louis Philippe II, Duke of Orléans" label="Philippe Égalité"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108820" start="38355" end="38361" title="Second Battle of Cholet" label="Cholet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8628" start="38429" end="38442" title="War in the Vendée" label="Vendée rebels"/>
<link wikidata="Q686995" start="38503" end="38510" title="Battle of Le Mans (1793)" label="Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q115764923" start="38674" end="38691" title="French historians" label="French historians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436102" start="38776" end="38806" title="Drownings at Nantes" label="drowned in the Loire at Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q727601" start="38832" end="38853" title="Jean-Baptiste Carrier" label="Jean-Baptiste Carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q318667" start="38984" end="38998" title="François Furet" label="François Furet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474268" start="39355" end="39365" title="Hébertists" label="Hébertists"/>
<link wikidata="Q620629" start="39471" end="39476" title="deist" label="deist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344444" start="39494" end="39517" title="Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution" label="anti-religious policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="39535" end="39542" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q249313" start="39739" end="39757" title="Camille Desmoulins" label="Camille Desmoulins"/>
<link wikidata="Q177253" start="39767" end="39777" title="show trial" label="show trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361404" start="39863" end="39881" title="Law of 22 Prairial" label="Law of 22 Prairial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277069" start="40160" end="40185" title="Cult of the Supreme Being" label="Cult of the Supreme Being"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218843" start="40331" end="40345" title="price controls" label="price controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457361" start="40438" end="40465" title="Low Countries theatre of the War of the First Coalition" label="improved military situation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12989672" start="41236" end="41262" title="9 Thermidor (Fall of Robespierre)" label="Robespierre and his allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q270668" start="41793" end="41808" title="Georges Couthon" label="Georges Couthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q318667" start="42074" end="42088" title="François Furet" label="François Furet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237299" start="42448" end="42463" title="Southern France" label="Southern France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454077" start="42478" end="42494" title="First White Terror" label="revenge killings"/>
<link wikidata="Q333843" start="42762" end="42773" title="Paul Barras" label="Paul Barras"/>
<link wikidata="Q219817" start="42804" end="42820" title="French Directory" label="French Directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q216958" start="42826" end="42839" title="Joseph Fouché" label="Joseph Fouché"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451427" start="42888" end="42906" title="Minister of Police (France)" label="Minister of Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="42946" end="42952" title="First French Empire" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="43029" end="43047" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q675833" start="43084" end="43104" title="Treaty of La Jaunaye" label="Treaty of La Jaunaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q249960" start="43115" end="43126" title="Chouannerie" label="Chouannerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898124" start="43304" end="43312" title="Patriottentijd" label="Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q188553" start="43324" end="43341" title="Batavian Republic" label="Batavian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q667080" start="43437" end="43451" title="Peace of Basel" label="Peace of Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="43681" end="43689" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3152958" start="43870" end="43880" title="Insurrection of 12 Germinal, Year III" label="rose again"/>
<link wikidata="Q664271" start="44044" end="44056" title="Constitution of the Year III" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="44070" end="44080" title="plebiscite" label="plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q178991" start="44150" end="44163" title="Pierre Claude François Daunou" label="Pierre Daunou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450807" start="44168" end="44188" title="François Antoine de Boissy d&amp;#x27;Anglas" label="Boissy d&amp;#x27;Anglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q189445" start="44207" end="44228" title="bicameral legislature" label="bicameral legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q617290" start="44353" end="44367" title="Council of 500" label="Council of 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325988" start="44449" end="44468" title="Council of Ancients" label="Council of Ancients"/>
<link wikidata="Q672087" start="45355" end="45367" title="Bonapartism" label="Bonapartists"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="45384" end="45392" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092773" start="45880" end="45893" title="Thermidorians" label="Thermidorians"/>
<link wikidata="Q720498" start="46073" end="46088" title="13 Vendémiaire" label="royalist rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139992" start="46114" end="46123" title="1795 French Directory election" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q378534" start="46639" end="46663" title="Conspiracy of the Equals" label="Conspiracy of the Equals"/>
<link wikidata="Q189714" start="46690" end="46710" title="François-Noël Babeuf" label="François-Noël Babeuf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871443" start="47221" end="47239" title="Louis Marie de La Révellière-Lépeaux" label="Révellière-Lépeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685535" start="47244" end="47265" title="Jean-François Rewbell" label="Jean-François Rewbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980127" start="47339" end="47347" title="Club de Clichy" label="centrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q164284" start="47391" end="47418" title="Étienne-François Letourneur" label="Étienne-François Letourneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q310767" start="47423" end="47436" title="Lazare Carnot" label="Lazare Carnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750" start="47537" end="47558" title="Louis XVIII of France" label="Louis XVIII of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q355643" start="47683" end="47704" title="Jean-Charles Pichegru" label="Jean-Charles Pichegru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450903" start="47750" end="47760" title="François-Marie, marquis de Barthélemy" label="Barthélemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q248033" start="47869" end="47888" title="Coup of 18 Fructidor" label="coup on 4 September"/>
<link wikidata="Q860109" start="47924" end="47937" title="Army of Italy (France)" label="Army of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q314135" start="47944" end="47959" title="Pierre Augereau" label="Pierre Augereau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769" start="48120" end="48133" title="French Guiana" label="French Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139982" start="48377" end="48391" title="1798 French Directory election" label="1798 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q253684" start="48446" end="48463" title="French campaign in Egypt and Syria" label="invasion of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q26749" start="48534" end="48561" title="War of the Second Coalition" label="War of the Second Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q128743" start="48748" end="48755" title="Barthélemy Catherine Joubert" label="Joubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q151098" start="49331" end="49337" title="Lucien Bonaparte" label="Lucien"/>
<link wikidata="Q620965" start="49396" end="49415" title="Coup of 18 Brumaire" label="Coup of 18 Brumaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q877619" start="49453" end="49469" title="French Consulate" label="French Consulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663883" start="49527" end="49538" title="Roger Ducos" label="Roger Ducos"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314" start="53614" end="53622" title="Battle of Waterloo" label="Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q76555" start="53859" end="53868" title="Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Joseph II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542740" start="53914" end="53938" title="Austro-Turkish War (1788–1791)" label="at war with the Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q123210" start="53948" end="53960" title="Russo-Turkish War (1787–1792)" label="the Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="54008" end="54027" title="Partitions of Poland" label="partitioning Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q151321" start="54087" end="54097" title="Leopold II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Leopold II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821974" start="54466" end="54478" title="Levée en masse" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="54699" end="54707" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="54713" end="54724" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="54734" end="54746" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q700283" start="55362" end="55382" title="Austrian Netherlands" label="Austrian Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q855271" start="55528" end="55536" title="Battle of Jemappes" label="Jemappes"/>
<link wikidata="Q152243" start="55596" end="55605" title="Rhineland" label="Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q706553" start="55607" end="55611" title="County of Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232887" start="55616" end="55621" title="County of Savoy" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="55695" end="55709" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18817" start="55744" end="55770" title="War of the First Coalition" label="War of the First Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q188553" start="56347" end="56364" title="Batavian Republic" label="Batavian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q206752" start="56673" end="56695" title="Treaty of Campo Formio" label="Treaty of Campo Formio"/>
<link wikidata="Q213353" start="56761" end="56779" title="Cisalpine Republic" label="Cisalpine Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q253684" start="57667" end="57684" title="French campaign in Egypt and Syria" label="invasion of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q949107" start="58285" end="58311" title="Society of the Friends of the Blacks" label="Société des Amis des Noirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559780" start="59212" end="59223" title="Vincent Ogé" label="Vincent Ogé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189630" start="59228" end="59242" title="Julien Raimond" label="Julien Raimond"/>
<link wikidata="Q689128" start="59834" end="59854" title="Haitian Revolution" label="A major slave revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050194" start="60017" end="60026" title="Léger-Félicité Sonthonax" label="Sonthonax"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296729" start="60031" end="60039" title="Étienne Polverel" label="Polvérel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3165416" start="60822" end="60844" title="Jean-François Papillon" label="Jean-François Papillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102316" start="60849" end="60864" title="Georges Biassou" label="Georges Biassou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553709" start="61794" end="61807" title="Victor Hugues" label="Victor Hugues"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054" start="62030" end="62040" title="Martinique" label="Martinique"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070" start="62105" end="62112" title="Réunion" label="Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q205695" start="62121" end="62138" title="Mascarene Islands" label="Îles Mascareignes"/>
<link wikidata="Q205783" start="62614" end="62634" title="Toussaint Louverture" label="Toussaint Louverture"/>
<link wikidata="Q289738" start="62671" end="62683" title="André Rigaud" label="André Rigaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q719806" start="63411" end="63431" title="L&amp;#x27;Ami du peuple" label="L&amp;#x27;Ami du peuple"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587970" start="63442" end="63459" title="Elysée Loustallot" label="Elysée Loustallot"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="64667" end="64682" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q207660" start="64739" end="64768" title="Claude Joseph Rouget de Lisle" label="Claude Joseph Rouget de Lisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q219825" start="64808" end="64834" title="French National Convention" label="French National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="64853" end="64874" title="French First Republic" label="First Republic&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511549" start="64945" end="64955" title="Fédéré" label="volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="64961" end="64970" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q128015" start="65395" end="65405" title="guillotine" label="guillotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q265147" start="65750" end="65768" title="revolutionary song" label="revolutionary song"/>
<link wikidata="Q98594657" start="65775" end="65799" title="La guillotine permanente" label="La guillotine permanente"/>
<link wikidata="Q825126" start="66136" end="66146" title="tricoteuse" label="tricoteuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q285272" start="66452" end="66459" title="Cockade" label="Cockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q249313" start="66623" end="66641" title="Camille Desmoulins" label="Camille Desmoulins"/>
<link wikidata="Q213240" start="67005" end="67017" title="Phrygian cap" label="Phrygian cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778772" start="67022" end="67028" title="Pileus (hat)" label="pileus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454489" start="67185" end="67196" title="manumission" label="manumission"/>
<link wikidata="Q206972" start="67488" end="67504" title="Olympe de Gouges" label="Olympe de Gouges"/>
<link wikidata="Q730868" start="67520" end="67580" title="Declaration of the Rights of Woman and of the Female Citizen" label="Declaration of the Rights of Woman and of the Female Citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q216063" start="67586" end="67602" title="Charlotte Corday" label="Charlotte Corday"/>
<link wikidata="Q266773" start="67633" end="67655" title="Théroigne de Méricourt" label="Théroigne de Méricourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372743" start="67657" end="67669" title="Pauline Léon" label="Pauline Léon"/>
<link wikidata="Q960260" start="67678" end="67719" title="Society of Revolutionary Republican Women" label="Society of Revolutionary Republican Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277069" start="68928" end="68953" title="Cult of the Supreme Being" label="Cult of the Supreme Being"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088896" start="68955" end="68967" title="Olwen Hufton" label="Olwen Hufton"/>
<link wikidata="Q206972" start="69141" end="69157" title="Olympe de Gouges" label="Olympe de Gouges"/>
<link wikidata="Q730868" start="69298" end="69358" title="Declaration of the Rights of Woman and of the Female Citizen" label="Declaration of the Rights of Woman and of the Female Citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q236554" start="69582" end="69595" title="Madame Roland" label="Madame Roland"/>
<link wikidata="Q281914" start="70333" end="70342" title="assignats" label="assignats"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="70359" end="70364" title="guild" label="guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147614" start="70435" end="70446" title="Ferme générale" label="tax farming"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="70818" end="70857" title="History of education in France#Revolution" label="school systems were massively disrupted"/>
<link wikidata="Q50851" start="71220" end="71232" title="black market" label="black market"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874022" start="71946" end="71964" title="French nationalism" label="French nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="72091" end="72103" title="nation state" label="nation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084414" start="72210" end="72219" title="modernity" label="modernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281534" start="72228" end="72241" title="Modern era" label="modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450796" start="72410" end="72425" title="François Victor Alphonse Aulard" label="François Aulard"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="73174" end="73186" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="73214" end="73233" title="First French Empire" label="First French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="73469" end="73482" title="republicanism" label="republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="73786" end="73807" title="French Third Republic" label="French Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="73891" end="73903" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q250843" start="74483" end="74496" title="Primogeniture" label="Primogeniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q214214" start="76147" end="76159" title="Codification (law)" label="codified law"/>
<link wikidata="Q718581" start="76242" end="76256" title="Daron Acemoglu" label="Daron Acemoglu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461050" start="76274" end="76287" title="Simon Johnson (economist)" label="Simon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19520018" start="76293" end="76310" title="James A. Robinson (economist)" label="James A. Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="76500" end="76512" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796895" start="76680" end="76702" title="Revolution Controversy" label="Revolution Controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143698" start="76715" end="76727" title="pamphlet war" label="pamphlet war"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806705" start="76770" end="76808" title="A Discourse on the Love of Our Country" label="A Discourse on the Love of Our Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q561101" start="76834" end="76847" title="Richard Price" label="Richard Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318691" start="76855" end="76873" title="Revolution Society" label="Revolution Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q165792" start="76928" end="76940" title="Edmund Burke" label="Edmund Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287584" start="76997" end="77036" title="Reflections on the Revolution in France" label="Reflections on the Revolution in France"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77125" end="77137" title="William Coxe (MP)" label="William Coxe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77445" end="77454" title="Pamphlet#History" label="pamphlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638171" start="77482" end="77516" title="A Vindication of the Rights of Men" label="A Vindication of the Rights of Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q101638" start="77526" end="77545" title="Mary Wollstonecraft" label="Mary Wollstonecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q126462" start="77590" end="77602" title="Thomas Paine" label="Thomas Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q979108" start="77616" end="77629" title="Rights of Man" label="Rights of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113473" start="77675" end="77693" title="Christopher Wyvill (reformer)" label="Christopher Wyvill"/>
<link wikidata="Q535030" start="78056" end="78082" title="Society of United Irishmen" label="Society of United Irishmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="78198" end="78204" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q437962" start="78246" end="78256" title="Wolfe Tone" label="Wolfe Tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q370744" start="78573" end="78591" title="German nationalism" label="German nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q206696" start="78650" end="78667" title="Helvetic Republic" label="Helvetic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q568452" start="78853" end="78874" title="Restoration and Regeneration in Switzerland" label="period of restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q208128" start="79427" end="79442" title="agrarian reform" label="agrarian reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492696" start="79531" end="79542" title="Freehold (law)" label="freeholders"/>
<link wikidata="Q642673" start="79675" end="79697" title="Constitution of Norway" label="Constitution of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q251668" start="79889" end="79907" title="Province of Quebec (1763–1791)" label="Province of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q935481" start="80078" end="80086" title="Loyalist (American Revolution)" label="Loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721124" start="80315" end="80326" title="the Canadas" label="the Canadas"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="80547" end="80555" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145" start="80559" end="80570" title="Quebec City" label="Quebec City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453498" start="80852" end="80870" title="First Party System" label="First Party System"/>
<link wikidata="Q42186" start="80913" end="80940" title="Democratic-Republican Party" label="Democratic-Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q950262" start="80955" end="80982" title="United States Ambassador to France" label="American minister to France"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="80983" end="80999" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="81086" end="81103" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981888" start="81236" end="81257" title="Proclamation of Neutrality" label="proclaimed neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q165792" start="81431" end="81443" title="Edmund Burke" label="Edmund Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287584" start="81473" end="81512" title="Reflections on the Revolution in France" label="Reflections on the Revolution in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q126462" start="81524" end="81536" title="Thomas Paine" label="Thomas Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q979108" start="81553" end="81566" title="Rights of Man" label="Rights of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q123041" start="82284" end="82301" title="Germaine de Staël" label="Germaine de Staël"/>
<link wikidata="Q157324" start="82306" end="82312" title="François Guizot" label="Guizot"/>
<link wikidata="Q310791" start="82527" end="82541" title="Jules Michelet" label="Jules Michelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5738" start="82620" end="82626" title="Adolphe Thiers" label="Thiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q660553" start="82628" end="82634" title="François Mignet" label="Mignet"/>
<link wikidata="Q140694" start="82639" end="82650" title="Alexis de Tocqueville" label="Tocqueville"/>
<link wikidata="Q297726" start="82689" end="82704" title="Hippolyte Taine" label="Hippolyte Taine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450796" start="83168" end="83183" title="François Victor Alphonse Aulard" label="Alphonse Aulard"/>
<link wikidata="Q663862" start="83614" end="83630" title="Georges Lefebvre" label="Georges Lefebvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q223588" start="83797" end="83810" title="Albert Soboul" label="Albert Soboul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644830" start="83929" end="83942" title="Alfred Cobban" label="Alfred Cobban"/>
<link wikidata="Q318667" start="84393" end="84407" title="François Furet" label="François Furet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691908" start="85061" end="85078" title="Age of Revolution" label="Age of Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q751967" start="85081" end="85101" title="Bourgeois revolution" label="Bourgeois revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q829721" start="85104" end="85114" title="Cordeliers" label="Cordeliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q127378018" start="85117" end="85136" title="Democracy in Europe" label="Democracy in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109199" start="85139" end="85172" title="Glossary of the French Revolution" label="Glossary of the French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7778" start="85175" end="85192" title="History of France" label="History of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050146" start="85195" end="85247" title="List of people associated with the French Revolution" label="List of people associated with the French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q50660885" start="85250" end="85299" title="List of political groups in the French Revolution" label="List of political groups in the French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q60848413" start="85302" end="85378" title="List of films set during the French Revolution and French Revolutionary Wars" label="List of films set during the French Revolution and French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389498" start="85381" end="85413" title="Musée de la Révolution française" label="Musée de la Révolution française"/>
<link wikidata="Q20050726" start="85416" end="85441" title="Paris in the 18th century" label="Paris in the 18th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q186961" start="85444" end="85477" title="Timeline of the French Revolution" label="Timeline of the French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="85925" end="85963" title="Internet_History_Sourcebooks_Project#Internet_Modern_Sourcebook" label="The Internet Modern History Sourcebook"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11194" wikidata="Q186123" url="?curid=11194" title="Francis Fukuyama">
<text>Francis Yoshihiro Fukuyama (; born October 27, 1952) is an American political scientist, political economist, international relations scholar, and writer.

Fukuyama is best known for his book &quot;The End of History and the Last Man&quot; (1992), which argues that the worldwide spread of liberal democracies and free-market capitalism of the West and its lifestyle may signal the end point of humanity&#x27;s sociocultural evolution and political struggle and become the final form of human government, an assessment meeting with numerous and substantial criticisms. In his subsequent book &quot;Trust: Social Virtues and Creation of Prosperity&quot; (1995), he modified his earlier position to acknowledge that culture cannot be cleanly separated from economics. Fukuyama is also associated with the rise of the neoconservative movement, from which he has since distanced himself.

Fukuyama has been a senior fellow at the Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies since July 2010 and the Mosbacher Director of the Center on Democracy, Development and the Rule of Law at Stanford University. In August 2019, he was named director of the Ford Dorsey Master&#x27;s in International Policy at Stanford.

Before that, he served as a professor and director of the International Development program at the School of Advanced International Studies of Johns Hopkins University. He had also been the Omer L. and Nancy Hirst Professor of Public Policy at the School of Public Policy at George Mason University.

He is a council member of the International Forum for Democratic Studies founded by the National Endowment for Democracy and was a member of the Political Science Department of the RAND Corporation. He is also one of the 25 leading figures on the Information and Democracy Commission launched by Reporters Without Borders. In 2024, he received the Riggs Award for Lifetime Achievement in International and Comparative Public Administration.

==Early life and education==
Francis Fukuyama was born in the Hyde Park neighborhood of Chicago, Illinois, United States. His paternal grandfather fled the Russo-Japanese War in 1905 and started a shop on the west coast before being incarcerated in the Second World War. His father, Yoshio Fukuyama, a second-generation Japanese American, was trained as a minister in the Congregational Church, received a doctorate in sociology from the University of Chicago, and taught religious studies. His mother, Toshiko Kawata Fukuyama (), was born in Kyoto, Japan, and was the daughter of , founder of the Economics Department of Kyoto University and first president of Osaka City University. Francis, whose Japanese name is Yoshihiro, grew up in Manhattan as an only child, had little contact with Japanese culture, and did not learn Japanese. His family moved to State College, Pennsylvania, in 1967.
Fukuyama received his Bachelor of Arts degree in classics from Cornell University, where he studied political philosophy under Allan Bloom. He initially pursued graduate studies in comparative literature at Yale University, going to Paris for six months to study under Roland Barthes and Jacques Derrida but became disillusioned and switched to political science at Harvard University. There, he studied with Samuel P. Huntington and Harvey Mansfield, among others. He earned his Ph.D. in political science at Harvard for his thesis on Soviet threats to intervene in the Middle East. In 1979, he joined the global policy think tank RAND Corporation.

Fukuyama lived at the Telluride House and has been affiliated with the Telluride Association since his undergraduate years at Cornell. Telluride is an education enterprise that has been home to other significant leaders and intellectuals, including Steven Weinberg, Paul Wolfowitz and Kathleen Sullivan.

Fukuyama was the Omer L. and Nancy Hirst Professor of Public Policy in the School of Public Policy at George Mason University from 1996 to 2000. Until July 10, 2010, he was the Bernard L. Schwartz Professor of International Political Economy and Director of the International Development Program at the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies of Johns Hopkins University in Washington, D.C. He is now Olivier Nomellini Senior Fellow and resident in the Center on Democracy, Development, and the Rule of Law at the Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies at Stanford University, and director of the Ford Dorsey Master&#x27;s in International Policy at Stanford.

==Scholarship==

=== &quot;The End of History and the Last Man&quot; ===

Fukuyama is best known as the author of &quot;The End of History and the Last Man&quot;, in which he argued that the progression of human history as a struggle between ideologies was largely at an end, with the world settling on liberal democracy after the end of the Cold War and the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989. The book was an expansion on ideas expressed in an earlier article, &quot;The End of History?&quot; published in &quot;The National Interest&quot;. In the article, Fukuyama predicted the coming global triumph of political and economic liberalism:

Authors such as Ralf Dahrendorf and Luciano Canfora argued in 1990 that the essay gave Fukuyama his 15 minutes of fame, which a slide into obscurity would soon follow. However, Fukuyama remained a relevant and cited public intellectual, which led American communitarian Amitai Etzioni to declare him &quot;one of the few enduring public intellectuals. They are often media stars who are eaten up and spat out after their 15 minutes. But he has lasted.&quot; Bernard Crick in his book titled &quot;Democracy&quot; spoke of Fukayama&#x27;s principle of &quot;the end of the world&quot; as being a poor misreading of the historical processes involved in the development of modern democracy.

According to Fukuyama, one of the main critiques of &quot;The End of History&quot; was of his aggressive stance toward postmodernism. In Fukuyama&#x27;s opinion, postmodern philosophy undermined the ideology behind liberal democracy, leaving the Western world in a potentially weaker position. The fact that Marxism and fascism had proven untenable for practical use while liberal democracy still thrived was reason enough to embrace the hopeful attitude of the Progressive Era, as this hope for the future was what made a society worth struggling to maintain. Postmodernism, which, by this time, had become embedded in the cultural consciousness, offered no hope and nothing to sustain a necessary sense of community, instead relying only on lofty intellectual premises.

=== &quot;The Origins of Political Order&quot; ===

In the 2011 book, Fukuyama describes what makes a state stable, using comparative political history to develop a theory of the stability of a political system. According to Fukuyama, an ideal political order needs a modern and effective state, the rule of law governing the state, and accountability.

=== &quot;Political Order and Political Decay&quot; ===

The 2014 book is his second book on political order, following the 2011 book &quot;The Origins of Political Order&quot;. In this book, Fukuyama covers events since the French Revolution and sheds light on political institutions and their development in different regions.

After tracing how a modern and effective government was developed in the U.S., Fukuyama asserts that the country is experiencing political decay. Fukuyama believes that political decay can be seen in the deterioration of bureaucracies, special interest groups capturing the legislature, and inevitable but cumbersome judicial processes challenging all types of government action.

=== Other works ===

Fukuyama has written a number of other books, among them &quot;Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity&quot; and &quot;Our Posthuman Future: Consequences of the Biotechnology Revolution&quot;. In the latter, he qualified his original &quot;end of history&quot; thesis, arguing that since biotechnology increasingly allows humans to control their own evolution, it may allow humans to alter human nature, thereby putting liberal democracy at risk. One possible outcome could be that an altered human nature could end in radical inequality. He is a fierce enemy of transhumanism, an intellectual movement asserting that posthumanity is a desirable goal.

In another work, &quot;The Great Disruption: Human Nature and the Reconstruction of Social Order&quot;, Fukuyama explores the origins of social norms and analyzes current disruptions in the fabric of human moral traditions. He considers these disruptions to arise from a shift from the manufacturing to the Information Age. This shift is, he thinks, normal and will prove self-correcting, given the intrinsic human need for social norms and rules.

In 2006, in &quot;America at the Crossroads,&quot; Fukuyama discusses the history of neoconservatism, with particular focus on its major tenets and political implications. He outlines his rationale for supporting the Bush Administration and where he believed it was going wrong at the time.

In 2008, Fukuyama published the book &quot;Falling Behind: Explaining the Development Gap Between Latin America and the United States&quot;, which resulted from research and a conference funded by Grupo Mayan to gain an understanding of why Latin America, once far wealthier than North America, fell behind in terms of development in only a matter of centuries. Discussing this book at a 2009 conference, Fukuyama outlined his belief that inequality within Latin American nations impedes growth. He stated that an unequal distribution of wealth leads to social upheaval, resulting in stunted growth.

In 2018, in &quot;Identity: The Demand for Dignity and the Politics of Resentment&quot;, Fukuyama enlists Plato&#x27;s notion of thymos to understand the politics of grievance and resentment.

At the start of the following decade, he published some reflections on his work in the form of conversations under the title &quot;After the End of History&quot;.

In 2022, Fukuyama published the book &quot;Liberalism and Its Discontents&quot;, in which he defended liberalism from critics on the populist right and the progressive left. He also criticized neoliberalism and identity politics.

== Political views ==

===Neoconservatism===
As a key Reagan Administration contributor to the formulation of the Reagan Doctrine, Fukuyama is an important figure in the rise of neoconservatism, although his works came out years after Irving Kristol&#x27;s 1972 book crystallized neoconservatism. Fukuyama was active in the Project for the New American Century think tank starting in 1997, and as a member co-signed the organization&#x27;s 1998 letter recommending that President Bill Clinton support Iraqi insurgencies in the overthrow of then-President of Iraq Saddam Hussein. He was also among forty co-signers of William Kristol&#x27;s September 20, 2001 letter to President George W. Bush after the September 11, 2001 attacks that suggested the U.S. not only &quot;capture or kill Osama bin Laden&quot;, but also embark upon &quot;a determined effort to remove Saddam Hussein from power in Iraq&quot;.

As a supporter of the Iraq War Fukuyama defended the war against critics who accused the US of unilateralism and violating international law, saying &quot;Americans are right to insist that there is no such thing as an &#x27;international community&#x27; in the abstract, and that nation-states must ultimately look out for themselves when it comes to critical matters of security&quot;.

In a &quot;New York Times&quot; article from February 2006, Fukuyama, in considering the ongoing Iraq War, stated: &quot;What American foreign policy needs is not a return to a narrow and cynical realism, but rather the formulation of a &#x27;realistic Wilsonianism&#x27; that better matches means to ends.&quot; In regard to neoconservatism, he went on to say: &quot;What is needed now are new ideas, neither neoconservative nor realist, for how America is to relate to the rest of the world – ideas that retain the neoconservative belief in the universality of human rights, but without its illusions about the efficacy of American power and hegemony to bring these ends about.&quot;

===Current views===
Fukuyama began to distance himself from the neoconservative agenda of the Bush administration, citing its excessive militarism and embrace of unilateral armed intervention, particularly in the Middle East. By mid-2004, Fukuyama had voiced his growing opposition to the Iraq War and called for Donald Rumsfeld&#x27;s resignation as Secretary of Defense.

At an annual dinner of the American Enterprise Institute in February 2004, Dick Cheney and Charles Krauthammer declared the beginning of a unipolar era under American hegemony. &quot;All of these people around me were cheering wildly,&quot; Fukuyama remembers. He believes that the Iraq War was being blundered. &quot;All of my friends had taken leave of reality.&quot; He has not spoken to Paul Wolfowitz (previously a good friend) since.

Fukuyama declared he would not be voting for Bush, and that the Bush administration had made three mistakes:
* Overstating the threat of Islamist extremism to the US.
* Failing to foresee the fierce negative reaction to its &quot;benevolent hegemony&quot;. From the very beginning showing a negative attitude toward the United Nations and other intergovernmental organizations and not seeing that it would increase anti-Americanism in other countries.
* Misjudging what was needed to bring peace in Iraq and being overly optimistic about the success with which social engineering of western values could be applied to Iraq and the Middle East in general.

Fukuyama believes the US has a right to promote its own values in the world, but more along the lines of what he calls &quot;realistic Wilsonianism&quot;, with military intervention only as a last resort and only in addition to other measures. A latent military force is more likely to have an effect than actual deployment. The US spends 43% of global military spending, but Iraq shows there are limits to its effectiveness.

The US should instead stimulate political and economic development and gain a better understanding of what happens in other countries. The best instruments are setting a good example and providing education and, in many cases, money. The secret of development, be it political or economic, is that it never comes from outsiders, but always from people in the country itself. One thing the US proved to have excelled in during the aftermath of World War II was the formation of international institutions. A return to support for these structures would combine American power with international legitimacy, but such measures require a lot of patience. This is the central thesis of his 2006 work &quot;America at the Crossroads&quot;.

In a 2006 essay in &quot;The New York Times Magazine&quot; strongly critical of the invasion, he identified neoconservatism with Leninism. He wrote that neoconservatives &quot;believed that history can be pushed along with the right application of power and will. Leninism was a tragedy in its Bolshevik version, and it has returned as farce when practiced by the United States. Neoconservatism, as both a political symbol and a body of thought, has evolved into something I can no longer support.&quot;

Fukuyama announced the end of the neoconservative moment and argued for the demilitarization of the War on Terrorism:

Fukuyama endorsed Barack Obama in the 2008 US presidential election. He states:

In 2007 Fukuyama criticized the American government&#x27;s attitude to Iran, &quot;If the only thing we&#x27;re putting on the table is that we&#x27;ll talk to you, it isn&#x27;t going to work. What the Iranians have really wanted over a long period of time is the grand bargain&quot;. In 2009 he described Iran as &quot;not quite a tyranny, petty or grand&quot; but also not a liberal democracy and added that &quot;Iran could evolve towards a genuine rule-of-law democracy within the broad parameters of the 1979 constitution&quot;.

In a 2018 interview with &quot;New Statesman&quot;, when asked about his views on the resurgence of socialist politics in the United States and the United Kingdom, he responded:

In a review for &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, Fukuyama discussed Ezra Klein&#x27;s 2020 book &quot;Why We&#x27;re Polarized&quot; regarding US politics, and outlined Klein&#x27;s central conclusion about the importance of race and white identity to Donald Trump voters and Republicans.

In 2020, Fukuyama became the chair of the editorial board for &quot;American Purpose,&quot; a magazine established in 2020 to promote three central ideas. Firstly, it wants to promote liberal democracy in the United States. Secondly, it seeks to understand and opine on the challenges to liberal democracy in other countries. Thirdly, it wants to &quot;offer criticism and commentary on history and biography, high art and pop culture, science and technology.&quot;

Fukuyama has also perceived Joe Biden&#x27;s victory in the 2020 presidential election as the result of the Western system&#x27;s ability to correct mistakes. 

===Views following Russian invasion of Ukraine===
A few weeks after the beginning of Russia&#x27;s invasion of Ukraine in February 2022, Fukuyama made several prognoses in the magazine &quot;American Purpose&quot;:

* Russia was heading towards defeat, with its planning being incompetent and based on flawed assumptions about Ukrainians being favorable to Russia and about the Ukrainian military suffering immediate collapse in an invasion scenario. &quot;Russian soldiers were evidently carrying dress uniforms for their victory parade in Kyiv rather than extra ammo and rations.&quot; The bulk of Russia&#x27;s military had been committed to the invasion and so there were no vast reserves available to it.
* Russia&#x27;s position could collapse suddenly and catastrophically rather than through a slow war of attrition. Its army would reach a point where it could be neither resupplied nor withdrawn, and morale would collapse accordingly.
* A Russian defeat was a prerequisite for any diplomatic solution to the war as otherwise both Russia and Ukraine&#x27;s losses meant that there was no conceivable compromise which they could both accept.
* Vladimir Putin&#x27;s rule over Russia would not survive a military defeat. &quot;He gets support because he is perceived to be a strongman; what does he have to offer once he demonstrates incompetence and is stripped of his coercive power?&quot;
* The invasion had done huge damage to populists such as Matteo Salvini, Jair Bolsonaro, Éric Zemmour, Marine Le Pen, Viktor Orbán, and Donald Trump; all had expressed sympathy for Putin before the war, and their &quot;openly authoritarian&quot; leanings had been exposed by the war&#x27;s politics.
* The war thus far had been a &quot;good lesson&quot; for China whose military, like Russia&#x27;s, was technologically sophisticated but had minimal combat experience. The People&#x27;s Liberation Army Air Force&#x27;s lack of experience in relation to complex air operations meant that in a future conflict it would likely replicate the poor performance of Russia&#x27;s air force. &quot;We may hope that the Chinese leadership will not delude itself as to its own capabilities the way the Russians did when contemplating a future move against Taiwan&quot;; as for Taiwan itself, Fukuyama expressed his hope that it would now begin to prepare for a future conflict including by reintroducing conscription.
* &quot;Turkish drones will become bestsellers&quot;.
* A Russian defeat would permit a &quot;new birth of freedom&quot; and assuage fears about the declining state of global democracy. The spirit of 1989 would live on thanks to Ukraine&#x27;s bravery.

Fukuyama has also put emphasis on the importance of national identity for a sound defense of liberal values—and thus the need to reconcile the nation-state with liberal universalism, even if they seem at odds at first—in a &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot; article:

Liberalism, with its universalist pretensions, may sit uneasily alongside seemingly parochial nationalism, but the two can be reconciled. The goals of liberalism are entirely compatible with a world divided into nation-states. . . . Liberal rights are meaningless if they cannot be enforced by a state . . . The territorial jurisdiction of a state necessarily corresponds to the area occupied by the group of individuals who signed on to the social contract. People living outside that jurisdiction must have their rights respected, but not necessarily enforced, by that state. . . . The need for international cooperation in addressing issues such as global warming and pandemics has never been more evident. But it remains the case that one particular form of power, the ability to enforce rules through the threat or the actual use of force, remains under the control of nation-states. . . . Ultimate power, in other words, continues to be the province of nation-states, which means that the control of power at this level remains critical. . . . There is thus no necessary contradiction between liberal universalism and the need for nation-states. Although the normative value of human rights may be universal, enforcement power is not; it is a scarce resource that is necessarily applied in a territorially delimited way.

In a 2022 interview with &quot;El País&quot;, Fukuyama expressed support for social democratic policies: &quot;In Germany, the Netherlands, Scandinavia, you&#x27;ve had social democratic parties in power for a long time. [They&#x27;ve] done a lot of redistribution – you don&#x27;t get this kind of polarized politics and you have an alternation between the center-left and center-right, which I think is much healthier.&quot; However, Fukuyama also said that he &quot;was never opposed to social democracy. I think that it really depends on the historical period and the degree of state intervention. By the 1960s, many social democratic societies had become mired in low growth [and] high inflation. At that point, I think it was important to roll some of that back. That is, in fact, what happened in Scandinavia. Most of those countries reduced tax rates, reduced levels of regulation and therefore became more productive. But I think that in the current period, we need more social democracy, especially in the United States.&quot;

==Affiliations==
* Between 2006 and 2008, Fukuyama advised Muammar Gaddafi as part of the Monitor Group, a consultancy firm based in Cambridge, MA.
* In August 2005, Fukuyama co-founded &quot;The American Interest&quot;, a bimonthly magazine devoted to the broad theme of &quot;America in the World&quot;. He served as chairman of the editorial board until his resignation. In a published letter posted on his public Medium page on July 27, 2020, Fukuyama cited a disagreement with the publisher&#x27;s decision to terminate Jeff Gedmin as editor-in-chief. Fukuyama also indicated other changes underway at the publication as an additional reason for his resignation.
* Fukuyama was a member of the RAND Corporation&#x27;s Political Science Department from 1979 to 1980, 1983 to 1989, and 1995 to 1996. He is now a member of the board of trustees.
* Fukuyama was a member of the President&#x27;s Council on Bioethics from 2001 to 2004.
* Fukuyama is a Fellow of the World Academy of Art and Science (WAAS).
* Fukuyama was on the steering committee for the Scooter Libby Legal Defense Trust. Fukuyama is a long-time friend of Libby. They served together in the State Department in the 1980s.
* Fukuyama is a member of the Board of Counselors for the Pyle Center of Northeast Asian Studies at the National Bureau of Asian Research.
* Fukuyama is on the board of Global Financial Integrity.
* Fukuyama is a member of the Inter-American Dialogue.
*Fukuyama is the chair of the editorial board for &quot;American Purpose,&quot; a magazine established in 2020.
* Fukuyama is a member of the International Advisory Board for Bellingcat.

==Personal life==
Fukuyama is a part-time photographer. He also has an interest in early American furniture, which he reproduces by hand. Another hobby of Fukuyama&#x27;s is sound recording and reproduction. He explained, &quot;These days I seem to spend as much time thinking about gear as I do analyzing politics for my day job.&quot; Since the mid-1990s, Fukuyama has been building his own personal computers.

Fukuyama is married to Laura Holmgren, whom he met when she was a University of California in Los Angeles graduate student after he started working for the RAND Corporation. He dedicated his book &quot;Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity&quot; to her. They live in California, with their three children, Julia, David, and John.

He is the first cousin to crime novelist Joe Ide. Fukuyama helped him get his first book published.

==Selected bibliography==

===Scholarly works===
* &quot;The Soviet Union and Iraq since 1968&quot;. RAND Corporation (1980).

===Books===

* &quot;The End of History and the Last Man&quot;. Free Press, 1992. 
* Free Press, 1995. 
* &quot;The Great Disruption: Human Nature and the Reconstitution of Social Order&quot;. Free Press. 1999. 
* &quot;Our Posthuman Future: Consequences of the Biotechnology Revolution&quot;. New York, NY: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 2002. 
* &quot;State-Building: Governance and World Order in the 21st century&quot;. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 2004. 
* &quot;America at the Crossroads: Democracy, Power, and the Neoconservative Legacy&quot;. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 2006. &quot;After the Neo Cons: Where the Right went Wrong&quot;. London: Profile Books. 2006. 
* &quot;Falling Behind: Explaining the Development Gap Between Latin America and the United States&quot; (editor). New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 2008. 
* &quot;The Origins of Political Order: From Prehuman Times to the French Revolution&quot;. New York, NY: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 2011. 
* &quot;Political Order and Political Decay: From the Industrial Revolution to the Present Day&quot;. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 2014. 
* &quot;&quot;, New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 2018.
* &quot;Liberalism and Its Discontents&quot;, New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 2022.

===Essays===
* &quot;The End of History?&quot; &quot;The National Interest&quot;, no. 16 (Summer 1989).
* &quot;Women and the Evolution of World Politics.&quot; &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot; (Oct. 1998).
* &quot;Immigrants and Family Values.&quot; The Immigration Reader (1998). .
* &quot;Human Nature and the Reconstruction of Social Order.&quot; &quot;The Atlantic Monthly&quot; (May 1999).
* &quot;Social Capital and Civil Society.&quot; Paper prepared for delivery at the International Monetary Fund Conference on Second Generation Reforms (Oct. 1, 1999).
* &quot;The Neoconservative Moment.&quot; &quot;The National Interest&quot; (Summer 2004).
* &quot;After Neoconservatism.&quot; &quot;New York Times Magazine&quot; (Feb. 19, 2006).
* &quot;Supporter&#x27;s Voice Now Turns on Bush.&quot; &quot;New York Times Magazine&quot; (Mar. 14, 2006).
* &quot;Why Shouldn&#x27;t I Change My Mind?&quot; &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; (Apr. 9, 2006).
* &quot;The Fall of America, Inc.&quot; &quot;Newsweek&quot; (Oct. 13, 2008).
* &quot;The New Nationalism and the Strategic Architecture of Northeast Asia.&quot; &quot;Asia Policy&quot; (Jan. 2007)
* &quot;Left Out.&quot; &quot;The American Interest&quot; (Jan. 2011).
* &quot;Is China Next?&quot; &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot; (Mar. 12, 2011).
* &quot;The Future of History: Can Liberal Democracy Survive the Decline of the Middle Class?&quot; &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot; (Jan./Feb. 2012).
* &quot;What is Governance?&quot; &quot;Governance&quot; (Mar. 2013).
* &quot;Against Identity Politics: The New Tribalism and the Crisis of Democracy.&quot; &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot; (Sep./Oct. 2018).
* &quot;Liberalism and Its Discontents: The Challenges from the Left and the Right.&quot; &quot;American Purpose&quot; (Oct. 2020).
* How to Save Democracy From Technology, &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot;, November 24, 2020 (co-authored with Barak Richman and Ashish Goel)
* &quot;Still the End of History.&quot; &quot;The Atlantic&quot; (Oct. 2022).
* See Ronald T. Libby, &quot;The Death of Political Science and Rebirth of Politics.&quot;
* China&#x27;s Road to Ruin, &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot;, August 22, 2023 (co-authored with Michael Bennon)
* The Year of Elections Has Been Good for Democracy, &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot;, September 4, 2024

==See also==
* Biopolitics
* High trust and low trust societies
* &quot;Brave New World&quot; argument
* Obama Republicans (disambiguation)
* Vetocracy

==References==

==External links==
* 
* Francis Fukuyama&#x27;s blog at American Purpose
* Islam and America... Friends or Foes?
**&quot;In Depth&quot; interview with Fukuyama, March 5, 2006
* ANU Public Lecture Series MP3 of a public lecture by Fukuyama titled &quot;The Missing Dimension of Stateness&quot; delivered at The Australian National University, December 15, 2006
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q186123" start="0" end="26" title="Francis Fukuyama" label="Francis Yoshihiro Fukuyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="68" end="87" title="Political science" label="political scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q47555" start="89" end="108" title="Political economy" label="political economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q166542" start="110" end="133" title="international relations" label="international relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340341" start="198" end="233" title="The End of History and the Last Man" label="The End of History and the Last Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="290" end="309" title="liberal democracies" label="liberal democracies"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="314" end="325" title="Free market" label="free-market"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="326" end="336" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="395" end="410" title="Human" label="humanity&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050187" start="411" end="434" title="sociocultural evolution" label="sociocultural evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q47369905" start="439" end="457" title="Political stability" label="political struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q192139" start="815" end="839" title="Neoconservatism" label="neoconservative movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404101" start="905" end="918" title="senior fellow" label="senior fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931153" start="926" end="976" title="Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies" label="Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="1083" end="1102" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467713" start="1149" end="1198" title="Ford Dorsey Master&amp;#x27;s in International Policy" label="Ford Dorsey Master&amp;#x27;s in International Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352632" start="1312" end="1352" title="Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies" label="School of Advanced International Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="1356" end="1380" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q26243374" start="1403" end="1410" title="Omer L. Hirst" label="Omer L."/>
<link wikidata="Q1411222" start="1488" end="1511" title="George Mason University" label="George Mason University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848094" start="1544" end="1586" title="International Forum for Democratic Studies" label="International Forum for Democratic Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422577" start="1602" end="1634" title="National Endowment for Democracy" label="National Endowment for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="1695" end="1711" title="RAND Corporation" label="RAND Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q154330" start="1810" end="1835" title="Reporters Without Borders" label="Reporters Without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q123474582" start="1862" end="1953" title="Riggs Award for Lifetime Achievement in International and Comparative Public Administration" label="Riggs Award for Lifetime Achievement in International and Comparative Public Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143666" start="2018" end="2027" title="Hyde Park, Chicago" label="Hyde Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q159950" start="2112" end="2130" title="Russo-Japanese War" label="Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q936604" start="2189" end="2201" title="Japanese-American internment" label="incarcerated"/>
<link wikidata="Q8056225" start="2239" end="2254" title="Yoshio Fukuyama" label="Yoshio Fukuyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q15215155" start="2258" end="2275" title="Nisei" label="second-generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156766" start="2276" end="2293" title="Japanese Americans" label="Japanese American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="2328" end="2349" title="Congregational church" label="Congregational Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="2394" end="2415" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="2499" end="2504" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q336264" start="2578" end="2594" title="Kyoto University" label="Kyoto University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143396" start="2618" end="2639" title="Osaka City University" label="Osaka City University"/>
<link wikidata="Q877834" start="2656" end="2669" title="Japanese name" label="Japanese name"/>
<link wikidata="Q8056051" start="2673" end="2682" title="Yoshihiro" label="Yoshihiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="2695" end="2704" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q831454" start="2747" end="2763" title="Japanese Culture" label="Japanese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="2783" end="2791" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187041" start="2813" end="2840" title="State College, Pennsylvania" label="State College, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="2900" end="2908" title="classics" label="classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="2914" end="2932" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q179805" start="2951" end="2971" title="political philosophy" label="political philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q948966" start="2978" end="2989" title="Allan Bloom" label="Allan Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q141212" start="3012" end="3028" title="graduate school" label="graduate studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q834903" start="3032" end="3054" title="comparative literature" label="comparative literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="3058" end="3073" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q179109" start="3120" end="3134" title="Roland Barthes" label="Roland Barthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q130631" start="3139" end="3154" title="Jacques Derrida" label="Jacques Derrida"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="3196" end="3213" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="3217" end="3235" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q19074" start="3260" end="3280" title="Samuel P. Huntington" label="Samuel P. Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q860619" start="3285" end="3301" title="Harvey Mansfield" label="Harvey Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3387" end="3393" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="3422" end="3433" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="3483" end="3499" title="RAND Corporation" label="RAND Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q24765347" start="3524" end="3539" title="Telluride House" label="Telluride House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697663" start="3573" end="3594" title="Telluride Association" label="Telluride Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q179282" start="3751" end="3766" title="Steven Weinberg" label="Steven Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q219861" start="3768" end="3782" title="Paul Wolfowitz" label="Paul Wolfowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376911" start="3787" end="3804" title="Kathleen Sullivan (lawyer)" label="Kathleen Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411222" start="3909" end="3932" title="George Mason University" label="George Mason University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893344" start="3984" end="4003" title="Bernard L. Schwartz" label="Bernard L. Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352632" start="4110" end="4164" title="Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies" label="Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q193727" start="4168" end="4192" title="Johns Hopkins University" label="Johns Hopkins University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931153" start="4275" end="4328" title="Center on Democracy, Development, and the Rule of Law" label="Center on Democracy, Development, and the Rule of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931153" start="4336" end="4386" title="Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies" label="Freeman Spogli Institute for International Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="4390" end="4409" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467713" start="4431" end="4480" title="Ford Dorsey Master&amp;#x27;s in International Policy" label="Ford Dorsey Master&amp;#x27;s in International Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340341" start="4615" end="4650" title="The End of History and the Last Man" label="The End of History and the Last Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="4798" end="4815" title="liberal democracy" label="liberal democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="4837" end="4845" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="4866" end="4877" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521982" start="5006" end="5027" title="The National Interest" label="The National Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q729119" start="5113" end="5132" title="economic liberalism" label="economic liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q76959" start="5151" end="5166" title="Ralf Dahrendorf" label="Ralf Dahrendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q325441" start="5171" end="5186" title="Luciano Canfora" label="Luciano Canfora"/>
<link wikidata="Q194354" start="5235" end="5253" title="15 minutes of fame" label="15 minutes of fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q58968" start="5351" end="5370" title="public intellectual" label="public intellectual"/>
<link wikidata="Q324530" start="5391" end="5404" title="communitarianism" label="communitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q213652" start="5405" end="5419" title="Amitai Etzioni" label="Amitai Etzioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897748" start="5593" end="5606" title="Bernard Crick" label="Bernard Crick"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="5943" end="5956" title="postmodernism" label="postmodernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q647114" start="5986" end="6007" title="postmodern philosophy" label="postmodern philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="6132" end="6139" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="6144" end="6151" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635158" start="6286" end="6301" title="Progressive Era" label="Progressive Era"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6448" end="6470" title="cultural consciousness" label="cultural consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147507" start="6731" end="6748" title="political history" label="political history"/>
<link wikidata="Q28108" start="6791" end="6807" title="political system" label="political system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662628" start="7091" end="7121" title="The Origins of Political Order" label="The Origins of Political Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="7176" end="7193" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q17106442" start="7410" end="7425" title="political decay" label="political decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2504350" start="7517" end="7540" title="special interest groups" label="special interest groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111138" start="7819" end="7885" title="Our Posthuman Future" label="Our Posthuman Future: Consequences of the Biotechnology Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218530" start="7940" end="7954" title="end of history" label="end of history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="8050" end="8059" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q742609" start="8090" end="8102" title="human nature" label="human nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q194100" start="8263" end="8276" title="transhumanism" label="transhumanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18276277" start="8318" end="8327" title="posthuman" label="posthuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q956129" start="8660" end="8675" title="Information Age" label="Information Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662597" start="8820" end="8845" title="America at the Crossroads" label="America at the Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q192139" start="8887" end="8902" title="neoconservatism" label="neoconservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055020" start="9608" end="9638" title="Economic inequality" label="unequal distribution of wealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="9801" end="9813" title="Plato" label="Plato&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706580" start="9824" end="9830" title="thymos" label="thymos"/>
<link wikidata="Q407747" start="9875" end="9885" title="resentment" label="resentment"/>
<link wikidata="Q436860" start="10185" end="10199" title="Right-wing populism" label="populist right"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="10208" end="10224" title="Progressivism" label="progressive left"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="10245" end="10258" title="neoliberalism" label="neoliberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914650" start="10263" end="10280" title="identity politics" label="identity politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824573" start="10337" end="10358" title="Reagan Administration" label="Reagan Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q599227" start="10397" end="10412" title="Reagan Doctrine" label="Reagan Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192139" start="10461" end="10476" title="neoconservatism" label="neoconservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q553196" start="10518" end="10532" title="Irving Kristol" label="Irving Kristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q428649" start="10607" end="10643" title="Project for the New American Century" label="Project for the New American Century"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10728" end="10734" title="Project for the New American Century#Open letter to President Clinton on Iraq" label="letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="10763" end="10775" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="10841" end="10845" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="10846" end="10860" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q714646" start="10900" end="10922" title="Bill Kristol" label="William Kristol&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="10962" end="10976" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="10987" end="11013" title="September 11, 2001 attacks" label="September 11, 2001 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317" start="11069" end="11084" title="Osama bin Laden" label="Osama bin Laden"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="11213" end="11221" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q785893" start="11286" end="11299" title="unilateralism" label="unilateralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774161" start="11416" end="11439" title="international community" label="international community"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="11591" end="11605" title="The New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="12361" end="12380" title="Presidency of George W. Bush" label="Bush administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="12556" end="12564" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q184650" start="12580" end="12595" title="Donald Rumsfeld" label="Donald Rumsfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q735015" start="12618" end="12638" title="United States Secretary of Defense" label="Secretary of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q464135" start="12668" end="12697" title="American Enterprise Institute" label="American Enterprise Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q48259" start="12716" end="12727" title="Dick Cheney" label="Dick Cheney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065216" start="12732" end="12751" title="Charles Krauthammer" label="Charles Krauthammer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12780" end="12788" title="Polarity in international relations#Unipolarity" label="unipolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q182034" start="12808" end="12816" title="hegemony" label="hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q219861" start="13032" end="13046" title="Paul Wolfowitz" label="Paul Wolfowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082705" start="13219" end="13237" title="Islamist extremism" label="Islamist extremism"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="13427" end="13457" title="intergovernmental organization" label="intergovernmental organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q574827" start="13497" end="13513" title="anti-Americanism" label="anti-Americanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="13581" end="13585" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q847808" start="13643" end="13661" title="Social engineering (political science)" label="social engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182760" start="13873" end="13885" title="Wilsonianism" label="Wilsonianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q874302" start="14084" end="14108" title="List of countries by military expenditures" label="global military spending"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="14608" end="14620" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662597" start="14866" end="14891" title="America at the Crossroads" label="America at the Crossroads"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028269" start="14925" end="14952" title="The New York Times Magazine" label="The New York Times Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q155059" start="15029" end="15037" title="Leninism" label="Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15164" end="15277" title="The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte#&amp;quot;First as tragedy, then as farce&amp;quot;" label="Leninism was a tragedy in its Bolshevik version, and it has returned as farce when practiced by the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q185729" start="15505" end="15521" title="War on Terrorism" label="War on Terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="15542" end="15554" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="15562" end="15591" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008 US presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388932" start="16115" end="16132" title="Constitution of Iran" label="1979 constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566255" start="16172" end="16185" title="New Statesman" label="New Statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="16241" end="16250" title="socialist" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="16342" end="16361" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q605" start="16388" end="16398" title="Ezra Klein" label="Ezra Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q96414832" start="16422" end="16446" title="Why We&amp;#x27;re Polarized" label="Why We&amp;#x27;re Polarized"/>
<link wikidata="Q330963" start="16463" end="16474" title="US politics" label="US politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q86010097" start="16554" end="16568" title="white identity" label="white identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="16572" end="16584" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="16794" end="16811" title="liberal democracy" label="liberal democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="17105" end="17114" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q22923830" start="17137" end="17163" title="2020 United States presidential election" label="2020 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="17323" end="17356" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russia&amp;#x27;s invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q831550" start="18045" end="18061" title="war of attrition" label="war of attrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q17199349" start="18304" end="18310" title="Casualties of the Russo-Ukrainian War" label="losses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="18390" end="18404" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055449" start="18694" end="18708" title="Matteo Salvini" label="Matteo Salvini"/>
<link wikidata="Q10304982" start="18710" end="18724" title="Jair Bolsonaro" label="Jair Bolsonaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q288477" start="18726" end="18738" title="Éric Zemmour" label="Éric Zemmour"/>
<link wikidata="Q12927" start="18740" end="18753" title="Marine Le Pen" label="Marine Le Pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57641" start="18755" end="18767" title="Viktor Orbán" label="Viktor Orbán"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="18773" end="18785" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q607832" start="19110" end="19149" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Air Force" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q17501733" start="19653" end="19667" title="Bayraktar TB2" label="Turkish drones"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="19845" end="19849" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="20128" end="20143" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q50009" start="21519" end="21526" title="El País" label="El País"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="21565" end="21582" title="Social democracy" label="social democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="22585" end="22600" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900476" start="22616" end="22629" title="Monitor Group" label="Monitor Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713492" start="22718" end="22739" title="The American Interest" label="The American Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186120" start="22943" end="22949" title="Medium (website)" label="Medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686444" start="23051" end="23062" title="Jeff Gedmin" label="Jeff Gedmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="23225" end="23241" title="RAND Corporation" label="RAND Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758069" start="23401" end="23442" title="the President&amp;#x27;s Council on Bioethics" label="the President&amp;#x27;s Council on Bioethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3650983" start="23492" end="23524" title="World Academy of Art and Science" label="World Academy of Art and Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q380441" start="23582" end="23595" title="Scooter Libby" label="Scooter Libby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971153" start="23821" end="23854" title="National Bureau of Asian Research" label="National Bureau of Asian Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q7299207" start="23886" end="23912" title="Global Financial Integrity" label="Global Financial Integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044563" start="23944" end="23967" title="Inter-American Dialogue" label="Inter-American Dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q22938621" start="24144" end="24154" title="Bellingcat" label="Bellingcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934689" start="24255" end="24264" title="Virginia furniture" label="furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077126" start="24331" end="24363" title="sound recording and reproduction" label="sound recording and reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="24637" end="24676" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California in Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="24727" end="24743" title="RAND Corporation" label="RAND Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q50385245" start="24962" end="24969" title="Joe Ide" label="Joe Ide"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="25123" end="25139" title="RAND Corporation" label="RAND Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340341" start="25170" end="25205" title="The End of History and the Last Man" label="The End of History and the Last Man"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25255" end="25341" title="The Great Disruption: Human Nature and the Reconstitution of Social Order." label="&amp;quot;The Great Disruption: Human Nature and the Reconstitution of Social Order&amp;quot;."/>
<link wikidata="" start="25369" end="25435" title="Our Posthuman Future: Consequences of the Biotechnology Revolution" label="Our Posthuman Future: Consequences of the Biotechnology Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067003" start="25457" end="25482" title="Farrar, Straus and Giroux" label="Farrar, Straus and Giroux"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25493" end="25568" title="State-Building: Governance and World Order in the 21st century." label="&amp;quot;State-Building: Governance and World Order in the 21st century&amp;quot;."/>
<link wikidata="Q2997531" start="25581" end="25605" title="Cornell University Press" label="Cornell University Press"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25622" end="25697" title="America at the Crossroads: Democracy, Power, and the Neoconservative Legacy" label="America at the Crossroads: Democracy, Power, and the Neoconservative Legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q255147" start="25720" end="25741" title="Yale University Press" label="Yale University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662597" start="25749" end="25808" title="America at the Crossroads" label="&amp;quot;After the Neo Cons: Where the Right went Wrong&amp;quot;."/>
<link wikidata="Q7248254" start="25817" end="25830" title="Profile Books" label="Profile Books"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25847" end="25937" title="Falling Behind: Explaining the Development Gap Between Latin America and the United States" label="Falling Behind: Explaining the Development Gap Between Latin America and the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="25968" end="25991" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662628" start="26008" end="26084" title="The Origins of Political Order" label="The Origins of Political Order: From Prehuman Times to the French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="" start="26148" end="26234" title="Political Order and Political Decay: From the Industrial Revolution to the Present Day" label="Political Order and Political Decay: From the Industrial Revolution to the Present Day"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26353" end="26383" title="Liberalism and Its Discontents" label="Liberalism and Its Discontents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="26602" end="26617" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="26787" end="26807" title="The Atlantic Monthly" label="The Atlantic Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="26909" end="26936" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521982" start="27041" end="27062" title="The National Interest" label="The National Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028269" start="27127" end="27150" title="New York Times Magazine" label="New York Times Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028269" start="27236" end="27259" title="New York Times Magazine" label="New York Times Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="27340" end="27357" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="27426" end="27434" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713492" start="27608" end="27629" title="The American Interest" label="The American Interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="27684" end="27707" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="27837" end="27852" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588619" start="27917" end="27927" title="Governance (journal)" label="Governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="28041" end="28056" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="28260" end="28275" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="28396" end="28408" title="The Atlantic" label="The Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="28554" end="28569" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="28686" end="28701" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904237" start="28743" end="28754" title="Biopolitics" label="Biopolitics"/>
<link wikidata="Q56274047" start="28757" end="28791" title="High trust and low trust societies" label="High trust and low trust societies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28794" end="28830" title="Transhumanism#Threats to morality and democracy" label="&amp;quot;Brave New World&amp;quot; argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q123202630" start="28833" end="28867" title="Obama Republicans (disambiguation)" label="Obama Republicans (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923762" start="28870" end="28879" title="Vetocracy" label="Vetocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q127990" start="29207" end="29237" title="Australian National University" label="Australian National University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11195" wikidata="Q736748" url="?curid=11195" title="Fingerspelling">
<text>Fingerspelling (or dactylology) is the representation of the letters of a writing system, and sometimes numeral systems, using only the hands. These manual alphabets (also known as finger alphabets or hand alphabets) have often been used in deaf education and have subsequently been adopted as a distinct part of a number of sign languages. There are about forty manual alphabets around the world. Historically, manual alphabets have had a number of additional applications—including use as ciphers, as mnemonics and in silent religious settings.

==Forms of manual alphabets==
As with other forms of manual communication, fingerspelling can be comprehended visually or tactually. The simplest visual form of fingerspelling is tracing the shape of letters in the air and the simplest tactual form is tracing them on the hand. Fingerspelling can be one-handed such as in American Sign Language, French Sign Language and Irish Sign Language, or it can be two-handed such as in British Sign Language.

==Fingerspelling in sign languages==
Fingerspelling has been introduced into certain sign languages by educators and as such has some structural properties that are unlike the visually motivated and multi-layered signs that are typical in deaf sign languages. In many ways fingerspelling serves as a bridge between the sign language and the oral language that surrounds it.

Fingerspelling is used in different sign languages and registers for different purposes. It may be used to represent words from an oral language that have no sign equivalent or for emphasis or clarification or when teaching or learning a sign language.

In American Sign Language (ASL) more lexical items are fingerspelled in casual conversation than in formal or narrative signing. Different sign language speech communities use fingerspelling to a greater or lesser degree. At the high end of the scale fingerspelling makes up about 8.7% of casual signing in ASL and 10% of casual signing in Auslan. The proportion is higher in older signers. Across the Tasman Sea only 2.5% of the corpus of New Zealand Sign Language was found to be fingerspelling. Fingerspelling did not become a part of NZSL until the 1980s. Before that words could be spelled or initialised by tracing letters in the air. Fingerspelling does not seem to be used much in the sign languages of Eastern Europe except in schools, and Italian Sign Language is also said to use very little fingerspelling, and mainly for foreign words. Sign languages that make no use of fingerspelling at all include Kata Kolok and Ban Khor Sign Language.

The speed and clarity of fingerspelling also vary among different signing communities. In Italian Sign Language fingerspelled words are produced relatively slowly and clearly, whereas fingerspelling in standard British Sign Language (BSL) is often rapid so that the individual letters become difficult to distinguish and the word is grasped from the overall hand movement. Most of the letters of the BSL alphabet are produced with two hands but when one hand is occupied the dominant hand may fingerspell onto an imaginary subordinate hand and the word can be recognised by the movement. As with written words, the first and last letters and the length of the word are the most significant factors for recognition.

When people fluent in sign language read fingerspelling they do not usually look at the signer&#x27;s hand(s) but maintain eye contact, as is normal for sign language. People who are learning fingerspelling often find it impossible to understand it using just their peripheral vision and must look straight at the hand of someone who is fingerspelling. Often they must also ask the signer to fingerspell slowly. It frequently takes years of expressive and receptive practice to become skilled with fingerspelling.

==Families of manual alphabets in sign languages==

Power et al. (2020) conducted a large-scale data study into the evolution and contemporary character of 76 current and defunct manual alphabets (MAs) of sign languages, postulating the existence of eight groups: an Afghan–Jordanian Group, an Austrian-origin Group (with a Danish Subgroup), a British-origin Group, a French-origin Group, a Polish Group, a Russian Group, a Spanish Group, and a Swedish Group. Notably, several defunct versions of German, Austrian, Hungarian and Danish manual alphabets were part of the Austrian-origin group, while the current MAs of these sign languages are closely related to the French, American, International Sign and other MAs in the French-origin Group. Latvian Sign Language&#x27;s MA dangled somewhere between the Polish and Russian Groups, Finnish Sign Language (which belongs to the Swedish Sign Language family) had a French-origin MA, while Indo-Pakistani Sign Language (whose lexicon and grammar have independent origins) currently used a two-handed manual alphabet of British origin.

Yoel (2009) demonstrated that American Sign Language is influencing the lexicon and grammar of Maritime Sign Language in various ways, including the fact that the original BANZSL two-handed manual alphabet is no longer used in the Maritimes and has been replaced by the one-handed American manual alphabet, which has been influencing lexicalisation. Although all participants in her survey had learnt and could still produce the BANZSL fingerspelling, they had difficulty doing so, and all participants indicated that it had been a long time since they last used it.

===One-handed===

Two families of manual alphabets are used for representing the Latin alphabet in the modern world. The more common of the two is mostly produced on one hand and can be traced back to alphabetic signs used in Europe from at least the early 15th century.

Some manual representations of non-Roman scripts such as Chinese, Japanese, Devanagari (e.g. the Nepali manual alphabet), Hebrew, Greek, Thai and Russian alphabets are based to some extent on the one-handed Latin alphabet described above. In some cases, however, the &#x27;basis&#x27; is more theory than practice. Thus, for example, in the Japanese manual syllabary only the five vowels (ア /a/,　イ /i/,　ウ /u/,　エ /e/,　オ /o/) and the Ca (consonant plus &quot;a&#x27; vowel) letters (カ /ka/, サ /sa/, ナ /na/, ハ /ha/, マ /ma/, ヤ /ya/, ラ /ra/, ワ /wa/, but notably &quot;not&quot; タ /ta/, which would resemble a somewhat rude gesture) derive from the American manual alphabet. In the Nepali Sign Language only four &#x27;letters&#x27; derive from the American manual alphabet: अ /a/, ब /b/, म /m/, and र /r/).

The Yugoslav manual alphabet represents characters from the Serbian Cyrillic alphabet as well as Gaj&#x27;s Latin alphabet.
Manual alphabets based on the Arabic alphabet, the Ethiopian Ge&#x27;ez script and the Korean Hangul script use handshapes that are more or less iconic representations of the characters in the writing system.

===Two-handed===

Two-handed manual alphabets are used by a number of deaf communities; one such alphabet is shared by users of British Sign Language, Auslan and New Zealand Sign Language (collectively known as the BANZSL language family) and another is used in Turkish Sign Language. Some of the letters are represented by iconic shapes and in the BANZSL languages the vowels are represented by pointing to the fingertips.

Letters are formed by a dominant hand, which is on top of or alongside the other hand at the point of contact, and a subordinate hand, which uses either the same or a simpler handshape as the dominant hand. Either the left or right hand can be dominant. In a modified tactile form used by deafblind people the signer&#x27;s hand acts as the dominant hand and the receiver&#x27;s hand becomes the subordinate hand.

Some signs, such as the sign commonly used for the letter &quot;C&quot;, may be one-handed.

==History of manual alphabets==

===Latin manual alphabet===

Some writers have suggested that the body and hands were used to represent alphabets in Greek, Roman, Egyptian and Assyrian antiquity. Certainly, &quot;finger calculus&quot; systems were widespread, and capable of representing numbers up to 10,000; they are still in use today in parts of the Middle East. The practice of substituting letters for numbers and vice versa, known as gematria, was also common, and it is possible that the two practices were combined to produce a finger calculus alphabet. The earliest known manual alphabet, described by the Benedictine monk Bede in 8th century Northumbria, did just that. While the usual purpose of the Latin and Greek finger alphabets described by Bede is unknown, they were unlikely to have been used by deaf people for communication — even though Bede lost his own hearing later in life. Historian Lois Bragg concludes that these alphabets were &quot;only a bookish game.&quot;

Beginning with R. A. S. Macalister in 1938, several writers have speculated that the 5th century Irish Ogham script, with its quinary alphabet system, was derived from a finger alphabet that predates even Bede.

European monks from at least the time of Bede have made use of forms of manual communication, including alphabetic gestures, for a number of reasons: communication among the monastery while observing vows of silence, administering to the ill, and as mnemonic devices. They also may have been used as ciphers for discreet or secret communication. Clear antecedents of many of the manual alphabets in use today can be seen from the 16th century in books published by friars in Spain and Italy. From the same time, monks such as the Benedictine Fray Pedro Ponce de León began tutoring deaf children of wealthy patrons — in some places, literacy was a requirement for legal recognition as an heir — and the manual alphabets found a new purpose. They were originally part of the earliest known Mouth Hand Systems. The first book on deaf education, published in 1620 by Juan Pablo Bonet in Madrid, included a detailed account of the use of a manual alphabet to teach deaf students to read and speak.

This alphabet was adopted by the Abbé de l&#x27;Épée&#x27;s deaf school in Paris in the 18th century and then spread to deaf communities around the world in the 19th and 20th centuries via educators who had learned it in Paris. Over time variations have emerged, brought about by the natural phonetic changes that have occurred over time, adaptations for local written forms with special characters or diacritics (which are sometimes represented with the other hand) and avoidance of handshapes considered obscene in some cultures.

Meanwhile, in Britain, manual alphabets were also in use for a number of purposes, such as secret communication, public speaking, or used for communication by deaf people. In 1648, John Bulwer described &quot;Master Babington&quot;, a deaf man proficient in the use of a manual alphabet, &quot;contryved on the joynts of his fingers&quot;, whose wife could converse with him easily, even in the dark through the use of tactile signing. In 1680, George Dalgarno published &quot;Didascalocophus, or, The deaf and dumb mans tutor&quot;, in which he presented his own method of deaf education, including an arthropological alphabet. Charles de La Fin published a book in 1692 describing an alphabetic system where pointing to a body part represented the first letter of the part (e.g. Brow=B), and vowels were located on the fingertips as with the other British systems. He described codes for both English and Latin.

The vowels of these early British manual alphabets, across the tips of the fingers, have survived in the contemporary alphabets used in British Sign Language, Auslan and New Zealand Sign Language. The earliest known printed pictures of consonants of the modern two-handed alphabet appeared in 1698 with &quot;Digiti Lingua&quot;, a pamphlet by an anonymous author who was himself unable to speak. He suggested that the manual alphabet could also be used by mutes, for silence and secrecy, or purely for entertainment. Nine of its letters can be traced to earlier alphabets, and 17 letters of the modern two-handed alphabet can be found among the two sets of 26 handshapes depicted.

== See also ==
*American manual alphabet
*Catalan manual alphabet
*Chilean manual alphabet
*Cued Speech
*French manual alphabet
*Initialized sign
*Irish manual alphabet
*Japanese manual syllabary
*Korean manual alphabet
*Nepali manual alphabet
*Polish manual alphabet
*Russian manual alphabet
*Sign name
*Spanish manual alphabet
*Turkish Sign Language
*Two-handed manual alphabet
== Gallery ==


==References==
==External links==

*ASL Fingerspelling Chart A free, printable ASL fingerspelling chart &amp; other resources.
===Historic texts===
*Bonet, Juan Pablo (1620). Reducción de las letras y arte para enseñar a hablar a los mudos . Scan from Biblioteca Histórica de la Universidad de Sevilla.
*Dalgarno, George (1834). Didascalocophus, Or the Deaf and Dumb Man&#x27;s Tutor in The Works of George Dalgarno of Aberdeen (Maitland Club publications 29) pp. 110–160.
*Rossellius, Cosmas (1579). Thesaurus Artificiosae Memoriae p. 101-105.
*Wilkins, John (1641) Mercvry, or, the Secret and Swift Messenger
*de Yebra, Melchor (1593) Refugium Infirmorum (&quot;Refuge of the Sick&quot;)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q736748" start="0" end="14" title="Fingerspelling" label="Fingerspelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q736748" start="19" end="30" title="Fingerspelling" label="dactylology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9788" start="61" end="67" title="letter (alphabet)" label="letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="74" end="88" title="writing system" label="writing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q122653" start="104" end="118" title="numeral system" label="numeral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q736748" start="149" end="165" title="Fingerspelling" label="manual alphabets"/>
<link wikidata="Q736748" start="181" end="197" title="Fingerspelling" label="finger alphabets"/>
<link wikidata="Q736748" start="201" end="215" title="Fingerspelling" label="hand alphabets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430964" start="241" end="255" title="deaf education" label="deaf education"/>
<link wikidata="Q34228" start="325" end="338" title="sign language" label="sign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681865" start="491" end="497" title="cipher" label="cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q191062" start="503" end="511" title="mnemonic" label="mnemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752310" start="601" end="621" title="manual communication" label="manual communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879493" start="670" end="679" title="tactile signing" label="tactually"/>
<link wikidata="Q14759" start="870" end="892" title="American Sign Language" label="American Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33302" start="894" end="914" title="French Sign Language" label="French Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q14183" start="919" end="938" title="Irish Sign Language" label="Irish Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33000" start="975" end="996" title="British Sign Language" label="British Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q286576" start="1429" end="1437" title="Register (sociolinguistics)" label="register"/>
<link wikidata="Q14759" start="1631" end="1653" title="American Sign Language" label="American Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q383340" start="1781" end="1799" title="speech community" label="speech communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q29525" start="1968" end="1974" title="Auslan" label="Auslan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33254" start="2030" end="2040" title="Tasman Sea" label="Tasman Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q865083" start="2058" end="2064" title="Corpus linguistics" label="corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36239" start="2068" end="2093" title="New Zealand Sign Language" label="New Zealand Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q375619" start="2377" end="2398" title="Italian Sign Language" label="Italian Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322119" start="2542" end="2552" title="Kata Kolok" label="Kata Kolok"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441103" start="2557" end="2579" title="Ban Khor Sign Language" label="Ban Khor Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33000" start="2793" end="2814" title="British Sign Language" label="British Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431287" start="3564" end="3581" title="peripheral vision" label="peripheral vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q35754" start="4497" end="4515" title="International Sign" label="International Sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497414" start="4558" end="4579" title="Latvian Sign Language" label="Latvian Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33225" start="4647" end="4668" title="Finnish Sign Language" label="Finnish Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654844" start="4691" end="4719" title="Swedish Sign Language family" label="Swedish Sign Language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306265" start="4751" end="4779" title="Indo-Pakistani Sign Language" label="Indo-Pakistani Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q14759" start="4927" end="4949" title="American Sign Language" label="American Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915483" start="4992" end="5014" title="Maritime Sign Language" label="Maritime Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5069" end="5102" title="two-handed manual alphabet#BANZSL alphabet" label="BANZSL two-handed manual alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q731613" start="5124" end="5137" title="the Maritimes" label="the Maritimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745500" start="5178" end="5202" title="American manual alphabet" label="American manual alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q687185" start="5231" end="5245" title="lexicalisation" label="lexicalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="5546" end="5560" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092831" start="5803" end="5811" title="Japanese manual syllabary" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6994528" start="5834" end="5856" title="Nepali manual alphabet" label="Nepali manual alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092831" start="6078" end="6103" title="Japanese manual syllabary" label="Japanese manual syllabary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745500" start="6380" end="6404" title="American manual alphabet" label="American manual alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915492" start="6413" end="6433" title="Nepalese Sign Language" label="Nepali Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745500" start="6480" end="6504" title="American manual alphabet" label="American manual alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060385" start="6544" end="6568" title="Yugoslav manual alphabet" label="Yugoslav manual alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q829464" start="6600" end="6625" title="Serbian Cyrillic alphabet" label="Serbian Cyrillic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q754989" start="6637" end="6662" title="Gaj&amp;#x27;s Latin alphabet" label="Gaj&amp;#x27;s Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8196" start="6694" end="6709" title="Arabic alphabet" label="Arabic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q257634" start="6725" end="6742" title="Ge&amp;#x27;ez script" label="Ge&amp;#x27;ez script"/>
<link wikidata="Q8222" start="6758" end="6764" title="Hangul" label="Hangul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839535" start="6892" end="6919" title="Two-handed manual alphabets" label="Two-handed manual alphabets"/>
<link wikidata="Q33000" start="7002" end="7023" title="British Sign Language" label="British Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q29525" start="7025" end="7031" title="Auslan" label="Auslan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36239" start="7036" end="7061" title="New Zealand Sign Language" label="New Zealand Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805523" start="7089" end="7095" title="BANZSL" label="BANZSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q36885" start="7136" end="7157" title="Turkish Sign Language" label="Turkish Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q843356" start="7588" end="7597" title="deafblind" label="deafblind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417141" start="8021" end="8036" title="finger calculus" label="finger calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q840378" start="8249" end="8257" title="gematria" label="gematria"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="8424" end="8435" title="Benedictine" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q154938" start="8441" end="8445" title="Bede" label="Bede"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="8461" end="8472" title="Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q983129" start="8814" end="8833" title="Robert Alexander Stewart Macalister" label="R. A. S. Macalister"/>
<link wikidata="Q184661" start="8902" end="8907" title="Ogham" label="Ogham"/>
<link wikidata="Q263994" start="8925" end="8932" title="quinary" label="quinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752310" start="9083" end="9103" title="manual communication" label="manual communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066767" start="9211" end="9226" title="vow of silence" label="vows of silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q191062" start="9261" end="9269" title="mnemonic" label="mnemonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681865" start="9311" end="9317" title="cipher" label="cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q548320" start="9553" end="9557" title="Friar" label="Fray"/>
<link wikidata="Q917829" start="9558" end="9577" title="Pedro Ponce de León" label="Pedro Ponce de León"/>
<link wikidata="Q282410" start="9875" end="9891" title="Juan Pablo Bonet" label="Juan Pablo Bonet"/>
<link wikidata="Q860155" start="10039" end="10058" title="Charles-Michel de l&amp;#x27;Épée" label="Abbé de l&amp;#x27;Épée"/>
<link wikidata="Q754984" start="10298" end="10314" title="Sound change" label="phonetic changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q162940" start="10408" end="10417" title="diacritic" label="diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075402" start="10512" end="10519" title="Obscene gesture" label="obscene"/>
<link wikidata="Q10307815" start="10720" end="10731" title="John Bulwer" label="John Bulwer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879493" start="10958" end="10973" title="tactile signing" label="tactile signing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101523" start="10984" end="10999" title="George Dalgarno" label="George Dalgarno"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="11458" end="11463" title="vowel" label="vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q33000" start="11590" end="11611" title="British Sign Language" label="British Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839535" start="11715" end="11734" title="two-handed alphabet" label="two-handed alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745500" start="12153" end="12177" title="American manual alphabet" label="American manual alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051227" start="12179" end="12202" title="Catalan manual alphabet" label="Catalan manual alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098788" start="12204" end="12227" title="Chilean manual alphabet" label="Chilean manual alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q590951" start="12229" end="12240" title="Cued Speech" label="Cued Speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502308" start="12242" end="12264" title="French manual alphabet" label="French manual alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17131386" start="12266" end="12282" title="Initialized sign" label="Initialized sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060789" start="12284" end="12305" title="Irish manual alphabet" label="Irish manual alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092831" start="12307" end="12332" title="Japanese manual syllabary" label="Japanese manual syllabary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6432003" start="12334" end="12356" title="Korean manual alphabet" label="Korean manual alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6994528" start="12358" end="12380" title="Nepali manual alphabet" label="Nepali manual alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210042" start="12382" end="12404" title="Polish manual alphabet" label="Polish manual alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4400460" start="12406" end="12429" title="Russian manual alphabet" label="Russian manual alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6305506" start="12431" end="12440" title="Sign name" label="Sign name"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573416" start="12442" end="12465" title="Spanish manual alphabet" label="Spanish manual alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q36885" start="12467" end="12488" title="Turkish Sign Language" label="Turkish Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839535" start="12490" end="12516" title="Two-handed manual alphabet" label="Two-handed manual alphabet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11223" wikidata="Q901213" url="?curid=11223" title="Four Weddings and a Funeral">
<text>Four Weddings and a Funeral is a 1994 British romantic comedy film directed by Mike Newell. It is the first of several films by screenwriter Richard Curtis to star Hugh Grant, and follows the adventures of Charles (Grant) and his circle of friends through a number of social occasions as they each encounter romance. Andie MacDowell co-stars as Charles&#x27;s love interest Carrie, with Kristin Scott Thomas, James Fleet, Simon Callow, John Hannah, Charlotte Coleman, David Bower, Corin Redgrave and Rowan Atkinson in supporting roles.

The film was made in six weeks, cost under £3 million, and became an unexpected success and the highest-grossing British film in history at the time, with worldwide box office total of $245.7 million, and receiving Academy Award nominations for Best Picture and Best Original Screenplay. Additionally, Grant won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy and the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role, and the film won the BAFTA Awards&#x27; Best Film, Best Direction, and Best Actress in a Supporting Role for Scott Thomas. The film&#x27;s success propelled Hugh Grant to international stardom, particularly in the United States.

In 1999, &quot;Four Weddings and a Funeral&quot; was placed 23rd on the British Film Institute&#x27;s 100 greatest British films of the 20th century. In 2016, &quot;Empire&quot; magazine ranked it 21st in their list of the 100 best British films. A 2017 poll of 150 actors, directors, writers, producers and critics for &quot;Time Out&quot; magazine ranked it the 74th-best British film ever.

Curtis reunited director Newell and the surviving cast for a 25th-anniversary reunion Comic Relief short entitled &quot;One Red Nose Day and a Wedding&quot;, which aired in the UK during Red Nose Day on 15 March 2019.

==Plot==
On 1 May 1993, at the wedding of Angus and Laura in Somerset, the perpetually late best man Charles, his flatmate Scarlett, his aristocratic friend Fiona and her brother Tom, Gareth and his partner Matthew, and Charles&#x27;s deaf brother David, all gather. All are unmarried. Charles forgets the rings and hastily borrows two from the congregation, which prove to be incongruous. At the reception, he makes a risqué speech and is attracted to Carrie, an American woman who has been working in England. They spend the night together. In the morning, Carrie, who is returning to the U.S., laments to him that they may have &quot;missed a great opportunity&quot;.

Three months later, at the London wedding of Bernard and Lydia—who got together at the previous wedding—Tom is the best man. Charles is excited to run into Carrie, who has returned to the UK. He is disappointed to meet Hamish, Carrie&#x27;s older, wealthy Scottish fiancé. A young woman named Serena is attracted to David.

During the reception, Charles is humiliated by several ex-girlfriends. These include the distraught Henrietta, called &quot;Duckface&quot; by Fiona and whose brother was inadvertently insulted by Charles at the first wedding. Henrietta claims Charles is a &quot;serial monogamist&quot; fearful of commitment. Charles retreats to an empty hotel suite and sees Carrie and Hamish depart by taxi. Charles is temporarily trapped in the room when the newlyweds stumble in to have sex. Carrie returns to the reception; she and Charles spend a second night together.

A month later, Charles receives an invitation to Carrie&#x27;s wedding to Hamish. While searching for a gift on London&#x27;s South Bank, he runs into Carrie. Charles helps Carrie choose a wedding dress, after which she recounts her 33 sexual partners to him; Charles, who was number 32, awkwardly confesses he loves her, and Carrie gently rebuffs him.

A month later, Charles and his friends attend Carrie and Hamish&#x27;s wedding in Perthshire. The flamboyant Gareth tells the group to seek potential mates. Scarlett meets Chester, a Texan. Henrietta points out her new boyfriend to Charles. As Charles watches Carrie and Hamish dance, Fiona, aware of Charles&#x27;s unhappiness, tells him she remains single because she loves him. Charles, though sympathetic, does not reciprocate her feelings. During Hamish&#x27;s speech, Gareth suffers a fatal heart attack.

At Gareth&#x27;s funeral, Matthew recites &quot;Funeral Blues&quot;, a poem by W. H. Auden. Carrie and Charles share a brief moment, and Charles and Tom then ponder that, despite their clique&#x27;s pride in being single, Gareth and Matthew were as a &quot;married&quot; couple. They wonder whether seeking &quot;one true love&quot; is futile.

Ten months later, Charles&#x27;s wedding day arrives; he is marrying Henrietta. While seating guests, Tom meets his distant cousin, Deirdre, whom he has not seen since childhood; they are smitten with each other. Scarlett and Chester are overjoyed to meet again.

Carrie arrives and tells Charles she and Hamish separated following a difficult marriage. Charles has an emotional crisis in a back room of the church. After David and Matthew counsel him, he decides to proceed with the wedding. When the vicar asks whether anyone present has reason why the couple should not marry, David uses sign language to say the groom has doubts and loves someone else. Charles confirms this by saying &quot;I do&quot;, and a furious Henrietta knocks him out at the altar, ending the ceremony.

Later that day, Charles is at his flat discussing the fiasco with his friends when Carrie arrives to apologise for causing trouble. Charles again says he loves her and proposes a lifelong commitment without marriage, which Carrie accepts. As they kiss, a thunderbolt flashes across the sky.
In an ending photo montage, Henrietta has married an Army officer; David married Serena; Scarlett has married Chester, the Texan; Tom married Deirdre; Matthew has found a new male partner; Fiona is shown with Prince Charles; and Charles and Carrie have had their first child.

==Main cast==
==Production==
===Writing===
Screenwriter Richard Curtis&#x27;s own experiences as a wedding attendee inspired &quot;Four Weddings and a Funeral&quot;. According to Curtis, he began writing the script at age 34, after realising he had attended 65 weddings in an 11-year period. At one wedding he was propositioned by a fellow guest, but he turned her down and forever regretted it; accordingly, he based the origin of Charles and Carrie&#x27;s romance on that situation.

It took Curtis 17 drafts to reach the final version. He initially planned the film as &#x27;Four Weddings and a Honeymoon&#x27; but introduced the funeral theme on the advice of Helen Fielding. He has commented on director Mike Newell&#x27;s influence; &quot;I come from a school where making it funny is what matters. Mike was obsessed with keeping it real. Every character, no matter how small, has a story, not just three funny lines. It&#x27;s a romantic film about love and friendship that swims in a sea of jokes.&quot;

Curtis chose to omit any mention of the characters&#x27; careers, because he did not think a group of friends would realistically discuss their jobs while together at a wedding.

===Casting===
Curtis, Newell and the producers began the casting process for &quot;Four Weddings&quot; in early 1992. Alex Jennings was cast as Charles, but funding for the production fell through in mid-1992. Jennings would eventually go on to play a supporting role in Mindy Kaling&#x27;s 2019 television miniseries adaptation of the film. The team continued holding auditions for over a year, seeing roughly 70 actors for the role of Charles before Hugh Grant.

Grant was ready to give up acting as a career when he received the script for &quot;Four Weddings and a Funeral&quot;; he stated in 2016 that: &quot;I wasn&#x27;t really getting any work at all, and then to my great surprise this script came through the letterbox from my agent, and it was really good. And I rang on and said there must be a mistake, you&#x27;ve sent me a good script.&quot; Initially, writer Richard Curtis, who had modelled the character of Charles after himself, was opposed to casting Grant in the role, because he thought Grant was too handsome. Curtis favoured casting Alan Rickman, but Rickman refused to audition. Curtis was eventually persuaded by Newell and the producers to approve Grant&#x27;s casting.

Jeanne Tripplehorn was originally cast as Carrie, but she had to drop out before filming when her mother died. The role was offered to Marisa Tomei, but she turned it down, because her grandfather was sick at the time. Sarah Jessica Parker was also reportedly considered. Andie MacDowell was in London doing publicity for &quot;Groundhog Day&quot; when she read the script and was subsequently cast. MacDowell took a 75% cut in her fee to appear, receiving $250,000 upfront, but due to the success of the film, she earned around $3 million.

Grant&#x27;s participation hit another stumbling block when his agent requested a £5,000 rise over the £35,000 salary Grant was offered. The producers initially refused because of the extremely tight budget, but eventually agreed. The supporting cast members were paid £17,500 apiece.

===Production===
Duncan Kenworthy produced the film while on sabbatical from Jim Henson Productions. Pre-production for the movie was a long process because funding was erratic, falling through in mid-1992 and leading to much uncertainty. Finally in early 1993, Working Title Films stepped in to close the gap. Nonetheless, another $1.2 million was cut just before production began in the summer of 1993, forcing the film to be made in just 36 days with a final budget of £2.7 million (approximately $4.4 million in 1994). Channel Four Films contributed £800,000. The budget was so tight that extras had to wear their own wedding clothes, while Rowan Atkinson appeared as a vicar at two of the weddings so production would not have to pay another actor.

Future Home Secretary and Member of Parliament (MP) Amber Rudd was given the credit of &quot;Aristocracy Coordinator&quot; after she arranged for several aristocrats to make uncredited appearances as wedding extras, including Peregrine Cavendish, who was at the time Marquess of Hartington, and the Earl of Woolton, who conveniently wore their own morning suits.

To make Grant look more nerdy, the producers styled him with shaggy hair, glasses and deliberately unflattering, ill-fitting clothes. Grant was encouraged by director Mike Newell to mess up and trip over his lines, written in &quot;convoluted syntax&quot; as Grant describes them, in order to give Charles a stammering, nervous quality. Grant, who struggled with hay fever throughout filming, was unsure of Newell&#x27;s direction and his own performance, which he thought was &quot;atrocious.&quot; Regarding Newell, Grant commented that: &quot;He seemed to be giving direction against what I thought were the natural beats of the comedy. He was making a film with texture, grounding it, playing the truths rather than the gags&quot;.

====Filming locations====
The film was shot mainly in London and the Home Counties, including: Hampstead, Islington where the final moments take place on Highbury Terrace, Greenwich Hospital, Betchworth in Surrey, Amersham in Buckinghamshire, the village of Sarratt in Hertfordshire (wedding number one), St Bartholomew-the-Great church in London (wedding number four), and St Clement&#x27;s Church, West Thurrock in Essex (the funeral). Exterior shots of guests arriving for the funeral were filmed in Thurrock, Essex overlooking the River Thames with the backdrop of the Dartford River Crossing and the Queen Elizabeth II Bridge.

Stately homes in Bedfordshire (Luton Hoo for wedding two&#x27;s reception) and Hampshire provided exteriors for weddings.

===Post-production===
According to Hugh Grant, the initial screening of a rough cut of &quot;Four Weddings&quot; went very badly. 

Throughout production, Gramercy Pictures, the U.S. distributor for the film, sent frequent transatlantic faxes objecting to the explicit language and sexual content, fearing the final product would not be suitable for American distribution or television airings. They particularly objected to the opening scene of the movie, in which Charles and Scarlett say the word &quot;Fuck&quot; over and over, after an initial screening of the movie in Salt Lake City led the conservative Mormon members of the city council to walk out. Accordingly, Mike Newell and the actors agreed to reshoot the scene with the British swear word &quot;Bugger&quot; to be used in the American version. The executives also objected to the title, believing &quot;Four Weddings and a Funeral&quot; would turn off male viewers from the film. In its place they suggested such titles as &quot;True Love and Near Misses&quot;, &quot;Loitering in Sacred Places&quot;, &quot;Skulking Around&quot; and &quot;Rolling in the Aisles&quot;, none of which were accepted.

===Music and soundtrack===
The original score was composed by British composer Richard Rodney Bennett. The movie also featured a soundtrack of popular songs, including a cover version of The Troggs&#x27; &quot;Love Is All Around&quot; performed by Wet Wet Wet that remained at number 1 on the UK Singles Chart for fifteen weeks and was then the ninth biggest selling single of all time in Britain. This song would later be adapted into &quot;Christmas Is All Around&quot; and sung by the character of Billy Mack in Richard Curtis&#x27; 2003 film &quot;Love Actually&quot;, in which Grant also stars. The soundtrack album sold more than 750,000 units.

==Release==
&quot;Four Weddings and a Funeral&quot; had its world premiere in January 1994 at the Sundance Film Festival in Salt Lake City, Utah.

It opened in the United States on 11 March 1994 in five theatres. The box office receipts from the first five days of the film&#x27;s general release in the United States so impressed the movie&#x27;s distributor that it decided to spend lavishly on promotion, buying full-page newspaper ads and TV-spots totaling some $11 million. The movie also benefited from much free publicity because of Grant&#x27;s reception in the United States, where he became an instant sex symbol and undertook a successful media tour promoting the film. Producer Duncan Kenworthy stated that &quot;It was the most amazing luck that when Hugh went on the publicity trail he turned out to be incredibly funny, and very like the character of Charles. That doesn&#x27;t ever happen.&quot; The film had a wide release in the United States on 15 April 1994.

At the UK premiere in Leicester Square on 11 May 1994, Hugh Grant&#x27;s then-girlfriend Elizabeth Hurley garnered much publicity for the film when she wore a black Versace safety-pin dress which became a sensation in the press. The film opened in the UK on 13 May 1994.

==Reception==
===Critical response===
&quot;Four Weddings and a Funeral&quot; received critical acclaim. On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 92% based on 134 reviews, with an average rating of 7.9/10. The site&#x27;s critics consensus states, &quot;Hugh Grant ably snatches up the bouquet of leading man status with &quot;Four Weddings and a Funeral&quot;, a sparkling romantic comedy given real charm by its chummy ensemble and Richard Curtis&#x27; sharp-witted screenplay.&quot; Metacritic assigned the film a weighted average score of 81 out of 100 based on 19 critics, indicating &quot;universal acclaim&quot;.

Film critic Roger Ebert gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of four, calling it &quot;delightful and sly&quot;, and directed with &quot;light-hearted enchantment&quot; by Newell. He praised Grant&#x27;s performance, describing it as a kind of &quot;endearing awkwardness&quot;. Todd McCarthy of &quot;Variety&quot; called it a &quot;truly beguiling romantic comedy&quot; which was &quot;frequently hilarious without being sappily sentimental or tiresomely retrograde.&quot; Producer Duncan Kenworthy later attributed much of the success of &quot;Four Weddings&quot; at the box office to McCarthy&#x27;s review.

Writing for the &quot;Chicago Reader&quot;, Jonathan Rosenbaum called the film &quot;generic&quot; and &quot;standard issue&quot;, stating that the audience should not &quot;expect to remember it ten minutes later&quot;. &quot;Time&quot; magazine writer Richard Corliss was less scathing, but agreed that it was forgettable, saying that people would &quot;forget all about [the movie] by the time they leave the multiplex,&quot; even joking at the end of his review that he had forgotten the film&#x27;s name.

===Box office===
Upon its limited release in the United States, &quot;Four Weddings and a Funeral&quot; opened with $138,486 from five theatres. In its wide release, the film topped the box office with $4.2 million. The film would go on to gross $52.7 million in the United States and Canada.

In the United Kingdom, the film grossed £1.4 million in its opening weekend, a record for a UK production, and £2.7 million in its opening week from 211 theatres. It was number one for nine consecutive weeks, grossing £27.8 million, making it the second-highest-grossing film of all time in the United Kingdom behind &quot;Jurassic Park&quot;. It surpassed &quot;A Fish Called Wanda&quot; as the highest-grossing British film. In France, it was number one at the box office for ten weeks, grossing $34.4 million. It was also number one at the Australian box office for five weeks and was the second-highest-grossing film of the year, grossing $A21.4 million. Overall, it grossed $245.7 million worldwide, generating the highest percentage return on cost of films released in 1994. The success of the film cleared Working Title&#x27;s past losses and generated over $50 million for Polygram, clearing most of their losses in the four years since they started producing films.

===Recognition===
The film was voted the 27th-greatest comedy film of all time by readers of &quot;Total Film&quot; in 2000. In 2004, the same magazine named it the 34th-greatest British film of all time. It is number 96 on Bravo&#x27;s &quot;100 Funniest Movies&quot;.

&quot;The Guardian&quot;, in a 20th-anniversary retrospective of &quot;Four Weddings&quot;, stated that &quot;Its influence on the British film industry, on romantic-comedy writing, on the pop charts, on funeral readings, on &quot;haircuts&quot;, was enormous.&quot;

Hugh Grant commented in 2016 on the experience of the film&#x27;s phenomenal success and its effect on his career: &quot;I was making &quot;An Awfully Big Adventure&quot; at the time that &quot;Four Weddings&quot; came out, with Mike Newell again, same director, even tinier budget, in Dublin. And we&#x27;d get back from brutal days on the set, very long and no money, and the fax machines...were coming out saying that now your film &quot;Four Weddings&quot; is #5 in America, now it&#x27;s #3, now it&#x27;s #1 and here&#x27;s an offer Hugh, for &quot;Captain Blood&quot; and they&#x27;ll pay you $1 million. It was completely surreal.&quot;

===Awards and accolades===
==== Year-end lists ====

* 1st – Glenn Lovell, &quot;San Jose Mercury News&quot;
* 2nd – Sandi Davis, &quot;The Oklahoman&quot;
* 3rd – National Board of Review
* 5th – Joan Vadeboncoeur, &quot;Syracuse Herald American&quot;
* 5th – John Hurley, &quot;Staten Island Advance&quot;
* 6th – Peter Travers, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;
* 6th – Sean P. Means, &quot;The Salt Lake Tribune&quot;
* 7th – Michael MacCambridge, &quot;Austin American-Statesman&quot;
* 7th – Kenneth Turan, &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;
* 7th – Janet Maslin, &quot;The New York Times&quot;
* 7th – Todd Anthony, &quot;Miami New Times&quot;
* 7th – Steve Persall, &quot;St. Petersburg Times&quot;
* 8th – James Berardinelli, &quot;ReelViews&quot;
* 8th – Mack Bates, &quot;The Milwaukee Journal&quot;
* 10th – Kevin Thomas, &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;
* 10th – Douglas Armstrong, &quot;The Milwaukee Journal&quot;
* Top 7 (not ranked) – Duane Dudek, &quot;Milwaukee Sentinel&quot;
* Top 9 (not ranked) – Dan Webster, &quot;The Spokesman-Review&quot;
* Top 10 (listed alphabetically, not ranked) – Bob Ross, &quot;The Tampa Tribune&quot;
* Top 10 (listed alphabetically, not ranked) – Eleanor Ringel, &quot;The Atlanta Journal-Constitution&quot;
* Top 10 (not ranked) – Howie Movshovitz, &quot;The Denver Post&quot;
* Top 10 (not ranked) – George Meyer, &quot;The Ledger&quot;
* Top 10 (not ranked) – Bob Carlton, &quot;The Birmingham News&quot;
* Best of the year (not ranked) – Jeffrey Lyons, &quot;Sneak Previews&quot;
* Best &quot;sleepers&quot; (not ranked) – Dennis King, &quot;Tulsa World&quot;
* Honorable mention – Betsy Pickle, &quot;Knoxville News-Sentinel&quot;
* Honorable mention – William Arnold, &quot;Seattle Post-Intelligencer&quot;
* Honorable mention – David Elliott, &quot;The San Diego Union-Tribune&quot;
* Honorable mention – Robert Denerstein, &quot;Rocky Mountain News&quot;
* Honorable mention – Michael Mills, &quot;The Palm Beach Post&quot;
* Honorable mention – Jeff Simon, &quot;The Buffalo News&quot;
==== Awards ====
==Franchise==
===Hulu anthology television miniseries===

It was reported in November 2017 that the streaming service Hulu was developing an eponymous anthology television series based upon the film, to be written and executive produced by Mindy Kaling and Matt Warburton, with Richard Curtis also serving as an executive producer. In October 2018, it was announced Jessica Williams, Nikesh Patel, Rebecca Rittenhouse and John Reynolds had joined the cast. The miniseries premiered on 31 July 2019.

===&quot;One Red Nose Day and a Wedding&quot;===
On 5 December 2018, it was announced that Richard Curtis had written &quot;One Red Nose Day and a Wedding&quot;, a 25th-anniversary Comic Relief television reunion short film. The original film&#x27;s director, Mike Newell, returned, along with the film&#x27;s surviving cast, including Hugh Grant, Andie MacDowell, Kristin Scott Thomas, John Hannah, Rowan Atkinson, James Fleet, David Haig, Sophie Thompson, David Bower, Robin McCaffrey, Anna Chancellor, Rupert Vansittart, Simon Kunz, Sara Crowe and Timothy Walker. It was filmed on 13–14 December 2018 at St James&#x27; Church, Islington, London. It centered on the reunion of all the characters from the original film at the wedding of Charles and Carrie&#x27;s daughter to Fiona&#x27;s daughter. The involvement of additional cast members Lily James and Alicia Vikander, who played the young lesbians getting married, was not announced until the day the film aired in the UK. The film aired in the U.S. on their Red Nose Day on 23 May 2019.

==See also==
* BFI Top 100 British films
* &quot;Notting Hill&quot; (1999), also written by Curtis and starring Grant
* &quot;Love Actually&quot; (2003), another film by Curtis starring Grant and Atkinson 
* Black Versace dress of Elizabeth Hurley, worn by Hurley to the film&#x27;s premiere
* List of films featuring the deaf and hard of hearing
* Parey Hut Love

==References==
==External links==

* &quot;Four Weddings and a Funeral&quot; at the British Film Institute
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q860626" start="46" end="61" title="romantic comedy" label="romantic comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q312088" start="79" end="90" title="Mike Newell (director)" label="Mike Newell"/>
<link wikidata="Q355300" start="141" end="155" title="Richard Curtis" label="Richard Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q163286" start="164" end="174" title="Hugh Grant" label="Hugh Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q208558" start="317" end="332" title="Andie MacDowell" label="Andie MacDowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q208590" start="387" end="407" title="Kristin Scott Thomas" label="Kristin Scott Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161081" start="409" end="420" title="James Fleet" label="James Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q731187" start="422" end="434" title="Simon Callow" label="Simon Callow"/>
<link wikidata="Q298243" start="436" end="447" title="John Hannah (actor)" label="John Hannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338118" start="449" end="466" title="Charlotte Coleman" label="Charlotte Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173795" start="468" end="479" title="David Bower" label="David Bower"/>
<link wikidata="Q380884" start="481" end="495" title="Corin Redgrave" label="Corin Redgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q23760" start="500" end="514" title="Rowan Atkinson" label="Rowan Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922827" start="633" end="662" title="List of highest-grossing films in the United Kingdom" label="highest-grossing British film"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="752" end="765" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="782" end="794" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q41417" start="799" end="823" title="Best Original Screenplay" label="Best Original Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q181883" start="853" end="921" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q400007" start="930" end="974" title="BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role" label="BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="997" end="1009" title="BAFTA Awards" label="BAFTA Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q139184" start="1016" end="1025" title="BAFTA Award for Best Film" label="Best Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q787131" start="1027" end="1041" title="BAFTA Award for Best Direction" label="Best Direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q787123" start="1047" end="1080" title="BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role" label="Best Actress in a Supporting Role"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="1278" end="1300" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555746" start="1308" end="1354" title="BFI Top 100 British films" label="100 greatest British films of the 20th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="1371" end="1377" title="Empire (magazine)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657609" start="1532" end="1540" title="Time Out (magazine)" label="Time Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114459" start="1686" end="1698" title="Comic Relief" label="Comic Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114459" start="1787" end="1799" title="Red Nose Day" label="Red Nose Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="1880" end="1888" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q184211" start="3077" end="3094" title="serial monogamist" label="serial monogamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247411" start="3811" end="3821" title="Perthshire" label="Perthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474247" start="4289" end="4302" title="Funeral Blues" label="Funeral Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q178698" start="4320" end="4331" title="W. H. Auden" label="W. H. Auden"/>
<link wikidata="Q193364" start="5088" end="5093" title="vicar" label="vicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="5868" end="5882" title="Prince Charles" label="Prince Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q355300" start="5992" end="6006" title="Richard Curtis" label="Richard Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q232359" start="6600" end="6614" title="Helen Fielding" label="Helen Fielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260893" start="7246" end="7259" title="Alex Jennings" label="Alex Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611943" start="7419" end="7468" title="Four Weddings and a Funeral (miniseries)" label="2019 television miniseries adaptation of the film"/>
<link wikidata="Q106481" start="8185" end="8197" title="Alan Rickman" label="Alan Rickman"/>
<link wikidata="Q120366" start="8326" end="8344" title="Jeanne Tripplehorn" label="Jeanne Tripplehorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q191828" start="8461" end="8473" title="Marisa Tomei" label="Marisa Tomei"/>
<link wikidata="Q170530" start="8545" end="8565" title="Sarah Jessica Parker" label="Sarah Jessica Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q488655" start="8654" end="8667" title="Groundhog Day (film)" label="Groundhog Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q327292" start="9171" end="9187" title="Duncan Kenworthy" label="Duncan Kenworthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914692" start="9231" end="9253" title="Jim Henson Productions" label="Jim Henson Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060840" start="9416" end="9435" title="Working Title Films" label="Working Title Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448886" start="9677" end="9695" title="Channel Four Films" label="Channel Four Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="9916" end="9930" title="Home Secretary" label="Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="9935" end="9955" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q479171" start="9961" end="9971" title="Amber Rudd" label="Amber Rudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167791" start="10135" end="10154" title="Peregrine Cavendish, 12th Duke of Devonshire" label="Peregrine Cavendish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519287" start="10208" end="10223" title="Simon Marquis, 3rd Earl of Woolton" label="Earl of Woolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146387" start="10257" end="10270" title="Morning dress" label="morning suits"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="10516" end="10522" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q272436" start="10636" end="10645" title="hay fever" label="hay fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q795172" start="11079" end="11092" title="Home Counties" label="Home Counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q25610" start="11105" end="11114" title="Hampstead" label="Hampstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q125163" start="11116" end="11125" title="Islington" label="Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q15137935" start="11182" end="11200" title="Greenwich Hospital, London" label="Greenwich Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q635838" start="11202" end="11212" title="Betchworth" label="Betchworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q470188" start="11224" end="11232" title="Amersham" label="Amersham"/>
<link wikidata="Q19945" start="11268" end="11275" title="Sarratt" label="Sarratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093271" start="11315" end="11339" title="St Bartholomew-the-Great" label="St Bartholomew-the-Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592829" start="11384" end="11408" title="St Clement&amp;#x27;s Church, West Thurrock" label="St Clement&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q971550" start="11410" end="11423" title="West Thurrock" label="West Thurrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166794" start="11583" end="11606" title="Dartford Crossing" label="Dartford River Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q23143" start="11660" end="11672" title="Bedfordshire" label="Bedfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267914" start="11674" end="11683" title="Luton Hoo" label="Luton Hoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="11722" end="11731" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593631" start="11921" end="11938" title="Gramercy Pictures" label="Gramercy Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q31928" start="12272" end="12276" title="Fuck" label="Fuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="12341" end="12355" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177118" start="12377" end="12383" title="Mormon" label="Mormon"/>
<link wikidata="Q115681039" start="12527" end="12533" title="Bugger" label="Bugger"/>
<link wikidata="Q492264" start="12962" end="12976" title="original score" label="original score"/>
<link wikidata="Q959863" start="13010" end="13032" title="Richard Rodney Bennett" label="Richard Rodney Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q155171" start="13101" end="13114" title="cover version" label="cover version"/>
<link wikidata="Q943253" start="13118" end="13128" title="The Troggs" label="The Troggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q480274" start="13141" end="13159" title="Love Is All Around" label="Love Is All Around"/>
<link wikidata="Q49871" start="13179" end="13190" title="Wet Wet Wet" label="Wet Wet Wet"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="13224" end="13240" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q190588" start="13483" end="13496" title="Love Actually" label="Love Actually"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="13681" end="13703" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="13707" end="13727" title="Salt Lake City, Utah" label="Salt Lake City, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q330742" start="14195" end="14205" title="sex symbol" label="sex symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019680" start="14510" end="14522" title="wide release" label="wide release"/>
<link wikidata="Q848912" start="14585" end="14601" title="Leicester Square" label="Leicester Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q75622" start="14652" end="14668" title="Elizabeth Hurley" label="Elizabeth Hurley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010433" start="14722" end="14752" title="Black Versace dress of Elizabeth Hurley" label="black Versace safety-pin dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="14961" end="14976" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="15355" end="15365" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="15502" end="15513" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894636" start="15773" end="15786" title="Todd McCarthy" label="Todd McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="15796" end="15803" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076422" start="16129" end="16143" title="Chicago Reader" label="Chicago Reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343526" start="16151" end="16169" title="Jonathan Rosenbaum" label="Jonathan Rosenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="16334" end="16338" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q38670" start="16361" end="16376" title="Richard Corliss" label="Richard Corliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491297" start="16644" end="16659" title="limited release" label="limited release"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019680" start="16770" end="16782" title="wide release" label="wide release"/>
<link wikidata="Q6559662" start="16804" end="16814" title="List of 1994 box office number-one films in the United States" label="box office"/>
<link wikidata="Q6559661" start="17082" end="17092" title="List of 1994 box office number-one films in the United Kingdom" label="number one"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922827" start="17159" end="17221" title="List of highest-grossing films in the United Kingdom" label="second-highest-grossing film of all time in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q167726" start="17235" end="17248" title="Jurassic Park (film)" label="Jurassic Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q466186" start="17275" end="17294" title="A Fish Called Wanda" label="A Fish Called Wanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922792" start="17357" end="17385" title="List of 1994 box office number-one films in France" label="number one at the box office"/>
<link wikidata="Q106617066" start="17437" end="17476" title="List of 1994 box office number-one films in Australia" label="number one at the Australian box office"/>
<link wikidata="Q157443" start="17943" end="17954" title="comedy film" label="comedy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270191" start="17987" end="17997" title="Total Film" label="Total Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q902771" start="18112" end="18117" title="Bravo (American TV network)" label="Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="18165" end="18177" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549305" start="18567" end="18591" title="An Awfully Big Adventure" label="An Awfully Big Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621164" start="18982" end="18995" title="Captain Blood (novel)" label="Captain Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q575741" start="19154" end="19175" title="San Jose Mercury News" label="San Jose Mercury News"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754787" start="19209" end="19222" title="The Oklahoman" label="The Oklahoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3873126" start="19237" end="19261" title="National Board of Review Awards 1994" label="National Board of Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757854" start="19295" end="19319" title="Syracuse Herald American" label="Syracuse Herald American"/>
<link wikidata="Q737529" start="19353" end="19374" title="Staten Island Advance" label="Staten Island Advance"/>
<link wikidata="Q890207" start="19389" end="19402" title="Peter Travers" label="Peter Travers"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="19410" end="19423" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550315" start="19459" end="19480" title="The Salt Lake Tribune" label="The Salt Lake Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q50821103" start="19495" end="19515" title="Michael MacCambridge" label="Michael MacCambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629935" start="19523" end="19548" title="Austin American-Statesman" label="Austin American-Statesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353410" start="19563" end="19576" title="Kenneth Turan" label="Kenneth Turan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="19584" end="19601" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q509946" start="19616" end="19628" title="Janet Maslin" label="Janet Maslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="19636" end="19654" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827370" start="19689" end="19704" title="Miami New Times" label="Miami New Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714356" start="19740" end="19760" title="St. Petersburg Times" label="St. Petersburg Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q711909" start="19775" end="19793" title="James Berardinelli" label="James Berardinelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765623" start="19843" end="19864" title="The Milwaukee Journal" label="The Milwaukee Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16104561" start="19880" end="19892" title="Kevin Thomas (film critic)" label="Kevin Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="19900" end="19917" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765623" start="20028" end="20046" title="Milwaukee Sentinel" label="Milwaukee Sentinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765988" start="20095" end="20115" title="The Spokesman-Review" label="The Spokesman-Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768079" start="20185" end="20202" title="The Tampa Tribune" label="The Tampa Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092348" start="20278" end="20310" title="The Atlanta Journal-Constitution" label="The Atlanta Journal-Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668654" start="20365" end="20380" title="The Denver Post" label="The Denver Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746595" start="20431" end="20441" title="The Ledger" label="The Ledger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718111" start="20491" end="20510" title="The Birmingham News" label="The Birmingham News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176141" start="20551" end="20564" title="Jeffrey Lyons" label="Jeffrey Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547458" start="20572" end="20586" title="Sneak Previews" label="Sneak Previews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852377" start="20655" end="20666" title="Tulsa World" label="Tulsa World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198071" start="20715" end="20738" title="Knoxville News-Sentinel" label="Knoxville News-Sentinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q286261" start="20789" end="20815" title="Seattle Post-Intelligencer" label="Seattle Post-Intelligencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547109" start="20865" end="20892" title="The San Diego Union-Tribune" label="The San Diego Union-Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883624" start="20946" end="20965" title="Rocky Mountain News" label="Rocky Mountain News"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522163" start="21015" end="21034" title="The Palm Beach Post" label="The Palm Beach Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390786" start="21081" end="21097" title="The Buffalo News" label="The Buffalo News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630304" start="21239" end="21243" title="Hulu" label="Hulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611943" start="21262" end="21299" title="Four Weddings and a Funeral (miniseries)" label="eponymous anthology television series"/>
<link wikidata="Q539917" start="21361" end="21373" title="Mindy Kaling" label="Mindy Kaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299575" start="21378" end="21392" title="Matt Warburton" label="Matt Warburton"/>
<link wikidata="Q355300" start="21399" end="21413" title="Richard Curtis" label="Richard Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2175951" start="21487" end="21503" title="Jessica Williams (actress)" label="Jessica Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q54827654" start="21505" end="21517" title="Nikesh Patel" label="Nikesh Patel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19917512" start="21519" end="21538" title="Rebecca Rittenhouse" label="Rebecca Rittenhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q43101124" start="21543" end="21556" title="John Paul Reynolds" label="John Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q312088" start="21881" end="21892" title="Mike Newell (director)" label="Mike Newell"/>
<link wikidata="Q163286" start="21957" end="21967" title="Hugh Grant" label="Hugh Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q208558" start="21969" end="21984" title="Andie MacDowell" label="Andie MacDowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q208590" start="21986" end="22006" title="Kristin Scott Thomas" label="Kristin Scott Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q298243" start="22008" end="22019" title="John Hannah (actor)" label="John Hannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q23760" start="22021" end="22035" title="Rowan Atkinson" label="Rowan Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161081" start="22037" end="22048" title="James Fleet" label="James Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985868" start="22050" end="22060" title="David Haig" label="David Haig"/>
<link wikidata="Q467362" start="22062" end="22077" title="Sophie Thompson" label="Sophie Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173795" start="22079" end="22090" title="David Bower" label="David Bower"/>
<link wikidata="Q433089" start="22109" end="22124" title="Anna Chancellor" label="Anna Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964106" start="22126" end="22143" title="Rupert Vansittart" label="Rupert Vansittart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519152" start="22145" end="22155" title="Simon Kunz" label="Simon Kunz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7421595" start="22157" end="22167" title="Sara Crowe" label="Sara Crowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807593" start="22172" end="22186" title="Timothy Walker (actor)" label="Timothy Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161928" start="22228" end="22260" title="St James&amp;#x27; Church, Islington" label="St James&amp;#x27; Church, Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="22262" end="22268" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q13217306" start="22464" end="22474" title="Lily James" label="Lily James"/>
<link wikidata="Q439314" start="22479" end="22494" title="Alicia Vikander" label="Alicia Vikander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555746" start="22682" end="22707" title="BFI Top 100 British films" label="BFI Top 100 British films"/>
<link wikidata="Q200672" start="22716" end="22728" title="Notting Hill (film)" label="Notting Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q190588" start="22793" end="22806" title="Love Actually" label="Love Actually"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010433" start="22875" end="22914" title="Black Versace dress of Elizabeth Hurley" label="Black Versace dress of Elizabeth Hurley"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417151" start="22961" end="23013" title="List of films featuring the deaf and hard of hearing" label="List of films featuring the deaf and hard of hearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q64768500" start="23016" end="23030" title="Parey Hut Love" label="Parey Hut Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="23116" end="23138" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11225" wikidata="Q27586" url="?curid=11225" title="Ferrari">
<text>Ferrari S.p.A. (; ) is an Italian luxury sports car manufacturer based in Maranello. Founded in 1939 by Enzo Ferrari (1898–1988), the company built its first car in 1940, adopted its current name in 1945, and began to produce its current line of road cars in 1947. Ferrari became a public company in 1960, and from 1963 to 2014 it was a subsidiary of Fiat S.p.A. It was spun off from Fiat&#x27;s successor entity, Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, in 2016. The company currently offers a large model range which includes several supercars, grand tourers, and one SUV. Many early Ferraris, dating to the 1950s and 1960s, count among the most expensive cars ever sold at auction. 

Throughout its history, the company has been noted for its continued participation in racing, especially in Formula One, where its team, Scuderia Ferrari, is the series&#x27; single oldest and most successful. Scuderia Ferrari has raced since 1929, first in Grand Prix events and later in Formula One, where it holds many records. Historically, Ferrari was also highly active in sports car racing, where its cars took many wins in races such as the Mille Miglia, Targa Florio and 24 Hours of Le Mans, as well as several overall victories in the World Sportscar Championship. Scuderia Ferrari fans, commonly called , are known for their passion and loyalty to the team.

Ferrari is one of the world&#x27;s strongest brands, and it maintains a brand image built around racing heritage, luxury, and exclusivity. As of May 2023, Ferrari is also one of the largest car manufacturers by market capitalisation, with a value of approximately US$85.5 billion.

== History ==
=== Early history ===

Enzo Ferrari, formerly a salesman and racing driver for Alfa Romeo, founded Scuderia Ferrari, a racing team, in 1929. Originally intended to service gentleman drivers and other amateur racers, Alfa Romeo&#x27;s withdrawal from racing in 1933, combined with Enzo&#x27;s connections within the company, turned Scuderia Ferrari into its unofficial representative on the track. Alfa Romeo supplied racing cars to Ferrari, who eventually amassed some of the best drivers of the 1930s and won many races before the team&#x27;s liquidation in 1937.

Late in 1937, Scuderia Ferrari was liquidated and absorbed into Alfa Romeo, but Enzo&#x27;s disagreements with upper management caused him to leave in 1939. He used his settlement to found his own company, where he intended to produce his own cars. He called the company &quot;Auto Avio Costruzioni&quot;, and headquartered it in the facilities of the old Scuderia Ferrari; due to a noncompete agreement with Alfa Romeo, the company could not use the Ferrari name for another four years. The company produced a single car, the Auto Avio Costruzioni 815, which participated in only one race before the outbreak of World War II. During the war, Enzo&#x27;s company produced aircraft engines and machine tools for the Italian military; the contracts for these goods were lucrative, and provided the new company with a great deal of capital. In 1943, under threat of Allied bombing raids, the company&#x27;s factory was moved to Maranello. Though the new facility was nonetheless bombed twice, Ferrari remains in Maranello to this day.

=== Under Enzo Ferrari ===
In 1945, Ferrari adopted its current name. Work started promptly on a new V12 engine that would power the 125 S, which was the marque&#x27;s first car, and many subsequent Ferraris. The company saw success in motorsport almost as soon as it began racing: the 125 S won many races in 1947, and several early victories, including the 1949 24 Hours of Le Mans and 1951 Carrera Panamericana, helped build Ferrari&#x27;s reputation as a high-quality automaker. Ferrari won several more races in the coming years, and early in the 1950s its road cars were already a favourite of the international elite. Ferrari produced many families of interrelated cars, including the America, Monza, and 250 series, and the company&#x27;s first series-produced car was the 250 GT Coupé, beginning in 1958.

In 1960, Ferrari was reorganized as a public company. It soon began searching for a business partner to handle its manufacturing operations: it first approached Ford in 1963, though negotiations fell through; later talks with Fiat, who bought 50% of Ferrari&#x27;s shares in 1969, were more successful. In the second half of the decade, Ferrari also produced two cars that upended its more traditional models: the 1967 Dino 206 GT, which was its first mass-produced mid-engined road car, and the 1968 365 GTB/4, which possessed streamlined styling that modernised Ferrari&#x27;s design language. The Dino in particular was a decisive movement away from the company&#x27;s conservative engineering approach, where every road-going Ferrari featured a V12 engine placed in the front of the car, and it presaged Ferrari&#x27;s full embrace of mid-engine architecture, as well as V6 and V8 engines, in the 1970s and 1980s.

=== Contemporary ===
Enzo Ferrari died in 1988, an event that saw Fiat expand its stake to 90%. The last car that he personally approved—the F40—expanded on the flagship supercar approach first tried by the 288 GTO four years earlier. Enzo was replaced in 1991 by Luca Cordero di Montezemolo, under whose 23-year-long chairmanship the company greatly expanded. Between 1991 and 2014, he increased the profitability of Ferrari&#x27;s road cars nearly tenfold, both by increasing the range of cars offered and through limiting the total number produced. Montezemolo&#x27;s chairmanship also saw an expansion in licensing deals, a drastic improvement in Ferrari&#x27;s Formula One performance (not least through the hiring of Michael Schumacher and Jean Todt), and the production of three more flagship cars: the F50, the Enzo, and the LaFerrari. In addition to his leadership of Ferrari, Montezemolo was also the chairman of Fiat proper between 2004 and 2010.

After Montezemolo resigned, he was replaced in quick succession by many new chairmen and CEOs. He was succeeded first by Sergio Marchionne, who would oversee Ferrari&#x27;s initial public offering and subsequent spin-off from Fiat Chrysler Automobiles, and then by Louis Camilleri as CEO and John Elkann as chairman. Beginning in 2021, Camilleri was replaced as CEO by Benedetto Vigna, who has announced plans to develop Ferrari&#x27;s first fully electric model. During this period, Ferrari has expanded its production, owing to a global increase in wealth, while becoming more selective with its licensing deals.

== Motorsport ==
Since the company&#x27;s beginnings, Ferrari has been involved in motorsport. Through its works team, Scuderia Ferrari, it has competed in a range of categories including Formula One and sports car racing, though the company has also worked in partnership with other teams.

=== Grand Prix and Formula One racing ===

Scuderia Ferrari has been continuously active since the very beginning of Formula One, and is one of its most illustrious teams: since 1952 it has fielded fifteen champion drivers, won sixteen Constructors&#x27; Championships, and accumulated more race victories, 1–2 finishes, podiums, pole positions, fastest laps and points than any other team in F1 history.

The earliest Ferrari entity, Scuderia Ferrari, was created in 1929—ten years before the founding of Ferrari proper—as a Grand Prix racing team. It was affiliated with automaker Alfa Romeo, for whom Enzo had worked in the 1920s. Alfa Romeo supplied racing cars to Ferrari, which the team then tuned and adjusted to their desired specifications. Scuderia Ferrari was highly successful in the 1930s: between 1929 and 1937 the team fielded such top drivers as Antonio Ascari, Giuseppe Campari, and Tazio Nuvolari, and won 144 out of its 225 races.

Ferrari returned to Grand Prix racing in 1947, which was at that point metamorphosing into modern-day Formula One. The team&#x27;s first homebuilt Grand Prix car, the 125 F1, was first raced at the 1948 Italian Grand Prix, where its encouraging performance convinced Enzo to continue the company&#x27;s costly Grand Prix racing programme. Ferrari&#x27;s first victory in an F1 series was at the 1951 British Grand Prix, heralding its strong performance during the 1950s and early 1960s: between 1952 and 1964, the team took home six World Drivers&#x27; Championships and one Constructors&#x27; Championship. Notable Ferrari drivers from this era include Alberto Ascari, Juan Manuel Fangio, Phil Hill, and John Surtees.

Ferrari&#x27;s initial fortunes ran dry after 1964, and its began to receive its titles in isolated sprees. Ferrari first started to slip in the late 1960s, when it was outclassed by teams using the inexpensive, well-engineered Cosworth DFV engine. The team&#x27;s performance improved markedly in the mid-1970s thanks to Niki Lauda, whose skill behind the wheel granted Ferrari a drivers&#x27; title in 1975 and 1977; similar success was accomplished in following years by the likes of Jody Scheckter and Gilles Villeneuve. The team also won the Constructors&#x27; Championship in 1982 and 1983.

Following another drought in the 1980s and 1990s, Ferrari saw a long winning streak in the 2000s, largely through the work of Michael Schumacher. After signing onto the team in 1996, Schumacher gave Ferrari five consecutive drivers&#x27; titles between 2000 and 2004; this was accompanied by six consecutive constructors&#x27; titles, beginning in 1999. Ferrari was especially dominant in the 2004 season, where it lost only three races. After Schumacher&#x27;s departure, Ferrari won one more drivers&#x27; title—given in 2007 to Kimi Räikkönen—and two constructors&#x27; titles in 2007 and 2008. These are the team&#x27;s most recent titles to date; as of late, Ferrari has struggled to outdo recently ascendant teams such as Red Bull and Mercedes-Benz.

==== Ferrari Driver Academy ====

Ferrari&#x27;s junior driver programme is the Ferrari Driver Academy. Begun in 2009, the initiative follows the team&#x27;s successful grooming of Felipe Massa between 2003 and 2006. Drivers who are accepted into the Academy learn the rules and history of formula racing as they compete, with Ferrari&#x27;s support, in feeder classes such as Formula Three and Formula 4. As of 2019, 5 out of 18 programme inductees had graduated and become F1 drivers: one of these drivers, Charles Leclerc, came to race for Scuderia Ferrari, while the other four signed to other teams. Non-graduate drivers have participated in racing development, filled consultant roles, or left the Academy to continue racing in lower-tier formulae.

=== Sports car racing ===

Aside from an abortive effort in 1940, Ferrari began racing sports cars in 1947, when the 125 S won six out of the ten races it participated in. Ferrari continued to see similar luck in the years to follow: by 1957, just ten years after beginning to compete, Ferrari had won three World Sportscar Championships, seven victories in the Mille Miglia, and two victories at the 24 Hours of Le Mans, among many other races. These races were ideal environments for the development and promotion of Ferrari&#x27;s earlier road cars, which were broadly similar to their racing counterparts.

This luck continued into the first half of the 1960s, when Ferrari won the WSC&#x27;s 2000GT class three consecutive times and finished first at Le Mans for six consecutive years. Its winning streak at Le Mans was broken by Ford in 1966, and though Ferrari would win two more WSC titles—one in 1967 and another in 1972—poor revenue allocation, combined with languishing performance in Formula One, led the company to cease competing in sports car events in 1973. From that point onward, Ferrari would help prepare sports racing cars for privateer teams, but would not race them itself.

In 2023, Ferrari reentered prototype sports car racing. For the 2023 FIA World Endurance Championship, Ferrari, in partnership with AF Corse, fielded two 499P sports prototypes. To commemorate the company&#x27;s return to the discipline, one of the cars was numbered &quot;50&quot;, referencing the fifty years that had elapsed since a works Ferrari competed in an endurance race. The 499P finished first at the 2023 24 Hours of Le Mans, ending Toyota Gazoo Racing&#x27;s five-year winning streak there and becoming the first Ferrari in 58 years to win the race. Ferrari repeated this feat at the 2024 24 Hours of Le Mans, marking its first consecutive victory at the race since 1965.

=== Other disciplines ===
From 1932 to 1935 Scuderia Ferrari operated a motorcycle racing division, which was conceived as a way to scout and train future Grand Prix drivers. Instead of Italian motorcycles, the team used British ones manufactured by Norton and Rudge. Though Ferrari was successful on two wheels, winning three national titles and 44 overall victories, it was eventually pushed out of the discipline both by the obsolescence of pushrod motorcycle engines and broader economic troubles stemming from the Great Depression.

Ferrari formerly participated in a variety of non-F1 open-wheel series. As early as 1948, Ferrari had developed cars for Formula Two and Formula Libre events, and the company&#x27;s F2 programme led directly to the creation of the Dino engine, which came to power various racing and road Ferraris. The final non-F1 formula in which Ferrari competed was the Tasman Series, wherein Chris Amon won the 1969 championship in a Dino 246 Tasmania.

At least two water speed record boats have utilized Ferrari powertrains, both of them 800kg-class hydroplanes from the early 1950s. Neither boat was built by or affiliated with Ferrari, though one of them, &quot;Arno XI&quot;, had its engine order approved directly by Enzo Ferrari. &quot;Arno XI&quot; still holds the top speed record for an 800kg hydroplane.

Since 2019, Scuderia Ferrari has participated in sim racing.

=== Race cars for other teams ===

Throughout its history, Ferrari has supplied racing cars to other entrants, aside from its own works Scuderia Ferrari team. In the 1950s and 1960s, Ferrari supplied Formula One cars to a number of private entrants and other teams. One famous example was Tony Vandervell&#x27;s team, which raced the Thinwall Special modified Ferraris before building their own Vanwall cars. The North American Racing Team&#x27;s entries in the final three rounds of the 1969 season were the last occasions on which a team other than Scuderia Ferrari entered a World Championship Grand Prix with a Ferrari car.

Ferrari supplied cars complete with V8 engines for the A1 Grand Prix series, from the 2008–2009 season. The car was designed by Rory Byrne and is styled to resemble the 2004 Ferrari Formula one car. Ferrari currently runs a customer GT program for a racing version of its 458 and has done so for the 458&#x27;s predecessors, dating back to the 355 in the late 1990s. Such private teams as the American Risi Competizione and Italian AF Corse teams have been very successful with Ferrari GT racers over the years. This car, made for endurance sportscar racing to compete against such racing versions of the Audi R8, McLaren MP4-12C, and BMW Z4 (E89) has proven to be successful, but not as successful as its predecessor, the F430. The Ferrari Challenge is a one-make racing series for the Ferrari 458. The FXX is not road legal and is therefore only used for track events.

== Road cars ==

The first vehicle made with the Ferrari name was the 125 S. Only two of this small two-seat sports/racing V12 car were made. In 1949, the 166 Inter was introduced marking the company&#x27;s significant move into the grand touring road car market. The first 166 Inter was a four-seat (2+2) berlinetta coupe with body work designed by Carrozzeria Touring Superleggera. Road cars quickly became the bulk of Ferrari sales. The early Ferrari road cars typically featured bodywork designed and customised by independent coachbuilders such as Vignale, Touring, Ghia, Pininfarina, Scaglietti and Bertone.

The original Ferrari road cars were typically two-seat front-engined V12s. This platform served Ferrari well through the 1950s and 1960s. In 1967, the V6 powered Dino 206 GT was introduced as the first production rear mid-engined car built by Ferrari. The 206 GT was sold under the lower cost Dino marque, named after Enzo Ferrari&#x27;s late son, and sold in greater numbers than any previous Ferrari model. The first rear mid-engine model to be sold under the Ferrari name came in 1973 with the flat 12 powered Berlinetta Boxer. This rear mid-engine layout would go on to be used in many Ferraris continuing into the present day. Current Ferrari road cars typically use V8 or V12 engines, with V8 models making up over half of the marque&#x27;s total production. 

For a time, Ferrari built 2+2 versions of its mid-engined V8 cars. Although they looked quite different from their 2-seat counterparts, both the GT4 and Mondial were closely related to the 308 GTB.

The company has also produced several front-engined 2+2 cars, culminating in the recent V12 model Lusso and V8 models Roma, Portofino and Lusso T. The California is credited with initiating the current model line of V8 front-engined 2+2 grand touring performance sports cars.

Starting in the early 2010s with the LaFerrari, Ferrari shifted its focus away from using independent coachbuilders, including Pininfarina, to instead relying on in-house design from the Centro Stile Ferrari for the design of all its road cars. The Ferrari F12 was the last Ferrari production model to feature Pininfarina design, although Ferrari has stated that they will continue to collaborate with Pininfarina on special projects.

The Ferrari SF90 Stradale is the first-ever Ferrari to feature PHEV (Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicle) architecture which sees the internal combustion engine integrated with three electric motors, two of which are independent and located on the front axle, with the third at the rear between the engine and the gearbox.

In February 2025, Ferrari announced that they would be unveiling their first-ever fully electric car in October, &quot;in a unique and innovative way&quot;, according to CEO Benedetto Vigna.

=== Current models ===
=== Customisation ===
In the 1950s and 1960s, clients often personalized their vehicles as they came straight from the factory. This philosophy added to the mystique of the brand at the time. Every Ferrari that came out of Maranello could be built to an individual customer&#x27;s specification.

Ferrari formalized this concept with its earlier Carrozzeria Scaglietti programme. The options offered here were more typical such as racing seats, rearview cameras, and other special trim. In late 2011, Ferrari announced a significant update of this philosophy. The Tailor Made programme allows clients to work with designers in Maranello to make decisions at every step of the process. Through this program almost any trim, any exterior colour or any interior material is possible. The program carries on the original tradition and emphasizes the idea of each car being unique.

=== &quot;Big 6&quot; supercars ===

The 1984 288 GTO is considered by some to be the first in the line of Ferrari flagship &quot;supercars&quot;. This pedigree is considered to extend through the F40, F50, Enzo, LaFerrari, and the F80. These are sometimes referred to by collectors as the &quot;Big 6&quot;.

=== Concept cars and specials ===

Ferrari has produced a handful of concept cars such as the Modulo, Mythos, and Pinin. Some of these were quite radical and never intended for production, while others showed styling elements that were later incorporated into production models. Most of Ferrari&#x27;s concept cars have been collaborations with design studio Pininfarina. The most recent concept car to be produced by Ferrari themselves was the 2010 Millechili.

A number of one-off special versions of Ferrari road cars have also been produced, commissioned to coachbuilders by wealthy owners. Examples include the P4/5 and the 612 Kappa.

==== Ferrari Special Projects ====
The Special Projects programme, also called the Portfolio Coachbuilding Programme, was launched in 2008 as a way to revive the tradition of past one-off and limited production coachbuilt Ferrari models, allowing clients to work with Ferrari and top Italian coachbuilders to create bespoke bodied models based on modern Ferrari road cars. Engineering and design is done by Ferrari, sometimes in cooperation with external design houses such as Pininfarina or Fioravanti, and the vehicles receive full homologation to be road legal. Since the creation of Ferrari&#x27;s in-house styling centre in 2010 though, the focus has shifted away somewhat from outside coachbuilders and more towards creating new in-house designs for clients.

The first car to be completed under this programme was the 2008 SP1, commissioned by a Japanese business executive. The second was the P540 Superfast Aperta, commissioned by an American collector. The following is a list of Special Projects cars that have been made public:

=== Bio-fuel and hybrid cars ===
An F430 Spider that runs on ethanol was displayed at the 2008 Detroit Auto Show. At the 2010 Geneva Motor Show, Ferrari unveiled a hybrid version of their flagship 599. Called the &quot;HY-KERS Concept&quot;, Ferrari&#x27;s hybrid system adds more than 100 horsepower on top of the 599 Fiorano&#x27;s 612 hp. Also in mid-2014, the flagship LaFerrari was put into production featuring a hybrid system. Ferrari introduced their first plug-in hybrid (PHEV) model in 2019 with the SF90 Stradale, followed by the 296 in 2021.

=== Naming conventions ===
From the beginning, the Ferrari naming convention consisted of a three-digit unitary displacement of an engine cylinder with an additional suffix representing the purpose of a vehicle. Therefore, Ferrari 125 S had V12 engine with a unitary displacement of 124.73 cc; whilst S-suffix represented Sport. Other race cars also received names invoking particular races such as Ferrari 166 MM for Mille Miglia. With the introduction of road-going models, the suffix Inter was added, inspired by the Scuderia Inter racing team of Igor Troubetzkoy. Popular at that time 166-series had engines with 166.25 cc of unitary displacement and a very diverse 250-series had of total displacement and 246.10 cc of unitary. Later series of road cars were renamed Europa and top-of-the-line series America and Superamerica.

Until the early 1990s, Ferrari followed a three-number naming scheme based on engine displacement and a number of cylinders:

* V6 and V8 models used the total displacement (in decilitres) for the first two digits and the number of cylinders as the third. Thus, the 206 was a 2.0 L V6 powered vehicle, while the 348 used a 3.4 L V8, although, for the F355, the last digit refers to 5 valves per cylinder. Upon introduction of the 360 Modena, the digits for V8 models (which now carried a name as well as a number) refer only to total engine displacement. The numerical indication aspect of this name carried on to the F430; the F430&#x27;s replacement, the 458 Italia, uses the same naming as the 206 and 348. The 488 uses the system formerly used by the V12 cars.
* V12 models used the displacement (in cubic centimetres) of one cylinder. Therefore, the famed 365 Daytona had a V12. However, some newer V12-engined Ferraris, such as the 599, have three-number designations that refer only to total engine displacement or boxer-style designations such as the six-litre V12 612.
* Flat 12 models used the displacement in litres for the first digit and the number of cylinders for the next two digits. Therefore, the 512 BB was five-litre flat 12 (a Berlinetta Boxer, in this case). However, the original Berlinetta Boxer was the 365 GT4 BB, which was named in a similar manner to the V12 models.
* Flagship models (aka &quot;halo cars&quot;) use the letter F followed by the anniversary in years, such as the F40 and F50. The Enzo skipped this rule, although the F60 name was applied to a Ferrari Formula One car and is sometimes attached to the Enzo.
* Some models, such as the 1980 Mondial and 1984 Testarossa did not follow a three-number naming scheme.

Most Ferraris were also given designations referring to their body style. In general, the following conventions were used:

* M (&quot;Modificata&quot;), placed at the end of a model&#x27;s number, denotes a modified version of its predecessor and not a complete evolution (see F512 M and 575 M Maranello).
* GTB (&quot;Gran Turismo Berlinetta&quot;) models are closed Berlinettas, or coupés.
* GTS (&quot;Gran Turismo Scoperta&quot;) this suffix can be seen in older spiders, or convertibles (see 365 GTS/4). Now the convertible models use the suffix &quot;Spider&quot; (spelt &quot;i&quot;) (see F355 Spider, and 360 Spider). In more recent models, this suffix is used for targa top models (see Dino 246 GTS, and F355 GTS), which is an absolutely correct use of the suffix since &quot;scoperta&quot; means &quot;uncovered&quot;. An increasing number of people tend to refer to GTS as &quot;Gran Turismo Spyder&quot;, which creates the false assumption that Ferrari does not know the difference between &quot;spyder&quot; and &quot;targa&quot;. The 348 TS, which is the only targa named differently, is an exception.
* GTO (&quot;Gran Turismo Omologata&quot;), placed at the end of a model&#x27;s number, denotes a modified version of its predecessor. It designates a model that has been designed and improved for racetrack use while still being street legal. Only three models bear those three letters: the 250 GTO of 1962, the 288 GTO of 1984, and the 599 GTO of 2010.

This naming system can be confusing, as some entirely different vehicles used the same engine type and body style. Many Ferraris also had other names affixed (such as Daytona) to identify them further. Many such names are not official factory names. The Daytona name commemorates Ferrari&#x27;s triple success in the February 1967 24 Hours of Daytona with the 330 P4. Only in the 1973 Daytona 24 Hours, a 365 GTB/4 run by NART (who raced Ferraris in America) ran second, behind a Porsche 911.

The various Dino models were named for Enzo&#x27;s son, Dino Ferrari, and were marketed as Dinos by Ferrari and sold at Ferrari dealersfor all intents and purposes they are Ferraris.

In the mid-1990s, Ferrari added the letter &quot;F&quot; to the beginning of all models (a practice abandoned after the F512 M and F355, but adopted again with the F430, but not with its successor, the Ferrari 458).

== Identity ==

=== The &quot;Prancing Horse&quot; ===

Ferrari&#x27;s symbol is the &quot;Prancing Horse&quot; (, ), a prancing black horse on a yellow background. Minor details of its appearance have changed many times, but its shape has remained consistent: it is always presented either as a shield, with the Italian tricolour above the horse and the initials &quot;SF&quot; (&quot;Scuderia Ferrari&quot;) below; or as a rectangle, replacing &quot;SF&quot; with the word &quot;Ferrari&quot; rendered in the company&#x27;s trademark typeface.

Enzo Ferrari offered an account of the horse&#x27;s origins. In his story, after a 1923 victory in Ravenna, the family of Francesco Baracca, a deceased flying ace who painted the emblem on his airplane, paid him a visit. Paolina de Biancoli, Francesco&#x27;s mother, suggested that Ferrari adopt the horse as a good luck charm: he accepted the request, and the Prancing Horse was first used by his racing team in 1932, applied to their Alfa Romeo 8C with the addition of a canary yellow background—the &quot;colour of Modena&quot;, Enzo&#x27;s hometown. The rectangular Prancing Horse has been used since 1947, when the Ferrari 125 S—also the first Ferrari-branded sports car—became the first to wear it.

=== Colour ===

For many years, () was the required colour of all Italian racing cars. It is also closely associated with Ferrari: even after livery regulations changed, allowing race teams to deviate from their national colours, Scuderia Ferrari continued to paint its cars bright red, as it does to this day. On Ferrari&#x27;s road-going cars, the colour has always been among the company&#x27;s most popular choices: in 2012, 40 per cent of Ferraris left the factory painted red, while in the early 1990s the figure was even higher, at 85 per cent. Some Ferrari vehicles, such as the 288 GTO, have only been made available in red.

Although rosso corsa is the colour most associated with Ferrari, it has not always been the colour of choice. Ferraris raced by privateers have run in a rainbow of colours, and one 250 GT SWB, used as a test mule for the 250 GTO, was a rare non-red factory-backed car: it raced in blue. In a particularly noteworthy case from 1964, while protesting the FIA&#x27;s homologation requirements, the company moved its racing assets to the North American Racing Team, an affiliated team based in the United States. As a result, Ferrari and the driver John Surtees won the 1964 Formula One season in American colours—blue, with a white racing stripe. By the early 2010s, red had also become less common on Ferrari&#x27;s road cars, fighting with newly popular colours such as yellow, silver, and white.

Speaking to both the popularity of rosso corsa and the power of the Ferrari brand, Enzo Ferrari is reported to have once said the following: &quot;Ask a child to draw a car, and he will certainly paint it red.&quot;

=== Brand image ===
Described by the &quot;Wall Street Journal&quot; as &quot;synonymous with opulence, meticulous craftsmanship and ridiculously fast cars for nearly a century&quot;, Ferrari possesses a robust and powerful brand image. Owing to a combination of its cars, enthusiast culture, and successful licensing deals, in 2019 Ferrari was labelled the world&#x27;s strongest brand by the financial consultancy Brand Finance.

Ferrari meticulously manages its brand image and public perception: it goes to great lengths to protect its trademarks, and its customers are expected to honour its rules and guidelines when caring for their cars. The company is noted for its frequent and diverse lawsuits, which have centred around such subjects as the shape of the Ferrari 250 GTO&#x27;s bodywork, exclusive rights to model names (including &quot;Testarossa&quot; and &quot;Purosangue&quot;), replica vehicles, and several unsanctioned owner modifications. Via a bounty system, individuals may receive rewards for reporting counterfeit Ferrari products to the company.
Ferrari aims to cultivate an image of exclusivity and refined luxury. To facilitate this, vehicle production is deliberately limited to below customer demand, and purchasers are internally ranked based on their desirability and loyalty. Some cars may only be purchased by customers who have already owned multiple Ferraris, and the company&#x27;s most exclusive supercars, such as the LaFerrari, have wait lists many times in excess of total production, with only the most loyal customers selected to purchase one. In 2015, the company&#x27;s head of sales stated that the purpose of this strategy was to maintain the brand&#x27;s value, and to &quot;keep alive this dream that is called Ferrari&quot;.

Sometimes, Ferrari&#x27;s desire to maintain its brand perception goes against the wishes of its clientele. In one case, the company sued the fashion designer Philipp Plein over &quot;distasteful&quot; Instagram posts featuring his personal 812 Superfast. The posts, which showcased two models in suggestive positions atop the car, were seen by Ferrari as &quot;unlawfully appropriating&quot; the Ferrari brand to promote Plein&#x27;s clothing, and as being outside Ferrari&#x27;s intended brand perception. Furthermore, the company places restrictions on what owners may do with their cars: they are not allowed to undertake certain modifications, and the company&#x27;s right of first refusal contract, designed to discourage speculation and flipping, prohibits unauthorised sales within the first two years of ownership. Purchasers who break these rules are placed on a &quot;blacklist&quot;, and may not be permitted to buy a Ferrari vehicle through official means. These owner restrictions came to high profile in 2014, when the musician Deadmau5 was sent a cease and desist letter regarding his highly customised 458 Italia: the car, which he dubbed the &quot;Purrari&quot;, possessed custom badges and a Nyan Cat-themed wrap, and was put up for sale on Craigslist.

Ferrari does encourage its buyers to personalise their cars, but only through official channels, which include its Tailor Made programme for bespoke trim packages and special coachbuilding initiatives for more demanding commissions. The customisation options offered through these channels are extensive, though they are always in line with Ferrari&#x27;s desired branding—for example, the company offers no pink paint for its cars. In 2017, the CEO of the company&#x27;s Australasia branch commented that this and similar customisations are &quot;against the company&#x27;s ethos,&quot; and that such a stance is &quot;a brand rule. No pink. No &quot;Pokémon&quot; Ferraris!&quot;.

== Corporate affairs ==
In 1963, Enzo Ferrari was approached by the Ford Motor Company about a possible buy out. Ford audited Ferrari&#x27;s assets but legal negotiations and talks were unilaterally cut off by Ferrari when he realized that the deal offered by Ford would not enable him to stay at the helm of the company racing program. Henry Ford II consequently directed his racing division to negotiate with Lotus, Lola, and Cooper to build a car capable of beating Ferrari on the world endurance circuit, eventually resulting in the production of the Ford GT40 in 1964.

As the Ford deal fell through, FIAT approached Ferrari with a more flexible proposal and purchased controlling interests in the company in 1969. Enzo Ferrari retained a 10% share, which is currently owned by his son Piero Lardi Ferrari.

Ferrari has an internally managed merchandising line that licences many products bearing the Ferrari brand, including eyewear, pens, pencils, electronic goods, perfume, cologne, clothing, high-tech bicycles, watches, cell phones, and laptop computers.

Ferrari also runs a museum, the Museo Ferrari in Maranello, which displays road and race cars and other items from the company&#x27;s history.

=== Formula Uomo programme ===
In 1997, Ferrari launched a long term master planned effort to improve overall corporate efficiency, production and employee happiness. The program was called Formula Uomo and became a case study in social sustainability. It took over ten years to fully implement and included over €200 million (2008) in investment.

=== Technical partnerships ===
Ferrari has had a long-standing relationship with petroleum company Shell Oil from the late 1950s to the early 1970s, and currently since 1996. Shell develops and supplies fuel and oils to the Scuderia Ferrari&#x27;s Formula One and World Endurance Championship teams, as well as Ducati Corse&#x27;s MotoGP and World Superbike teams. The Shell V-Power premium gasoline fuel is claimed to have been developed with the many years of technical expertise between Shell and Ferrari.

Ferrari has had agreements to supply Formula One engines to a number of other teams over the years, and currently supply the Sauber and Haas F1 F1 teams.

=== Sales history ===
As of the end of 2019, the total of Ferrari built and sold cars in their whole company history is 219,062.

In October 2023, Ferrari started accepting payment in cryptocurrency for its vehicles in the US with intentions to expand the scheme to Europe in 2024. The cryptocurrency payments will be immediately traded into traditional currency to avoid price swings. 

;Annual Ferrari sales to end customers (number of type-approved vehicles)

:

=== Recalls ===
In January 2020, the Italian carmaker said it will recall 982 vehicles for passenger airbags due to the Takata airbag recalls. If the inflator explodes, the airbag will spew metal shrapnel at passengers, which can cause severe injury. Every car involved will get a new passenger-side airbag assembly, complete with a new inflator without the dangerous propellant.

On 8 August 2022, the company recalled almost every car it&#x27;s sold in the US since 2005 over a potential for brake failure. According to an NHTSA recall filing, 23,555 Ferrari models sold in America are fitted with a potentially faulty brake fluid reservoir cap that may not vent pressure adequately. The affected cars will be fitted with a replacement cap and receive a software update.

=== Stores and attractions ===
Roughly thirty Ferrari boutiques exist worldwide, with two owned by Ferrari and the rest operating as franchises. The stores sell branded clothes, accessories and racing memorabilia; some stores also feature racing simulators where visitors can drive virtual Ferrari vehicles. Clothing includes upscale and lower-priced collections for men, women, and children. Ferrari debuted their high fashion brand with their first runway in June 2021.

There are also two Ferrari-themed amusement parks:
* Ferrari World Abu Dhabi opened in 2010, is the first Ferrari-branded theme park in the world, and is situated on Yas Island in Abu Dhabi, in the United Arab Emirates. It boasts 37 rides and attractions and is home to the world&#x27;s fastest roller coaster—Formula Rossa, and a dynamic coaster with one of the world&#x27;s tallest loop—Flying Aces.
* Ferrari Land, opened since 2017, is the second such Ferrari-themed amusement park, and is located in PortAventura World resort, Catalonia Spain. It has 16 rides and attractions, and is home to Europe&#x27;s fastest and highest vertical accelerator coaster—Red Force.

== See also ==

* Automotive industry in Italy
* List of automobile manufacturers of Italy
* List of companies of Italy
* List of Ferrari competition cars
* List of Ferrari engines
* List of Ferrari road cars
* Scuderia Ferrari

== Notes ==
== References ==
== General references ==
* Adler, Dennis, &quot;Ferrari: The Road from Maranello&quot;. Random House, 2006. .

== External links ==
* Ferrari Official Car Configurator
* Ferrari Past Models on auto.ferrari.com
* Ferrari Single-seaters on formula1.ferrari.com
* Ferrari Special Projects listing on Coachbuild.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27586" start="0" end="14" title="Ferrari" label="Ferrari S.p.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q274586" start="41" end="51" title="sports car" label="sports car"/>
<link wikidata="Q100060" start="74" end="83" title="Maranello" label="Maranello"/>
<link wikidata="Q181282" start="104" end="116" title="Enzo Ferrari" label="Enzo Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q784859" start="148" end="161" title="Auto Avio Costruzioni 815" label="its first car"/>
<link wikidata="Q891723" start="282" end="296" title="public company" label="public company"/>
<link wikidata="Q940689" start="351" end="362" title="Fiat S.p.A." label="Fiat S.p.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q1186164" start="370" end="378" title="Corporate spin-off" label="spun off"/>
<link wikidata="Q15678788" start="414" end="439" title="Fiat Chrysler Automobiles" label="Fiat Chrysler Automobiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q815679" start="522" end="530" title="supercar" label="supercar"/>
<link wikidata="Q744620" start="533" end="545" title="grand tourer" label="grand tourer"/>
<link wikidata="Q192152" start="556" end="559" title="SUV" label="SUV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6916808" start="629" end="669" title="List of most expensive cars sold at auction" label="most expensive cars ever sold at auction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5776110" start="684" end="695" title="History of Ferrari" label="its history"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="759" end="765" title="Auto racing" label="racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="781" end="792" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="810" end="826" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Scuderia Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089579" start="931" end="948" title="Grand Prix motor racing" label="Grand Prix events"/>
<link wikidata="Q371804" start="1052" end="1069" title="sports car racing" label="sports car racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935482" start="1122" end="1134" title="Mille Miglia" label="Mille Miglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q952162" start="1136" end="1148" title="Targa Florio" label="Targa Florio"/>
<link wikidata="Q187579" start="1153" end="1172" title="24 Hours of Le Mans" label="24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684565" start="1218" end="1246" title="World Sportscar Championship" label="World Sportscar Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q431289" start="1388" end="1393" title="brand" label="brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q471719" start="1554" end="1575" title="market capitalisation" label="market capitalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181282" start="1662" end="1674" title="Enzo Ferrari" label="Enzo Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q26921" start="1718" end="1728" title="Alfa Romeo" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="1738" end="1754" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Scuderia Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q749437" start="1811" end="1827" title="gentleman driver" label="gentleman driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q562444" start="2588" end="2608" title="noncompete agreement" label="noncompete agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q784859" start="2732" end="2757" title="Auto Avio Costruzioni 815" label="Auto Avio Costruzioni 815"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2818" end="2830" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q100060" start="3130" end="3139" title="Maranello" label="Maranello"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445263" start="3333" end="3349" title="Ferrari Colombo engine" label="a new V12 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q919505" start="3371" end="3376" title="Ferrari 125 S" label="125 S"/>
<link wikidata="Q216392" start="3597" end="3621" title="1949 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="1949 24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044949" start="3631" end="3651" title="Carrera Panamericana" label="Carrera Panamericana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892959" start="3930" end="3937" title="Ferrari America" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126922" start="3939" end="3944" title="Ferrari Monza" label="Monza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353522" start="3950" end="3953" title="Ferrari 250" label="250"/>
<link wikidata="Q215768" start="3991" end="4006" title="series-produced" label="series-produced"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069663" start="4019" end="4031" title="Ferrari 250 GT Coupé" label="250 GT Coupé"/>
<link wikidata="Q891723" start="4091" end="4105" title="public company" label="public company"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="4214" end="4218" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q940689" start="4279" end="4283" title="Fiat S.p.A." label="Fiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743115" start="4472" end="4483" title="Dino 206 GT" label="Dino 206 GT"/>
<link wikidata="Q762891" start="4519" end="4530" title="mid-engined" label="mid-engined"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035537" start="4554" end="4563" title="Ferrari Daytona" label="365 GTB/4"/>
<link wikidata="Q245272" start="4802" end="4805" title="V12 engine" label="V12"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115030" start="4820" end="4843" title="Front-engine, rear-wheel-drive layout" label="in the front of the car"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856569" start="4928" end="4930" title="V6" label="V6"/>
<link wikidata="Q341174" start="4935" end="4937" title="V8" label="V8"/>
<link wikidata="Q463627" start="5113" end="5116" title="Ferrari F40" label="F40"/>
<link wikidata="Q815679" start="5142" end="5150" title="supercar" label="supercar"/>
<link wikidata="Q176152" start="5179" end="5186" title="Ferrari 288 GTO" label="288 GTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q332640" start="5236" end="5263" title="Luca Cordero di Montezemolo" label="Luca Cordero di Montezemolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9671" start="5695" end="5713" title="Michael Schumacher" label="Michael Schumacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q171998" start="5718" end="5727" title="Jean Todt" label="Jean Todt"/>
<link wikidata="Q748461" start="5782" end="5785" title="Ferrari F50" label="F50"/>
<link wikidata="Q269880" start="5791" end="5795" title="Ferrari Enzo" label="Enzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069684" start="5805" end="5814" title="LaFerrari" label="LaFerrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229223" start="6052" end="6069" title="Sergio Marchionne" label="Sergio Marchionne"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="6104" end="6127" title="initial public offering" label="initial public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186164" start="6143" end="6151" title="Corporate spin-off" label="spin-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q15678788" start="6157" end="6182" title="Fiat Chrysler Automobiles" label="Fiat Chrysler Automobiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278430" start="6196" end="6211" title="Louis Camilleri" label="Louis Camilleri"/>
<link wikidata="Q284011" start="6223" end="6234" title="John Elkann" label="John Elkann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3638113" start="6300" end="6315" title="Benedetto Vigna" label="Benedetto Vigna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384416" start="6654" end="6664" title="Factory-backed" label="works team"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="6666" end="6682" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Scuderia Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="6735" end="6746" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q371804" start="6751" end="6768" title="sports car racing" label="sports car racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q172863" start="7045" end="7061" title="List of Formula One World Drivers&amp;#x27; Champions" label="champion drivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q177410" start="7075" end="7107" title="List of Formula One World Constructors&amp;#x27; Champions" label="Constructors&amp;#x27; Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="7274" end="7290" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Scuderia Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089579" start="7365" end="7382" title="Grand Prix racing" label="Grand Prix racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q26921" start="7422" end="7432" title="Alfa Romeo" label="Alfa Romeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q599666" start="7701" end="7715" title="Antonio Ascari" label="Antonio Ascari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385724" start="7717" end="7733" title="Giuseppe Campari" label="Giuseppe Campari"/>
<link wikidata="Q174277" start="7739" end="7753" title="Tazio Nuvolari" label="Tazio Nuvolari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310959" start="7957" end="7963" title="Ferrari 125 F1" label="125 F1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654235" start="7988" end="8011" title="1948 Italian Grand Prix" label="1948 Italian Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q173069" start="8185" end="8208" title="1951 British Grand Prix" label="1951 British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q172863" start="8323" end="8356" title="List of Formula One World Drivers&amp;#x27; Champions" label="World Drivers&amp;#x27; Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q177410" start="8365" end="8396" title="List of Formula One World Constructors&amp;#x27; Champions" label="Constructors&amp;#x27; Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086" start="8444" end="8458" title="Alberto Ascari" label="Alberto Ascari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069" start="8460" end="8478" title="Juan Manuel Fangio" label="Juan Manuel Fangio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112" start="8480" end="8489" title="Phil Hill" label="Phil Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153" start="8495" end="8507" title="John Surtees" label="John Surtees"/>
<link wikidata="Q195996" start="8738" end="8750" title="Cosworth DFV" label="Cosworth DFV"/>
<link wikidata="Q78489" start="8832" end="8842" title="Niki Lauda" label="Niki Lauda"/>
<link wikidata="Q172775" start="8997" end="9011" title="Jody Scheckter" label="Jody Scheckter"/>
<link wikidata="Q172845" start="9016" end="9033" title="Gilles Villeneuve" label="Gilles Villeneuve"/>
<link wikidata="Q9671" start="9234" end="9252" title="Michael Schumacher" label="Michael Schumacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q69869" start="9501" end="9512" title="2004 Formula One season" label="2004 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q11192" start="9639" end="9653" title="Kimi Räikkönen" label="Kimi Räikkönen"/>
<link wikidata="Q173663" start="9836" end="9844" title="Red Bull Racing" label="Red Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q65954812" start="9849" end="9862" title="Mercedes-Benz in Formula One" label="Mercedes-Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445262" start="9945" end="9967" title="Ferrari Driver Academy" label="Ferrari Driver Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q82652" start="10046" end="10058" title="Felipe Massa" label="Felipe Massa"/>
<link wikidata="Q506749" start="10242" end="10255" title="Formula Three" label="Formula Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q4491911" start="10260" end="10269" title="Formula 4" label="Formula 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q17541912" start="10374" end="10389" title="Charles Leclerc" label="Charles Leclerc"/>
<link wikidata="Q784859" start="10659" end="10677" title="Auto Avio Costruzioni 815" label="an abortive effort"/>
<link wikidata="Q919505" start="10738" end="10743" title="Ferrari 125 S" label="125 S"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684565" start="10929" end="10957" title="World Sportscar Championship" label="World Sportscar Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935482" start="10983" end="10995" title="Mille Miglia" label="Mille Miglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q187579" start="11022" end="11041" title="24 Hours of Le Mans" label="24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11453" end="11460" title="History of Ferrari#Racing rivalry" label="by Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742727" start="11523" end="11530" title="1967 World Sportscar Championship" label="in 1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741849" start="11543" end="11550" title="1972 World Sportscar Championship season" label="in 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q106018424" start="11883" end="11920" title="2023 FIA World Endurance Championship" label="2023 FIA World Endurance Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988831" start="11951" end="11959" title="AF Corse" label="AF Corse"/>
<link wikidata="Q114925087" start="11973" end="11977" title="Ferrari 499P" label="499P"/>
<link wikidata="Q114729824" start="12231" end="12255" title="2023 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="2023 24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q22956043" start="12264" end="12283" title="Toyota Gazoo Racing" label="Toyota Gazoo Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q118948646" start="12416" end="12440" title="2024 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="2024 24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163326" start="12577" end="12594" title="motorcycle racing" label="motorcycle racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150827" start="12755" end="12761" title="Norton Motorcycle Company" label="Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q448617" start="12766" end="12771" title="Rudge-Whitworth" label="Rudge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="13024" end="13040" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q687214" start="13164" end="13175" title="Formula Two" label="Formula Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470293" start="13180" end="13193" title="Formula Libre" label="Formula Libre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445264" start="13274" end="13285" title="Ferrari Dino engine" label="Dino engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q250631" start="13400" end="13413" title="Tasman Series" label="Tasman Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q171469" start="13423" end="13433" title="Chris Amon" label="Chris Amon"/>
<link wikidata="Q577775" start="13465" end="13482" title="Dino 246 Tasmania" label="Dino 246 Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420845" start="13498" end="13516" title="water speed record" label="water speed record"/>
<link wikidata="Q122714" start="13583" end="13593" title="Hydroplane (boat)" label="hydroplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008828" start="13697" end="13704" title="Arno XI" label="Arno XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417032" start="13896" end="13906" title="sim racing" label="sim racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="14045" end="14061" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Scuderia Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823618" start="14198" end="14213" title="Tony Vandervell" label="Tony Vandervell"/>
<link wikidata="Q173093" start="14243" end="14259" title="Thinwall Special" label="Thinwall Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q173093" start="14304" end="14311" title="Vanwall" label="Vanwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534246" start="14322" end="14348" title="North American Racing Team" label="North American Racing Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q279588" start="14593" end="14606" title="A1 Grand Prix" label="A1 Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q115821079" start="14646" end="14649" title="A1GP Powered by Ferrari car" label="car"/>
<link wikidata="Q276396" start="14810" end="14813" title="Ferrari 458" label="458"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497959" start="14940" end="14957" title="Risi Competizione" label="Risi Competizione"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988831" start="14970" end="14978" title="AF Corse" label="AF Corse"/>
<link wikidata="Q758778" start="15143" end="15150" title="Audi R8" label="Audi R8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130427" start="15152" end="15167" title="McLaren MP4-12C" label="McLaren MP4-12C"/>
<link wikidata="Q930466" start="15173" end="15185" title="BMW Z4 (E89)" label="BMW Z4 (E89)"/>
<link wikidata="Q239793" start="15261" end="15265" title="Ferrari F430" label="F430"/>
<link wikidata="Q74772" start="15271" end="15288" title="Ferrari Challenge" label="Ferrari Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q276396" start="15325" end="15336" title="Ferrari 458" label="Ferrari 458"/>
<link wikidata="Q269880" start="15342" end="15345" title="Ferrari FXX" label="FXX"/>
<link wikidata="Q919505" start="15480" end="15485" title="Ferrari 125 S" label="125 S"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576842" start="15565" end="15574" title="Ferrari 166 Inter" label="166 Inter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424761" start="15716" end="15726" title="berlinetta" label="berlinetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045332" start="15760" end="15792" title="Carrozzeria Touring Superleggera" label="Carrozzeria Touring Superleggera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734300" start="15941" end="15953" title="coachbuilder" label="coachbuilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q59179" start="15963" end="15970" title="Vignale" label="Vignale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045332" start="15972" end="15979" title="Carrozzeria Touring" label="Touring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045339" start="15981" end="15985" title="Ghia" label="Ghia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40987" start="15987" end="15998" title="Pininfarina" label="Pininfarina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045326" start="16000" end="16010" title="Carrozzeria Scaglietti" label="Scaglietti"/>
<link wikidata="Q27325" start="16015" end="16022" title="Gruppo Bertone" label="Bertone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743115" start="16187" end="16198" title="Dino 206 GT and 246 GT" label="Dino 206 GT"/>
<link wikidata="Q577775" start="16318" end="16322" title="Dino (marque)" label="Dino"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457710" start="16522" end="16529" title="Flat-12 engine" label="flat 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q577917" start="16538" end="16554" title="Ferrari Berlinetta Boxer" label="Berlinetta Boxer"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673219" start="17089" end="17094" title="Ferrari GTC4Lusso" label="Lusso"/>
<link wikidata="Q74955156" start="17109" end="17113" title="Ferrari Roma" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q37806207" start="17115" end="17124" title="Ferrari Portofino" label="Portofino"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673219" start="17129" end="17136" title="Ferrari GTC4Lusso" label="Lusso T"/>
<link wikidata="Q744792" start="17142" end="17152" title="Ferrari California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069684" start="17305" end="17314" title="Ferrari LaFerrari" label="LaFerrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q40987" start="17395" end="17406" title="Pininfarina" label="Pininfarina"/>
<link wikidata="Q976334" start="17517" end="17528" title="Ferrari F12" label="Ferrari F12"/>
<link wikidata="Q64162421" start="17708" end="17729" title="Ferrari SF90 Stradale" label="Ferrari SF90 Stradale"/>
<link wikidata="Q176152" start="19163" end="19170" title="Ferrari 288 GTO" label="288 GTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q463627" start="19314" end="19317" title="Ferrari F40" label="F40"/>
<link wikidata="Q748461" start="19319" end="19322" title="Ferrari F50" label="F50"/>
<link wikidata="Q269880" start="19324" end="19328" title="Ferrari Enzo" label="Enzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069684" start="19330" end="19339" title="LaFerrari" label="LaFerrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q130549590" start="19349" end="19352" title="Ferrari F80" label="F80"/>
<link wikidata="Q850270" start="19496" end="19507" title="concept car" label="concept car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295958" start="19521" end="19527" title="Ferrari Modulo" label="Modulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q961533" start="19529" end="19535" title="Ferrari Mythos" label="Mythos"/>
<link wikidata="Q647729" start="19541" end="19546" title="Ferrari Pinin" label="Pinin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40987" start="19786" end="19797" title="Pininfarina" label="Pininfarina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743130" start="19877" end="19887" title="Ferrari Millechili" label="Millechili"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882470" start="19902" end="19909" title="one-off" label="one-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734300" start="19989" end="20001" title="coachbuilder" label="coachbuilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000739" start="20043" end="20047" title="Ferrari P4/5 by Pininfarina" label="P4/5"/>
<link wikidata="Q951004" start="20056" end="20065" title="Ferrari 612 Kappa" label="612 Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q40987" start="20545" end="20556" title="Pininfarina" label="Pininfarina"/>
<link wikidata="Q55317292" start="20560" end="20570" title="Fioravanti (automotive)" label="Fioravanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377204" start="20602" end="20614" title="homologation" label="homologation"/>
<link wikidata="Q239793" start="20898" end="20901" title="Ferrari SP1" label="SP1"/>
<link wikidata="Q385268" start="20969" end="20990" title="Ferrari P540 Superfast Aperta" label="P540 Superfast Aperta"/>
<link wikidata="Q239793" start="21145" end="21156" title="Ferrari F430" label="F430 Spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="21170" end="21177" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21199" end="21221" title="Detroit Auto Show#2008" label="2008 Detroit Auto Show"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21230" end="21252" title="Geneva Motor Show#2010" label="2010 Geneva Motor Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q385268" start="21306" end="21309" title="Ferrari 599 GTB Fiorano" label="599"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069684" start="21482" end="21491" title="Ferrari LaFerrari" label="LaFerrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483388" start="21574" end="21595" title="Plug-in hybrid" label="plug-in hybrid (PHEV)"/>
<link wikidata="Q64162421" start="21619" end="21632" title="Ferrari SF90 Stradale" label="SF90 Stradale"/>
<link wikidata="Q107324636" start="21650" end="21653" title="Ferrari 296" label="296"/>
<link wikidata="Q919505" start="21887" end="21900" title="Ferrari 125 S" label="Ferrari 125 S"/>
<link wikidata="Q2147481" start="22063" end="22077" title="Ferrari 166 MM" label="Ferrari 166 MM"/>
<link wikidata="Q416698" start="22253" end="22256" title="Ferrari 166" label="166"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353522" start="22334" end="22337" title="Ferrari 250" label="250"/>
<link wikidata="Q466511" start="22575" end="22594" title="engine displacement" label="engine displacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445264" start="22625" end="22634" title="Ferrari Dino engine" label="V6 and V8"/>
<link wikidata="Q577775" start="22763" end="22766" title="Ferrari Dino" label="206"/>
<link wikidata="Q428064" start="22809" end="22812" title="Ferrari 348" label="348"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146729" start="22848" end="22852" title="Ferrari F355" label="F355"/>
<link wikidata="Q117235" start="22927" end="22930" title="Ferrari 360" label="360"/>
<link wikidata="Q239793" start="23115" end="23119" title="Ferrari F430" label="F430"/>
<link wikidata="Q276396" start="23154" end="23164" title="Ferrari 458 Italia" label="458 Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18943721" start="23211" end="23214" title="Ferrari 488" label="488"/>
<link wikidata="Q245272" start="23264" end="23267" title="V12 engine" label="V12"/>
<link wikidata="Q385268" start="23435" end="23438" title="Ferrari 599 GTB Fiorano" label="599"/>
<link wikidata="Q951004" start="23570" end="23573" title="Ferrari 612" label="612"/>
<link wikidata="Q678276" start="23577" end="23584" title="Flat engine" label="Flat 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q577917" start="23825" end="23835" title="Ferrari 365 GT4/BB" label="365 GT4 BB"/>
<link wikidata="Q463627" start="24005" end="24008" title="Ferrari F40" label="F40"/>
<link wikidata="Q748461" start="24013" end="24016" title="Ferrari F50" label="F50"/>
<link wikidata="Q269880" start="24022" end="24026" title="Enzo Ferrari (car)" label="Enzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q268935" start="24180" end="24187" title="Ferrari Mondial" label="Mondial"/>
<link wikidata="Q830375" start="24197" end="24207" title="Ferrari Testarossa" label="Testarossa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24532" end="24538" title="Ferrari Testarossa#F512 M" label="F512 M"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249123" start="24543" end="24558" title="Ferrari 575M Maranello" label="575 M Maranello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424761" start="24623" end="24633" title="Berlinetta" label="Berlinetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q213853" start="24639" end="24644" title="coupé" label="coupé"/>
<link wikidata="Q55989" start="24734" end="24746" title="Convertible (car)" label="convertibles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24752" end="24761" title="Ferrari Daytona#365 GTB/4 and GTS/4" label="365 GTS/4"/>
<link wikidata="Q828170" start="24806" end="24824" title="Roadster (automobile)" label="&amp;quot;Spider&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146729" start="24852" end="24863" title="Ferrari F355" label="F355 Spider"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24869" end="24879" title="Ferrari 360#Spider" label="360 Spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535526" start="24929" end="24938" title="targa top" label="targa top"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24951" end="24963" title="Ferrari Dino#Dino 246 GT and GTS" label="Dino 246 GTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146729" start="24969" end="24977" title="Ferrari F355" label="F355 GTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q428064" start="25304" end="25310" title="Ferrari 348" label="348 TS"/>
<link wikidata="Q216330" start="26058" end="26077" title="24 Hours of Daytona" label="24 Hours of Daytona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069700" start="26087" end="26093" title="Ferrari P" label="330 P4"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26132" end="26141" title="Ferrari Daytona#365 GTB/4 and GTS/4" label="365 GTB/4"/>
<link wikidata="Q219357" start="26207" end="26218" title="Porsche 911" label="Porsche 911"/>
<link wikidata="Q577775" start="26233" end="26237" title="Dino (automobile)" label="Dino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26525" end="26531" title="Ferrari Testarossa#F512 M" label="F512 M"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146729" start="26536" end="26540" title="Ferrari F355" label="F355"/>
<link wikidata="Q239793" start="26569" end="26573" title="Ferrari F430" label="F430"/>
<link wikidata="Q276396" start="26607" end="26618" title="Ferrari 458" label="Ferrari 458"/>
<link wikidata="Q17100652" start="26935" end="26952" title="National colours of Italy" label="Italian tricolour"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="27008" end="27024" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Scuderia Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q13364" start="27268" end="27275" title="Ravenna" label="Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q472772" start="27291" end="27308" title="Francesco Baracca" label="Francesco Baracca"/>
<link wikidata="Q222982" start="27321" end="27331" title="flying ace" label="flying ace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472912" start="27605" end="27618" title="Alfa Romeo 8C" label="Alfa Romeo 8C"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27642" end="27655" title="Shades of yellow#Yellow (CMYK) (process yellow) (canary yellow)" label="canary yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q279" start="27687" end="27693" title="Modena" label="Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q919505" start="27789" end="27802" title="Ferrari 125 S" label="Ferrari 125 S"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983457" start="28087" end="28103" title="List of international auto racing colours" label="national colours"/>
<link wikidata="Q176152" start="28462" end="28469" title="Ferrari 288 GTO" label="288 GTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301433" start="28638" end="28648" title="Privateer (motorsport)" label="privateers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353522" start="28691" end="28701" title="Ferrari 250 GT SWB" label="250 GT SWB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355679" start="28713" end="28722" title="test mule" label="test mule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384416" start="28759" end="28773" title="factory-backed" label="factory-backed"/>
<link wikidata="Q179412" start="28863" end="28866" title="FIA" label="FIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q10747721" start="28874" end="28886" title="Homologation (motorsport)" label="homologation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534246" start="28944" end="28970" title="North American Racing Team" label="North American Racing Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153" start="29055" end="29067" title="John Surtees" label="John Surtees"/>
<link wikidata="Q69193" start="29076" end="29099" title="1964 Formula One season" label="1964 Formula One season"/>
<link wikidata="Q981333" start="29139" end="29152" title="racing stripe" label="racing stripe"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="29567" end="29586" title="Wall Street Journal" label="Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q431289" start="29748" end="29759" title="brand image" label="brand image"/>
<link wikidata="Q277339" start="30290" end="30305" title="Ferrari 250 GTO" label="Ferrari 250 GTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4372150" start="30488" end="30494" title="Bounty (reward)" label="bounty"/>
<link wikidata="Q502918" start="30549" end="30560" title="counterfeit" label="counterfeit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069684" start="30979" end="30988" title="LaFerrari" label="LaFerrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q73234" start="31457" end="31470" title="Philipp Plein" label="Philipp Plein"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="31500" end="31509" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q28790462" start="31539" end="31552" title="Ferrari 812 Superfast" label="812 Superfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q694719" start="31970" end="31992" title="right of first refusal" label="right of first refusal"/>
<link wikidata="Q107885" start="32026" end="32037" title="speculation" label="speculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q96201898" start="32042" end="32050" title="flipping" label="flipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q49009" start="32341" end="32349" title="Deadmau5" label="Deadmau5"/>
<link wikidata="Q31726" start="32361" end="32377" title="cease and desist" label="cease and desist"/>
<link wikidata="Q276396" start="32417" end="32427" title="Ferrari 458" label="458 Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q149" start="32509" end="32517" title="Nyan Cat" label="Nyan Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q788500" start="32558" end="32568" title="Craigslist" label="Craigslist"/>
<link wikidata="Q20311520" start="32720" end="32732" title="trim package" label="trim package"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734300" start="32746" end="32759" title="coachbuilding" label="coachbuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q429220" start="32979" end="32983" title="pink" label="pink"/>
<link wikidata="Q864" start="33223" end="33230" title="Pokémon" label="Pokémon"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="33323" end="33341" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q516858" start="33592" end="33605" title="Henry Ford II" label="Henry Ford II"/>
<link wikidata="Q35935" start="33666" end="33671" title="Lotus Cars" label="Lotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q172857" start="33673" end="33677" title="Lola Cars" label="Lola"/>
<link wikidata="Q173003" start="33683" end="33689" title="Cooper Car Company" label="Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q291149" start="33810" end="33819" title="Ford GT40" label="Ford GT40"/>
<link wikidata="Q932101" start="34046" end="34065" title="Piero Lardi Ferrari" label="Piero Lardi Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706867" start="34353" end="34366" title="Museo Ferrari" label="Museo Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q100060" start="34370" end="34379" title="Maranello" label="Maranello"/>
<link wikidata="Q154950" start="34913" end="34922" title="Shell Oil" label="Shell Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493706" start="35183" end="35196" title="Shell V-Power" label="Shell V-Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q64506339" start="35449" end="35455" title="Sauber Motorsport" label="Sauber"/>
<link wikidata="Q16300222" start="35460" end="35467" title="Haas F1" label="Haas F1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36065" end="36086" title="Takata Corporation#Defective airbag recalls (2013–present)" label="Takata airbag recalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967350" start="36470" end="36475" title="National Highway Traffic Safety Administration" label="NHTSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068824" start="36773" end="36781" title="boutique" label="boutique"/>
<link wikidata="Q171947" start="36852" end="36862" title="franchising" label="franchises"/>
<link wikidata="Q212469" start="36920" end="36931" title="memorabilia" label="memorabilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417032" start="36958" end="36974" title="racing simulator" label="racing simulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="37226" end="37240" title="amusement park" label="amusement park"/>
<link wikidata="Q673656" start="37245" end="37268" title="Ferrari World Abu Dhabi" label="Ferrari World Abu Dhabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274177" start="37358" end="37368" title="Yas Island" label="Yas Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519" start="37372" end="37381" title="Abu Dhabi" label="Abu Dhabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="37390" end="37410" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q25002" start="37502" end="37515" title="Formula Rossa" label="Formula Rossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q60769496" start="37581" end="37592" title="Flying Aces (roller coaster)" label="Flying Aces"/>
<link wikidata="Q908792" start="37596" end="37608" title="Ferrari Land" label="Ferrari Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q908792" start="37697" end="37715" title="PortAventura World" label="PortAventura World"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="37724" end="37733" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="37734" end="37739" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q28555619" start="37852" end="37861" title="Red Force (roller coaster)" label="Red Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826736" start="37882" end="37910" title="Automotive industry in Italy" label="Automotive industry in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4431783" start="37913" end="37954" title="List of automobile manufacturers of Italy" label="List of automobile manufacturers of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860718" start="37957" end="37983" title="List of companies of Italy" label="List of companies of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570790" start="37986" end="38018" title="List of Ferrari competition cars" label="List of Ferrari competition cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570791" start="38021" end="38044" title="List of Ferrari engines" label="List of Ferrari engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247000" start="38047" end="38072" title="List of Ferrari road cars" label="List of Ferrari road cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q169898" start="38075" end="38091" title="Scuderia Ferrari" label="Scuderia Ferrari"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11227" wikidata="Q41726" url="?curid=11227" title="Freemasonry">
<text>Freemasonry (sometimes spelled Free-Masonry) or simply Masonry includes various fraternal organisations that trace their origins to the local guilds of stonemasons that, from the end of the 14th century, regulated the qualifications of stonemasons and their interaction with authorities and clients. Freemasonry is the oldest fraternity in the world and among the oldest still continued organizations in history.

Modern Freemasonry broadly consists of three main recognition groups: Regular Freemasonry, which insists that a &quot;volume of sacred law&quot;, such as the Bible, the Quran, or other religious scripture be open in a working lodge, that every member professes belief in a Supreme Being, that no women be admitted, and that discussion of religion or politics does not take place within the lodge; Liberal or Continental Freemasonry, which consists of the jurisdictions that have removed some, or all, of these restrictions; and Women’s and Mixed-Gender Freemasonry (Co-Freemasonry), which includes organizations that either admit women exclusively (such as the Order of Women Freemasons and the Honourable Fraternity of Ancient Freemasons in the UK) or accept both men and women (such as Le Droit Humain). These lodges are not officially recognized by Regular Freemasonry but operate independently, often following the same Masonic rules, regulations, rituals and traditions (sometimes sharing buildings, such as Freemasons&#x27; Hall in London).
The basic, local organisational unit of Freemasonry is the Lodge. These private Lodges are usually supervised at the regional level (usually coterminous with a state, province, or national border) by a Grand Lodge or Grand Orient. There is no international, worldwide Grand Lodge that supervises all of Freemasonry; each Grand Lodge is independent, and they do not necessarily recognise each other as being legitimate. Lodges are found around the world and on all populated continents; however due to anti-Masonry and laws that effectively ban the tradition, it does not have a presence in every country. In the spirit of brotherhood and hopefulness, however, Freemasons usually presume that clandestine lodges may nonetheless exist in those countries in which it is banned, even if they may not actually exist.

The degrees of Freemasonry are the three grades of medieval craft guilds: Entered Apprentice, Journeyman or Fellow of the craft (now called either &quot;Fellowcraft&quot; or &quot;Fellow Craft&quot; in English speaking jurisdictions, and &quot;Companion&quot; in non-English speaking jurisdictions), and Master Mason. The candidate of these three degrees is progressively taught the meanings of the symbols of Freemasonry and entrusted with grips, signs, and words to signify to other members that he has been so initiated. The degrees are part allegorical morality play and part lecture. These three degrees form Craft (or Blue Lodge) Freemasonry, and members of any of these degrees are known as Free-Masons, Freemasons or Masons. Once the Craft degrees have been conferred upon a Mason, he is qualified to join various &quot;Concordant bodies&quot; which offer additional degrees. These organisations are usually administered separately from the Grand Lodges who administer the Craft degrees. The extra degrees vary with locality and jurisdiction. In addition to these bodies, there are further organizations outside of the more traditional Rites of Freemasonry, that require an individual to be a Master Mason before they can join (such as the Rosicrucian Society of England).

Throughout its history, Freemasonry has received criticism and opposition on religious and political grounds. The Catholic Church, some Protestant denominations, and certain Islamic countries or entities have expressed opposition to or banned membership in Free-Masonry. Opposition to Freemasonry is sometimes rooted in anti-Semitism or conspiracy theories, and Freemasons have historically been persecuted by authoritarian states.

==Masonic lodge==
The Masonic lodge is the basic organisational unit of Freemasonry. The Lodge meets regularly and conducts the usual formal business of any small organisation (approve minutes, elect new members, appoint officers and take their reports, consider correspondence, bills and annual accounts, organise social and charitable events, etc.). In addition to such business, the meeting may perform a ceremony to confer a Masonic degree or receive a lecture, which is usually on some aspect of Masonic history or ritual. At the conclusion of the meeting, the Lodge may hold a formal dinner, or &quot;festive board&quot;, sometimes involving toasting and song. These meetings are typically held in a Masonic temple, though other venues may occasionally be used.

The bulk of Masonic ritual consists of degree ceremonies. Candidates for Freemasonry are progressively &quot;initiated&quot; into Freemasonry, first in the degree of Entered Apprentice. At some later time, in separate ceremonies, they will be &quot;passed&quot; to the degree of Fellowcraft; and then &quot;raised&quot; to the degree of Master Mason. In each of these ceremonies, the candidate must first take the new obligations of the degree, and is then entrusted with secret knowledge including passwords, signs and grips (secret handshakes) confined to his new rank. Although these symbols and gestures are nominally secret, they are readily found in public sources, including those published by Masonic organizations themselves.

Another ceremony is the annual installation of the Master of the Lodge and his appointed or elected officers. In some jurisdictions, an &quot;Installed Master&quot; elected, obligated, and invested to preside over a Lodge, is valued as a separate rank with its own secrets and distinctive title and attributes; after each full year in the chair the Master invests his elected successor and becomes a Past Master with privileges in the Lodge and Grand Lodge. In other jurisdictions, the grade is not recognised, and no inner ceremony conveys new secrets during the installation of a new Master of the Lodge.

Most Lodges have some sort of social functions, allowing members, their partners, and non-Masonic guests to meet openly. Often coupled with these events is the discharge of every Mason&#x27;s and Lodge&#x27;s collective obligation to contribute to charity. This occurs at many levels, including in annual dues, subscriptions, fundraising events, Lodges and Grand Lodges. Masons and their charities contribute for the relief of need in many fields, such as education, health and old age.

Private Lodges form the backbone of Freemasonry, with the sole right to elect their own candidates for initiation as Masons or admission as joining Masons, and sometimes with exclusive rights over residents local to their premises. There are non-local Lodges where Masons meet for wider or narrower purposes, such or in association with some hobby, sport, Masonic research, business, profession, regiment or college. The rank of Master Mason also entitles a Freemason to explore Masonry further through other degrees, administered separately from the basic Craft or &quot;Blue Lodge&quot; degrees described here, but generally having a similar structure and meetings.

There is much diversity and little consistency in Freemasonry because each Masonic jurisdiction is independent and sets its own rules and procedures while Grand Lodges have limited jurisdiction over their constituent member Lodges, which are ultimately private clubs. The wording of the ritual, the number of officers present, the layout of the meeting room, etc. varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.

Almost all officers of a Lodge are elected or appointed annually. Every Masonic Lodge has a Master, two Wardens, a treasurer and a secretary. There is also always a Tyler, or outer guard, outside the door of a working Lodge, who may be paid to secure its privacy. Other offices vary between jurisdictions.

Each Masonic Lodge exists and operates according to ancient principles known as the Landmarks of Freemasonry, which elude any universally accepted definition.

===Joining a lodge===
Candidates for Freemasonry will usually have met the most active members of the Lodge they are joining before being elected for initiation. The process varies among Grand Lodges, but in modern times interested people often look up a local Lodge through the Internet and will typically be introduced to a Lodge social function or open evening. The onus is upon candidates to ask to join; while they may be encouraged to ask, they may not be invited. Once the initial inquiry is made, a formal application may be proposed and seconded or announced in open Lodge and a more or less formal interview usually follows. If the candidate wishes to proceed, references are taken up during a period of notice so that members may enquire into the candidate&#x27;s suitability and discuss it. Finally, the Lodge takes an officially secret ballot on each application before a candidate is either initiated or rejected. The exact number of adverse ballots (&quot;blackballs&quot;) required to reject a candidate varies between Masonic jurisdictions. As an example, the United Grand Lodge of England only requires a single &quot;blackball&quot;, while the Grand Lodge of New York requires three.

A minimum requirement of every body of Freemasons is that each candidate must be &quot;free and of good reputation&quot;. The question of freedom, a standard feudal requirement of mediaeval guilds, is nowadays one of independence: the object is that every Mason should be a proper and responsible person. Thus, each Grand Lodge has a standard minimum age, varying greatly and often subject to dispensation in particular cases. (For example, in those jurisdictions where the minimum age is normally 21, lodges can often be given dispensations to initiate the sons of Masons at age 18.)
Additionally, most Grand Lodges require a candidate to declare a belief in a Supreme Being (although every candidate must interpret this condition in his own way, as all religious discussion is commonly prohibited). In a few cases, the candidate may be required to be of a specific religion. The form of Freemasonry most common in Scandinavia (known as the Swedish Rite), for example, accepts only Christians. At the other end of the spectrum, &quot;Liberal&quot; or Continental Freemasonry, exemplified by the Grand Orient de France, does not require a declaration of belief in any deity and accepts atheists (the cause of the distinction from the rest of Freemasonry).

During the ceremony of initiation, the candidate is required to undertake an obligation, swearing on the religious volume sacred to his personal faith to do good as a Mason. In the course of three degrees, Masons will promise to keep the secrets of their degree from lower degrees and outsiders, as far as practicality and the law permit, and to support a fellow Mason in distress. There is formal instruction as to the duties of a Freemason, but on the whole, Freemasons are left to explore the craft in the manner they find most satisfying. Some will simply enjoy the dramatics, or the management and administration of the lodge, others will explore the history, ritual and symbolism of the craft, others will focus their involvement on their Lodge&#x27;s sociopolitical side, perhaps in association with other lodges, while still others will concentrate on the lodge&#x27;s charitable functions.

==Organisation==

===Grand Lodges===

Grand Lodges (sometimes termed Grand Orients) are independent and sovereign bodies that govern Masonry in a given country, state or geographical area (termed a &quot;jurisdiction&quot;). There is no single overarching governing body that presides over worldwide Freemasonry; connections between different jurisdictions depend solely on mutual recognition.

Estimates of the worldwide membership of Freemasonry in the early 21st century ranged from about two million to more than six million.

The fraternity is administratively organised into independent Grand Lodges (or sometimes Grand Orients), each of which governs its own Masonic jurisdiction, which consists of subordinate (or &quot;constituent&quot;) Lodges.

The United Grand Lodge of England (UGLE) remains the largest Masonic jurisdiction worldwide. However, its membership has declined dramatically, from about 500,000 members in the 1960s to approximately 170,000 in 2023. The organisation is structured into various Provincial Grand Lodges at the local level. Similarly, the Grand Lodge of Ireland has experienced a steep decline, with membership falling from 100,000 in 1960 to around 19,000 members currently.

In the United States, Masonic membership is organised in two systems, first through 51 Conservative Grand Lodges—one for each state plus the District of Columbia. While these Grand Lodges once boasted over 4 million members in 1957, membership has declined sharply. According to the Masonic Service Association of North America, current combined membership across these jurisdictions stands at approximately 875,000 members.

Additionally, there are 46 Prince Hall Grand Lodges in amity with UGLE, operating across various U.S. states. Prince Hall Freemasonry is a historically African-American branch of Freemasonry that maintains its own separate Grand Lodge system parallel to the state Grand Lodge system.

Together, these two systems—the conservative Grand Lodges and Prince Hall Grand Lodges—make up for a total of 97 UGLE recognised Grand Lodges, sharing jurisdictions in the United States. They represent the main bodies of Masonic governance in the United States, though both have experienced significant membership declines since their mid-20th century peaks.

In France, the Grand Orient de France is the largest jurisdiction in Continental or Liberal Freemasonry in terms of membership and has over 53,000 members spread across approximately 1,381 lodges for an average of 38 members per Lodges. The Grand Orient de France has been steadily growing in membership since World War II from 33,000 in 1960 to 53,000 in 2023.

===Recognition, amity and regularity===
Relations between Grand Lodges are determined by the concept of &quot;Recognition&quot;. Each Grand Lodge maintains a list of other Grand Lodges that it recognises. When two Grand Lodges recognise and are in Masonic communication with each other, they are said to be &quot;&quot;, and the brethren of each may visit each other&#x27;s Lodges and interact Masonically. When two Grand Lodges are not in amity, inter-visitation is not allowed. There are many reasons one Grand Lodge will withhold or withdraw recognition from another, but the two most common are &quot;Exclusive Jurisdiction&quot; and &quot;Regularity&quot;.

====Exclusive Jurisdiction====
Exclusive Jurisdiction is a concept whereby normally only one Grand Lodge will be recognised in any geographical area. If two Grand Lodges claim jurisdiction over the same area, the other Grand Lodges will have to choose between them, and they may not all decide to recognise the same one. (In 1849, for example, the Grand Lodge of New York split into two rival factions, each claiming to be the legitimate Grand Lodge. Other Grand Lodges had to choose between them until the schism was healed.) Exclusive Jurisdiction can be waived when the two overlapping Grand Lodges are themselves in amity and agree to share jurisdiction. For example, since the Grand Lodge of Connecticut is in amity with the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Connecticut, the principle of Exclusive Jurisdiction does not apply, and other Grand Lodges may recognise both. Likewise, the five distinct kinds of lodges in Germany have nominally united under one Grand Lodge in order to obtain international recognition.

==== Modern Challenges and Evolution ====
The concept of Exclusive Jurisdiction has been significantly challenged in the United States with the increasing recognition of Prince Hall Grand Lodges, a branch of Freemasonry created for African Americans. Historically, many &quot;mainstream&quot; or conservative U.S. Grand Lodges refused to recognize Prince Hall Grand Lodges operating in their states, citing Exclusive Jurisdiction. However, this began to change in 1989 when the Grand Lodge of Connecticut extended recognition to its Prince Hall counterpart.

This initial recognition created a precedent for &quot;shared jurisdiction&quot; between mainstream and Prince Hall Grand Lodges, effectively modifying the traditional interpretation of Exclusive Jurisdiction. By 2024, most U.S. Grand Lodges have recognized their Prince Hall counterparts, establishing a new norm where two Grand Lodges can legitimately operate within the same geographical area, provided they maintain mutual recognition and amity.

The evolution of this practice demonstrates how traditional Masonic principles can adapt to accommodate social progress while maintaining the fundamental aims of regular Freemasonry. Some jurisdictions have formalized this arrangement through written agreements that specifically outline the terms of shared jurisdiction.

====Regularity====
Regularity is a concept based on adherence to Masonic Landmarks, the basic membership requirements, tenets and rituals of the craft. Each Grand Lodge sets its own definition of what these landmarks are, and thus what is Regular and what is Irregular (and the definitions do not necessarily agree between Grand Lodges). Essentially, every Grand Lodge will hold that &quot;its&quot; landmarks (its requirements, tenets and rituals) are Regular, and judge other Grand Lodges based on those. If the differences are significant, one Grand Lodge may declare the other &quot;Irregular&quot; and withdraw or withhold recognition.

The most commonly shared rules for Recognition (based on Regularity) are those given by the United Grand Lodge of England in 1929:
* The Grand Lodge should be established by an existing regular Grand Lodge, or by at least three regular Lodges.
* A belief in a supreme being and scripture is a condition of membership.
* Initiates should take their vows on that scripture.
* Only men can be admitted, and no relationship exists with mixed Lodges.
* The Grand Lodge has complete control over the first three degrees and is not subject to another body.
* All Lodges shall display a volume of scripture with the square and compasses while in session.
* There is no discussion of politics or religion.
* &quot;Ancient landmarks, customs and usages&quot; observed.

==Other degrees, orders, and bodies==

Blue Lodges, known as Craft Lodges in the United Kingdom, offer only the three traditional degrees. In most jurisdictions, the rank of past or installed master is also conferred in Blue/Craft Lodges. Master Masons are able to extend their Masonic experience by taking further degrees, in appendant or other bodies whether or not approved by their own Grand Lodge.

The Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite is a system of 33 degrees, including the three Blue Lodge degrees administered by a local or national Supreme Council. This system is popular in North America, South America and in Continental Europe. In America, the York Rite, with a similar range, administers three orders of Masonry, namely the Royal Arch, Cryptic Masonry, and Knights Templar.

In Britain, separate bodies administer each order. Freemasons are encouraged to join the Holy Royal Arch, which is linked to Mark Masonry in Scotland and Ireland, but completely separate in England. In England, the Royal Arch is closely associated with the Craft, automatically having many Grand Officers in common, including H.R.H the Duke of Kent as both Grand Master of the Craft and First Grand Principal of the Royal Arch. The English Knights Templar and Cryptic Masonry share the Mark Grand Lodge offices and staff at Mark Masons Hall. The Ancient and Accepted Rite (similar to the Scottish Rite), requires a member to proclaim the Trinitarian Christian faith, and is administered from Duke Street in London. Conversely, the Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia is a fully independent esoteric organization that requires members be United Grand Lodge of England Master Masons.

In the Nordic countries, the Swedish Rite is dominant; a variation of it is also used in parts of Germany.

==Ritual and symbolism==

Freemasonry describes itself as a &quot;beautiful system of morality, veiled in allegory and illustrated by symbols&quot;. The symbolism is mainly, but not exclusively, drawn from the tools of stonemasons—the square and compasses, the level and plumb rule, the trowel, the rough and smooth ashlars, among others. Moral lessons are attributed to each of these tools, although the assignment is by no means consistent. The meaning of the symbolism is taught and explored through ritual, and in lectures and articles by individual Masons who offer their personal insights and opinions.

According to the scholar of Western esotericism Jan A. M. Snoek: &quot;the best way to characterize Freemasonry is in terms of what it is not, rather than what it is&quot;. All Freemasons begin their journey in the &quot;craft&quot; by being progressively &quot;initiated&quot;, &quot;passed&quot; and &quot;raised&quot; into the three degrees of Craft, or Blue Lodge Masonry. During these three rituals, the candidate is progressively taught the Masonic symbols, and entrusted with grips or tokens, signs, and words to signify to other Masons which degrees he has taken. The dramatic allegorical ceremonies include explanatory lectures and revolve around the construction of the Temple of Solomon, and the artistry and death of the chief architect, Hiram Abiff. The degrees are those of &quot;Entered apprentice&quot;, &quot;Fellowcraft&quot; and &quot;Master Mason&quot;. While many different versions of these rituals exist, with various lodge layouts and versions of the Hiramic legend, each version is recognizable to any Freemason from any jurisdiction.

In some jurisdictions, the main themes of each degree are illustrated by tracing boards. These painted depictions of Masonic themes are exhibited in the lodge according to which degree is being worked and are explained to the candidate to illustrate the legend and symbolism of each degree.

The idea of Masonic brotherhood probably descends from a 16th-century legal definition of a &quot;brother&quot; as one who has taken an oath of mutual support to another. Accordingly, Masons swear at each degree to support and protect their brethren unless they have broken the law. In most Lodges, the oath or obligation is taken on a &quot;Volume of Sacred Law&quot;, whichever book of divine revelation is appropriate to the religious beliefs of the individual brother (usually the Bible in the Anglo-American tradition). In &quot;Progressive&quot; continental Freemasonry, books other than scripture are permissible, a cause of rupture between Grand Lodges.

==History==
===Origins===
Since the middle of the 19th century, Masonic historians have sought the origins of the movement in a series of similar documents known as the Old Charges, dating from the Regius Poem in about 1425 to the beginning of the 18th century. Alluding to the membership of a lodge of operative masons, they relate it to a mythologised history of the craft, the duties of its grades, and the manner in which oaths of fidelity are to be taken on joining. The 15th century also sees the first evidence of ceremonial regalia.

There is no clear mechanism by which these local trade organisations became today&#x27;s Masonic Lodges. The earliest rituals and passwords known, from operative lodges around the turn of the 17th–18th centuries, show continuity with the rituals developed in the later 18th century by accepted or speculative Masons, as those members who did not practice the physical craft gradually came to be known. The minutes of the Lodge of Edinburgh (Mary&#x27;s Chapel) No. 1 in Scotland show a continuity from an operative lodge in 1598 to a modern speculative Lodge. It is reputed to be the oldest Masonic Lodge in the world.

Alternatively, Thomas De Quincey in his work titled &quot;Rosicrucians and Freemasonry&quot; put forward the theory that suggested that Freemasonry may have been an outgrowth of Rosicrucianism. The theory had also been postulated in 1803 by German professor; J. G. Buhle.

The first Grand Lodge, the Grand Lodge of London and Westminster, later called the Grand Lodge of England, was founded on St John&#x27;s Day, 24 June 1717, when four existing London Lodges met for a joint dinner. Over the next decade, most of the existing Lodges in England joined the new regulatory body, which itself entered a period of self-publicity and expansion. New lodges were created, and the fraternity began to grow.

During the course of the 18th century, as aristocrats and artists crowded out the craftsmen originally associated with the organization, Freemasonry became fashionable throughout Europe and the American colonies.

Between 1730 and 1750, the Grand Lodge endorsed several significant changes that some Lodges could not endorse. A rival Grand Lodge was formed on 17 July 1751, which called itself the &quot;Antient Grand Lodge of England&quot; to signify that, in their opinion, these lodges were maintaining older traditions and rejected changes that the Premiere Grand Lodge had adopted. As an insult, the self proclaimed &quot;Antient Grand Lodge&quot; coined the term &quot;modern&quot; to designate the Premiere Grand Lodge (historians now use Premiere Grand Lodge and Antient Grand Lodge – to differentiate the two bodies). These two Grand Lodges vied for supremacy until the Premiere Grand Lodge made a compromise with the antient Grand Lodge to return to a ritual that worked for both Grand Lodges. They re-united on 27 December 1813 to form the United Grand Lodge of England.

The Grand Lodge of Ireland and the Grand Lodge of Scotland were formed in 1725 and 1736, respectively, although neither persuaded all of the existing lodges in their countries to join for many years.

===North America===

The earliest known American lodges were in Pennsylvania. The collector for the port of Pennsylvania, John Moore, wrote of attending lodges there in 1715, two years before the putative formation of the first Grand Lodge in London. The Grand Lodge of England appointed a Provincial Grand Master for North America in 1731, based in Pennsylvania, leading to the creation of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.

In Canada, Erasmus James Philipps became a Freemason while working on a commission to resolve boundaries in New England and, in 1739, he became provincial Grand Master for Nova Scotia; Philipps founded the first Masonic lodge in Canada at Annapolis Royal, Nova Scotia.

Other lodges in the colony of Pennsylvania obtained authorisations from the later Antient Grand Lodge of England, the Grand Lodge of Scotland, and the Grand Lodge of Ireland, which was particularly well represented in the travelling lodges of the British Army. Many lodges came into existence with no warrant from any Grand Lodge, applying and paying for their authorisation only after they were confident of their own survival.

After the American Revolution, independent U.S. Grand Lodges developed within each state. Some thought was briefly given to organising an overarching &quot;Grand Lodge of the United States&quot;, with George Washington, who was a member of a Virginian lodge, as the first Grand Master, but the idea was short-lived. The various state Grand Lodges did not wish to diminish their own authority by agreeing to such a body.

On April 30, 1789, George Washington took his oath of office at his first inauguration upon a bible belonging to St. John&#x27;s Lodge No. 1 of New York. Originally, it was expected that Washington would bring his own Bible upon which to swear his oath of office, and there was some consternation when it turned out that no one had informed Washington to bring one. Thinking quickly, Jacob Morton, the Marshal of the Inauguration (and Master of St. John&#x27;s Lodge), borrowed the Lodge&#x27;s Bible for use in the ceremony. That bible has been known since as the George Washington Inaugural Bible, and is still in possession of St. John&#x27;s Lodge No. 1 of the Grand Lodge of New York. Robert Livingston, Chancellor of the State of New York, also the first Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of Free and Accepted Masons of the State of New York, administered the oath. This event effectuated the establishment of the Executive Branch of the Federal Government of the United States, which had until then existed only virtually after the US Constitution become operational almost two months earlier, on March 4, 1789.

====Jamaican Freemasonry====

Freemasonry was imported to Jamaica by British immigrants who colonized the island for over 300 years. In 1908, there were eleven recorded Masonic lodges, which included three Grand Lodges, two Craft lodges, and two Rose Croix chapters. During slavery, the lodges were open to all &quot;freeborn&quot; men. According to the Jamaican 1834 census, that potentially included 5,000 free black men and 40,000 free people of colour (mixed race). After the full abolition of slavery in 1838, the Lodges were open to all Jamaican men of any race. Jamaica also kept close relationships with Masons from other countries. Jamaican Freemasonry historian Jackie Ranston, noted that:

On 25 May 2017, Masons around the world celebrated the 300th anniversary of the fraternity. Jamaica hosted one of the regional gatherings for this celebration.

====Prince Hall Freemasonry====
Prince Hall Freemasonry exists because of the refusal of early American lodges to admit African Americans. In 1775, an African American named Prince Hall, along with 14 other African American men, was initiated into a British military lodge with a warrant from the Grand Lodge of Ireland, having failed to obtain admission from the other lodges in Boston. When the British military Lodge left North America after the end of the Revolution, those 15 men were given the authority to meet as a Lodge, but not to initiate Masons. In 1784, these individuals obtained a Warrant from the Grand Lodge of England (Premiere Grand Lodge) and formed African Lodge, Number 459. When the two English grand lodges united in 1813, all U.S.-based Lodges were stricken from their rolls—largely because of the War of 1812. Thus, separated from both English jurisdiction and any concordantly recognised U.S. Grand Lodge, African Lodge retitled itself as the African Lodge, Number 1—and became a &quot;de facto&quot; Grand Lodge. (This lodge is not to be confused with the various Grand Lodges in Africa.) As with the rest of U.S. Freemasonry, Prince Hall Freemasonry soon grew and organised on a Grand Lodge system for each state.

Unlike other fraternal orders, there was never any blanket rule against the admission of men based on their race. Each lodge and grand lodge had their own rules, both written and unwritten. A few non-Prince Hall lodges did admit Blacks, with Angelo Soliman being one notable Masonic personality of African descent. Nonetheless, widespread racial segregation in 19th- and early 20th-century North America made it difficult for African Americans to join Lodges outside of Prince Hall jurisdictions. Even if a lodge was willing to entertain non-White applicants, generally only a single anonymous vote could prevent someone from being admitted. Inter-jurisdiction recognition between traditional and Prince Hall U.S. Masonic authorities was also not forthcoming. As demonstrated by the case of the famous black boxer Jack Johnson, if word spread that a mainstream lodge had admitted a Black person, that lodge could potentially face sanction from other discriminatory lodges.

Today most (but not all) U.S. Grand Lodges recognise their Prince Hall counterparts, and the authorities of both traditions are working towards full recognition. The United Grand Lodge of England has no problem with recognising Prince Hall Grand Lodges. While celebrating their heritage as lodges of African Americans, Prince Hall is open to all men regardless of race or religion.

===Emergence of Continental or Liberal Freemasonry===

English Freemasonry spread to France in the 1720s, first as lodges of expatriates and exiled Jacobites, and then as distinctively French lodges that still follow the ritual of the Premier Grand Lodge of England. From France and England, Freemasonry spread to most of Continental Europe during the course of the 18th century. The Grande Loge de France was formed under the Grand Mastership of the Duke of Clermont, who exercised only nominal authority. His successor, the Duke of Orléans, reconstituted the central body as the Grand Orient de France in 1773. Briefly eclipsed during the French Revolution, French Freemasonry continued to grow in the next century, at first under the leadership of Alexandre Francois Auguste de Grasse, Comte de Grassy-Tilly. A career Army officer, he lived with his family in Charleston, South Carolina from 1793 to the early 1800s, after leaving Saint-Domingue, now Haiti, during the years of the Haitian Revolution.

=== Freemasonry in the Middle East ===

After the failure of the 1830 Italian revolution, a number of Italian Freemasons were forced to flee. They secretly set up an approved chapter of Scottish Rite in Alexandria, a town already inhabited by a large Italian community. Meanwhile, the French Freemasons publicly organised a local chapter in Alexandria in 1845. During the 19th and 20th century Ottoman Empire, Masonic lodges operated widely across all parts of the empire and numerous Sufi orders shared a close relationship with them. Many Young Turks affiliated with the Bektashi order were members and patrons of Freemasonry. They were also closely allied against European imperialism. Many Ottoman intellectuals believed that Sufism and Freemasonry shared close similarities in doctrines, spiritual outlook and mysticism.

=== Schism ===

==== The racial schism ====
The relationship between English and French Freemasonry changed significantly during the formation of the United Grand Lodge of England in 1813. While the two jurisdictions maintained mutual recognition for several decades, events in the 1860s and 1870s led to a lasting division. In 1868, the &quot;Supreme Council of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of the State of Louisiana&quot; established itself within the jurisdiction of the Grand Lodge of Louisiana. This body, recognised by the Grand Orient de France but was considered irregular by the Grand Lodge of Louisiana because it admitted Black members. The following year, shocked by the Grand Lodge of Louisiana&#x27;s discrimination practices, the Grand Orient de France clarified and cemented its positions by passing a resolution declaring that &quot;neither colour, race, nor religion could disqualify a man from Masonry&quot;. This prompted the Grand Lodge of Louisiana to withdraw recognition and influenced other American Grand Lodges to do the same.

==== The theological schism ====
A philosophical debate during the Lausanne Congress of Supreme Councils of 1875 led the Grand Orient de France to examine its foundational principles. Following a report by a Protestant pastor, they concluded that Freemasonry, not being a religion, should not require religious belief. The Grand Orient revised its constitution to emphasise &quot;absolute liberty of conscience and human solidarity&quot;, removing previous requirements regarding belief in the existence of God and the immortality of the soul. The United Grand Lodge of England subsequently withdrew recognition of the Grand Orient de France, possibly influenced by contemporary political tensions between France and Britain. This separation continues today.

==== Evolution of styles ====
This change was not universally accepted within French Freemasonry. In 1894, lodges preferring to maintain recognition of the Great Architect of the Universe formed the Grande Loge de France. By 1913, the United Grand Lodge of England recognised another French body, the &quot;Grande Loge Nationale Indépendante et Régulière pour la France et les Colonies Françaises&quot;, which maintained practices similar to Anglo-American Free-Masonry including belief in a deity.

Modern Freemasonry encompasses three main approaches, which influence practice throughout Continental Europe:

*Liberal (or adogmatic/progressive) – Emphasising liberty of conscience and laïcité, particularly regarding separation of Church and State.
*Traditional – Following established French practices while maintaining requirement for belief in a Supreme Being. The Grande Loge de France exemplifies this approach.
*Conservative – Following Anglo-American practices with mandatory belief in Supreme Being.

The term Continental Freemasonry was used in Mackey&#x27;s 1873 &quot;Encyclopedia of Freemasonry&quot; to &quot;designate the Lodges on the Continent of Europe which retain many usages which have either been abandoned by, or never were observed in, the Lodges of England, Ireland, and Scotland, as well as the United States of America&quot;. Today, it is frequently used to refer to only the Liberal jurisdictions typified by the Grand Orient de France.

Different approaches to recognition and interaction between Masonic bodies emerged in the 20th century. In 1961, several Grand Lodges and Grand Orients established the Centre de Liaison et d&#x27;Information des Puissances maçonniques Signataires de l&#x27;Appel de Strasbourg (CLIPSAS), creating an international forum for Masonic cooperation. CLIPSAS membership includes over 100 Masonic organisations worldwide, encompassing traditional, liberal, and mixed-gender organisations.

This development reflected different philosophical approaches to Masonic recognition. The United Grand Lodge of England maintains a policy of exclusive recognition based on specific criteria, including belief in a Supreme Being and male-only membership. In contrast, CLIPSAS member organisations generally practise open recognition, allowing interaction between diverse Masonic traditions.

These differing approaches to recognition have led to distinct networks of Masonic interaction, often characterised as Conservative or Anglo-American and Liberal or Continental traditions, though this simplification does not fully capture the complexity of modern Masonic relationships.

However, recent developments indicate shifting perspectives within Conservative Freemasonry regarding women&#x27;s organisations. In 1999, the United Grand Lodge of England officially acknowledged both The Order of Women Freemasons and the Honourable Fraternity of Ancient Freemasons (Freemasonry for Women) as legitimate Masonic bodies. While not extending formal recognition, UGLE maintains &quot;excellent working relationships&quot; with both Grand Lodges and collaborates with them on various initiatives, including joint participation in Open House London events at Freemasons&#x27; Hall and university recruitment fairs. This represents a significant evolution from earlier stricter positions and demonstrates increasing liberalisation and acceptance of diverse Masonic traditions.

Additionally, in 2018, UGLE released guidance explicitly welcoming transgender members and affirming that &quot;A Freemason who after initiation ceases to be a man does not cease to be a Freemason.&quot;

===Freemasonry and women===
The status of women in the old guilds and corporations of medieval masons remains uncertain. The principle of &quot;femme sole&quot; allowed a widow to continue the trade of her husband, but its application had wide local variations, such as full membership of a trade body or limited trade by deputation or approved members of that body. In masonry, the small available evidence points to the less empowered end of the scale.

At the dawn of the Grand Lodge era, during the 1720s, James Anderson composed the first printed constitutions for Freemasons, the basis for most subsequent constitutions, which specifically excluded women from Freemasonry. As Freemasonry spread, women began to be added to the Lodges of Adoption by their husbands who were continental masons, which worked three degrees with the same names as the men&#x27;s but different content. The French officially abandoned the experiment in the early 19th century. Later organisations with a similar aim emerged in the United States but distinguished the names of the degrees from those of male masonry.

Maria Deraismes was initiated into Freemasonry in 1882, then resigned to allow her lodge to rejoin their Grand Lodge. Having failed to achieve acceptance from any masonic governing body, she and Georges Martin started a mixed masonic lodge that worked masonic ritual. Annie Besant spread the phenomenon to the English-speaking world. Disagreements over ritual led to the formation of exclusively female bodies of Freemasons in England, which spread to other countries. Meanwhile, the French had re-invented Adoption as an all-female lodge in 1901, only to cast it aside again in 1935. The lodges, however, continued to meet, which gave rise, in 1959, to a body of women practising continental Freemasonry.

In general, Continental Freemasonry is sympathetic to Freemasonry among women, dating from the 1890s when French lodges assisted the emergent co-masonic movement by promoting enough of their members to the 33rd degree of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite to allow them, in 1899, to form their own grand council, recognised by the other Continental Grand Councils of that Rite. The United Grand Lodge of England issued a statement in 1999 recognising the two women&#x27;s grand lodges there, The Order of Women Freemasons and The Honourable Fraternity of Ancient Freemasons, to be regular in all but the participants. While they were not, therefore, recognised as regular, they were part of Freemasonry &quot;in general&quot;. The attitude of most regular Anglo-American grand lodges remains that women Freemasons are not legitimate Masons.

In 2018, guidance was released by the United Grand Lodge of England stating that, in regard to transgender women, &quot;A Freemason who after initiation ceases to be a man does not cease to be a Freemason&quot;. The guidance also states that transgender men are allowed to apply to become Freemasons.

==Development and expansion==
===18th century Enlightenment===

During the Age of the Enlightenment in the 18th century, Freemasons comprised an international network of like-minded men, often meeting in secret in ritualistic programs at their lodges. They promoted the ideals of the Enlightenment and helped diffuse these values across Britain and France and other places. British Freemasonry offered a systematic creed with its own myths, values and set of rituals. It fostered new codes of conduct—including a communal understanding of liberty and equality inherited from guild sociability—&quot;liberty, fraternity, and equality&quot; Scottish soldiers and Jacobite Scots brought to the Continent ideals of fraternity which reflected not the local system of Scottish customs but the institutions and ideals originating in the English Revolution against royal absolutism. Freemasonry was particularly prevalent in France—by 1789, there were between 50,000 and 100,000 French Masons, making Freemasonry the most popular of all Enlightenment associations.

Jacob argues that Masonic lodges probably had an effect on society as a whole, for they &quot;reconstituted the polity and established a constitutional form of self-government, complete with constitutions and laws, elections and representatives&quot;. In other words, the micro-society set up within the lodges constituted a normative model for society as a whole. This was especially true on the Continent: when the first lodges began to appear in the 1730s, their embodiment of British values was often seen as threatening by state authorities. For example, the Parisian lodge that met in the mid-1720s was composed of English Jacobite exiles. Furthermore, freemasons all across Europe made reference to the Enlightenment in general in the 18th century. In French lodges, for example, the line &quot;As the means to be enlightened I search for the enlightened&quot; was a part of their initiation rites. British lodges assigned themselves the duty to &quot;initiate the unenlightened&quot;. Many lodges praised the Grand Architect, the masonic terminology for the divine being who created a scientifically ordered universe.

On the other hand, historian Robert Roswell Palmer noted that lodges operated separately and Masons politically did not act together as a group. American historians note that Benjamin Franklin and George Washington were leading Masons, but the significance of freemasonry in the revolution is a topic of debate. Daniel Roche contests freemasonry&#x27;s claims for egalitarianism, writing that &quot;the real equality of the lodges was elitist&quot;, only attracting men of similar social backgrounds.

In long-term historical perspective, Norman Davies has argued that Freemasonry was a powerful force in Europe, from about 1700 to the twentieth century. It expanded rapidly during the Age of Enlightenment, reaching practically every country in Europe, as well as the European colonies in the New World and Asia. Davies states, &quot;In the nineteenth century and beyond it would be strongly associated with the cause of Liberalism.&quot; In Catholic lands it was anti-clerical and came under heavy attack from the Catholic Church. In the 20th century, it was suppressed by Fascist and Communist regimes. It was especially attractive to royalty, aristocrats and politicians and businessmen, as well as intellectuals, artists and political activists. Davies notes that prominent members included Montesquieu, Voltaire, Sir Robert Walpole, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Benjamin Franklin, and George Washington. Steven Bullock notes that in the late 18th century, English lodges were headed by the Prince of Wales, Prussian lodges by king Frederick the Great, and French lodges by royal princes. Emperor Napoleon selected his own brother as the Grand Master of France.

===France===

In the 18th century, liberal French politicians met together in Masonic lodges to develop some of the Enlightenment ideas that dominated the French Revolution of 1789. Avner Halpern has traced French Freemasonry&#x27;s major role in building France&#x27;s first modern political party in 1901, the Radical Party. It used two Masonic devices: the &quot;civil leadership model&quot;, which Freemasonry developed in late 19th century France, and the local Masonic congresses of the Grand Orient of France federations.

===Russia===

Freemasons had been active in Russia in the 18th century, working to introduce Enlightenment ideals; however, they were increasingly suppressed by the government. According to Ludwick Hass, Freemasonry was officially illegal in Tsarist Russia, but would later be introduced by exiles who returned after the 1905 revolution. These individuals had been active Masons in Paris, where lodges were politically active in the new Radical Party. In Russia, the Freemasons supported constitutional liberalism, and maintained ties with France while simplifying many of the ceremonial rituals. Their secret meetings became a centre of progressive ideals, attracting politicians and activists. The lodges initially supported World War I, promoting close ties with France. Alexander Kerensky was an important Masonic activist who came to political power with the overthrow of the tsars, in 1917. The organization collapsed as the Bolsheviks took power and was again outlawed.

===Italy===

According to Adrian Lyttelton, in the early 20th century, Freemasonry was an influential but semi-secret force in Italian politics; with a strong presence among professionals and the middle class across Italy, its appeal spread to the leadership of the parliament, public administration, and the army. The two main organisations were the Grand Orient and the Grand Lodge of Italy. They had around 25,000 members in some 500 lodges. Freemasons typically espoused anticlericalism and promoted unification. The Catholic Church was a vigorous opponent of unification, and thus of the Freemasons; various national governments would repeatedly alternate and backpedal between the anticlerical side and the Church side. Politically, they promoted Italian nationalism focused on unification and undermining the power of the Catholic Church. Freemasons took on the challenge of mobilizing the press, encouraging public opinion and the leading political parties in support of Italy&#x27;s joining of the Allies of the First World War in 1914–1915. In 1919, they favoured a League of Nations to promote a new post-war, universal order based upon the peaceful coexistence of independent and democratic nations. In the early 1920s, many of Mussolini&#x27;s collaborators, especially the leaders in organizing the March on Rome, were Masons. The lodges hailed fascism as the saviour of Italy from Bolshevism; however, Mussolini decided he needed to come to terms with the Catholic Church, in the mid-1920s, outlawing Freemasonry.

===Latin America===
The Spanish government outlawed Freemasonry in its overseas empire in the mid-18th century, and energetically enforced the ban. Nevertheless, many Freemasons were active in planning and plotting for independence. Leaders with Freemason membership included Grand Master Francisco de Miranda, José de San Martin, Simón Bolivar, Bernardo O&#x27;Higgins, and many others. The movement was important after independence was achieved in the 1820s. In Brazil, many prominent men were Freemasons, and they played a leading role in the abolition of slavery.

====Mexico====
Freemasons were leaders in liberalism and anti-clericalism in 19th and 20th-century Mexico. Members included numerous top leaders. The Freemasons were divided regarding relations with the United States, with a pro-U.S. faction supported by the American ambassador Joel Poinsett known as the &quot;Yorkinos&quot;. According to historian Karen Racine, Freemasons in the presidency of Mexico included: Guadalupe Victoria, Valentín Gómez Farías, Antonio López de Santa Anna, Benito Juárez, Sebastián Lerdo de Tejada, Porfirio Díaz, Francisco I. Madero, Venustiano Carranza, Plutarco Elías Calles, Lázaro Cárdenas, Emilio Portes Gil, Pascual Ortiz Rubio, Abelardo L. Rodríguez, and Miguel Alemán Valdés.

=== China ===
The first lodge formed in China was the Amity Lodge which constituted at Canton in 1767. In 1875, District Grand Lodge of China split into two Districts, Northern China, and Hong Kong and South China. During the second world war, All Masonic activity in Hong Kong was brought to a halt due to the Japanese invasion. After the 1949, the new China government (Communist) established, some lodges in China moved to Hong Kong or closed due to lack of new candidates.

==== Hong Kong ====
Royal Sussex Lodge No. 501 was the first lodge established in Victoria City of Hong Kong on 29 April 1844.

For the English Constitution, Provincial or District Grand Lodge name in Hong Kong Changed as following:

* 1847–1866, Provincial Grand Lodge of China
* 1866–1875, District Grand Lodge of China
* 1875–1963, District Grand Lodge of Hong Kong and South China
* 1963–present, District Grand Lodge of Hong Kong and the Far East

For the Scottish Constitution, District Grand Lodge name in Hong Kong Changed as following:
* 1905–1958, District Grand Lodge of Hong Kong and South China
* 1958–present, District Grand Lodge of the Far East

For the Irish Constitution, Provincial or District Grand Lodge name in Hong Kong Changed as following:
* 1933–1938, District Grand Inspector
* 1938–1947, Grand Inspector
* 1947–1954, Grand Inspector for Hong Kong and China
* 1954–1967, Grand Inspector for Hong Kong, China and Malaya
* 1967–1988, Grand Inspector for the Far East
* 1988–present, Provincial Grand Lodge of the Far East

Now, there are 19 (English Constitution) lodges under the District Grand Lodge of Hong Kong and Far East, United Grand Lodge of England and meet at Zetland Hall, Hong Kong:

* Cathay Lodge No. 4373
* Corinthian Lodge of Amoy No. 1806
* Foochow Lodge No. 1912
* Harriers Lodge No. 9882
* Hong Kong and Far East District Grand Stewards Lodge No. 9879
* Lodge of Lu Pan No. 9387
* Lodge Star of Southern China No. 2013
* Paul Chater Lodge of Installed Masters No. 5391
* Perseverance Lodge of Hong Kong No. 1165
* Rotarian Lodge of Hong Kong No. 9378
* Royal Sussex Lodge No. 501
* St. Paul&#x27;s Lodge No. 9718
* St Joseph&#x27;s &amp; La Salle No. 10050
* The Swatow Lodge No. 3705
* The Club Lodge No. 9880
* United Service Lodge No. 1341
* University Lodge of Hong Kong No. 3666
* Victoria Lodge of Hong Kong No. 1026
* Zetland Lodge No. 525
The Rising Sun Lodge No. 1401 is the lodge meeting in Kobe, Japan and under the jurisdiction of District Grand Lodge of Hong Kong and Far East rather than Grand Lodge of Japan. As a result, there are 20 lodges currently under the District Grand Lodge of Hong Kong and Far East.

==Anti-Masonry==
&quot;Anti-Masonry&quot; (alternatively called &quot;Anti-Freemasonry&quot;) has been defined as &quot;opposition to Freemasonry&quot;, but there is no homogeneous anti-Masonic movement. Anti-Masonry consists of widely differing criticisms from diverse (and often incompatible) groups who are hostile to Freemasonry in some form. Critics have included religious groups, political groups, and conspiracy theorists, in particular, those espousing Masonic conspiracy theories or the Judeo-Masonic conspiracy theory. Certain prominent Anti-Masons, such as Nesta Helen Webster, exclusively criticized &quot;Continental Masonry&quot;, while considering &quot;Regular Masonry&quot; to be an honourable association.

There have been many disclosures and exposés dating as far back as the 18th century. These often lack context, may be outdated for various reasons, or could be outright hoaxes on the part of the author, as in the case of the Taxil hoax.

These hoaxes and exposés have often become the basis for criticism of Masonry, often religious or political in nature or are based on suspicion of corrupt conspiracy of some form. The political opposition that arose after the American &quot;Morgan Affair&quot; in 1826 gave rise to the term &quot;Anti-Masonry&quot;, which is still in use in America today, both by Masons in referring to their critics and as a self-descriptor by the critics themselves.

===Religious opposition===
Freemasonry has attracted criticism from theocratic states and organised religions that believe it is in competition with religion or perceive the fraternity&#x27;s views or practices as heterodox; it has also long been the target of conspiracy theories that assert Freemasonry to be an occult and evil power.

====Christianity and Freemasonry====
Although members of various faiths cite objections, certain Christian denominations have had high-profile negative attitudes to Masonry, banning or discouraging their members from being Freemasons. The denomination with the longest history of objection to Freemasonry is the Catholic Church. The objections raised by the Catholic Church are based on the allegation that Masonry teaches a naturalistic deistic religion which is in conflict with Church doctrine. More than 600 Papal pronouncements have been issued against Freemasonry. The first was Pope Clement XII&#x27;s &quot;In eminenti apostolatus,&quot; 28 April 1738; the most recent was Pope Francis in a letter by the Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith 13 November 2023.

The &quot;1917 Code of Canon Law&quot; explicitly declared that joining Freemasonry entailed automatic excommunication and banned books favouring Freemasonry.

In 1983, the Church issued a new code of canon law. Unlike its predecessor, the &quot;1983 Code of Canon Law&quot; did not explicitly name Masonic orders among the secret societies it condemns. It states: &quot;A person who joins an association which plots against the Church is to be punished with a just penalty; one who promotes or takes office in such an association is to be punished with an interdict.&quot; This named omission of Masonic orders caused both Catholics and Freemasons to believe that the ban on Catholics becoming Freemasons may have been lifted, especially after the perceived liberalisation of Vatican II. However, the matter was clarified when Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger (later Pope Benedict XVI), as the Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, issued a Declaration on Masonic Associations, which states: &quot;... the Church&#x27;s negative judgment in regard to Masonic association remains unchanged since their principles have always been considered irreconcilable with the doctrine of the Church and therefore membership in them remains forbidden. The faithful who enroll in Masonic associations are in a state of grave sin and may not receive Holy Communion.&quot; In 2023, Pope Francis reaffirmed the ban on Catholics becoming Freemasons stating the &quot;[...] irreconcilability between Catholic doctrine and Freemasonry [...]&quot; in response to Julito Cortes, Bishop of Dumanguete, who stated concerns over the growing number of Freemasons in the Philippines. The renewed ban cited both the &quot;1983 Code of Canon Law&quot;, as well as the &quot;Guidelines&quot; made by a Bishops Conference in 2003. For its part, Freemasonry has never objected to Catholics joining their fraternity. Those Grand Lodges in amity with the United Grand Lodge of England deny the Church&#x27;s claims, stating that &quot;Freemasonry does not seek to replace a Mason&#x27;s religion or provide a substitute for it.&quot;

In contrast to Catholic allegations of rationalism and naturalism, Protestant objections are more likely to be based on allegations of mysticism, occultism, and even Satanism. Masonic scholar Albert Pike is often quoted (in some cases misquoted) by Protestant anti-Masons as an authority for the position of Masonry on these issues. However, Pike, although undoubtedly learned, was not a spokesman for Freemasonry and was also controversial among Freemasons in general. His writings represented his personal opinion only, and furthermore, an opinion grounded in the attitudes and understandings of late 19th century Southern Freemasonry of the US. Notably, his book carries in the preface a form of disclaimer from his own Grand Lodge. No one voice has ever spoken for the whole of Freemasonry.

In 1993, the Southern Baptist Convention&#x27;s Home Mission Board determined that some parts of freemasonry are incompatible with Christianity, while others are compatible, concluding that participation in freemasonry should be considered &quot;a matter of personal conscience&quot;. The topic of Freemasonry remains controversial within the convention. James L. Holly, president of Mission and Ministry to Men, published a three volume book series titled &quot;The Southern Baptist Convention and Freemasonry&quot;, critiquing the report to the Southern Baptist Convention in addition to the influence of Gary Leazer, then Director of the Interfaith Witness Department of the North American Mission Board. Gary Leazer published &quot;Fundamentalism and Freemasonry&quot;, arguing that the convention&#x27;s discussion of Freemasonry was influenced by Southern Baptist Convention conservative resurgence.

Free Methodist Church founder B.T. Roberts was a vocal opponent of Freemasonry in the mid 19th century. Roberts opposed the society on moral grounds and stated, &quot;The god of the lodge is not the God of the Bible.&quot; Roberts believed Freemasonry was a &quot;mystery&quot; or &quot;alternate&quot; religion and encouraged his church not to support ministers who were Freemasons. Freedom from secret societies is one of the &quot;frees&quot; upon which the Free Methodist Church was founded.

Since the founding of Freemasonry, many Bishops of the Church of England have been Freemasons, including Archbishop Geoffrey Fisher. In the past, few members of the Church of England would have seen any incongruity in concurrently adhering to Anglican Christianity and practising Freemasonry. In recent decades, however, reservations about Freemasonry have increased within Anglicanism, perhaps due to the increasing prominence of the evangelical wing of the church. The former archbishop of Canterbury, Dr Rowan Williams, appeared to harbour some reservations about Masonic ritual, while being anxious to avoid causing offence to Freemasons inside and outside the Church of England. In 2003 he felt it necessary to apologise to British Freemasons after he said that their beliefs were incompatible with Christianity and that he had barred the appointment of Freemasons to senior posts in his diocese when he was Bishop of Monmouth.

In 1933, the Orthodox Church of Greece officially declared that being a Freemason constitutes an act of apostasy and thus, until he repents, the person involved with Freemasonry cannot partake of the Eucharist. This has been generally affirmed throughout the whole Eastern Orthodox Church. The Orthodox critique of Freemasonry agrees with both the Catholic and Protestant versions: &quot;Freemasonry cannot be at all compatible with Christianity as far as it is a secret organisation, acting and teaching in mystery and secret and deifying rationalism.&quot;

Regular Freemasonry has traditionally not responded to these claims, beyond the often-repeated statement that Freemasonry explicitly adheres to the principle that &quot;Freemasonry is not a religion, nor a substitute for religion. There is no separate &#x27;Masonic deity,&#x27; and there is no separate proper name for a deity in Freemasonry.&quot;

Christian men, who were discouraged from joining the Freemasons by their Churches or who wanted a more religiocentric society, joined similar fraternal organisations, such as the Knights of Columbus and Knights of Peter Claver for Catholics, and the Royal Black Institution for Protestants, although these fraternal organisations have been &quot;organized in part on the style of and use many symbols of Freemasonry&quot;.

There are some elements of Freemasonry within the temple rituals of Mormonism.

====Islam and Freemasonry====
Ottoman Caliph Mahmud I outlawed Freemasonry in the Ottoman Empire in 1748 CE and since that time Freemasonry was equated with atheism in the Ottoman Empire and the broader Islamic world.

Many Islamic anti-Masonic arguments are closely tied to antisemitic conspiracy theories, though other criticisms are made, such as linking Freemasonry to Al-Masih ad-Dajjal (the false Messiah in Islamic Scripture). Syrian-Egyptian Islamic theologian Mūhammād Rashīd Ridâ (1865–1935) played the crucial role in leading the opposition to Freemasonry across the Islamic world during the early twentieth century. Influenced by Rida, Islamic anti-Masons argue that Freemasonry promotes the interests of the Jews around the world and that one of its aims is to destroy the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound in order to rebuild the Temple of Solomon in Jerusalem. Through his popular pan-Islamic journal &quot;Al-Manar&quot;, Rashid Rida spread anti-Masonic ideas which would directly influence the Muslim Brotherhood and subsequent Islamist movements, such as Hamas. In article 28 of its Covenant, Hamas states that Freemasonry, Rotary, and other similar groups &quot;work in the interest of Zionism and according to its instructions ...&quot;

Several predominantly Muslim countries have banned Freemasonry within their borders, while others have not. Turkey and Morocco have established Grand Lodges, while in countries such as Malaysia and Lebanon, there are District Grand Lodges operating under a warrant from an established Grand Lodge. In 1972, in Pakistan, Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, then Prime Minister of Pakistan, placed a ban on Freemasonry. Lodge buildings were confiscated by the government.

Masonic lodges existed in Iraq as early as 1917, when the first lodge under the United Grand Lodge of England (UGLE) was opened. Nine lodges under UGLE existed by the 1950s, and a Scottish lodge was formed in 1923. However, the position changed following the revolution, and all lodges were forced to close in 1965. This position was later reinforced under Saddam Hussein; the death penalty was &quot;prescribed&quot; for those who &quot;promote or acclaim Zionist principles, including freemasonry, or who associate [themselves] with Zionist organisations.&quot;

===Political opposition===
In 1799, English Freemasonry almost came to a halt due to Parliamentary proclamation. In the wake of the French Revolution, the Unlawful Societies Act banned any meetings of groups that required their members to take an oath or obligation.

The Grand Masters of both the Moderns and the Antients Grand Lodges called on Prime Minister William Pitt (who was not a Freemason) and explained to him that Freemasonry was a supporter of the law and lawfully constituted authority and was much involved in charitable work. As a result, Freemasonry was specifically exempted from the terms of the Act, provided that each private lodge&#x27;s Secretary placed with the local &quot;Clerk of the Peace&quot; a list of the members of his lodge once a year. This continued until 1967, when the obligation of the provision was rescinded by Parliament.

Freemasonry in the United States faced political pressure following the 1826 kidnapping of William Morgan by Freemasons and his subsequent disappearance. Reports of the &quot;Morgan Affair&quot;, together with opposition to Jacksonian democracy (Andrew Jackson was a prominent Mason), helped fuel an Anti-Masonic movement. The short-lived Anti-Masonic Party was formed, which fielded candidates for the presidential elections of 1828 and 1832.
In Italy, Freemasonry has become linked to a scandal concerning the Propaganda Due lodge (a.k.a. P2). This lodge was chartered by the Grande Oriente d&#x27;Italia in 1877, as a lodge for visiting Masons unable to attend their own lodges. Under Licio Gelli&#x27;s leadership, in the late 1970s, P2 became involved in the financial scandals that nearly bankrupted the Vatican Bank. However, by this time the lodge was operating independently and irregularly, as the Grand Orient had revoked its charter and expelled Gelli in 1976.

Conspiracy theorists have long associated Freemasonry with the New World Order and the Illuminati, and state that Freemasonry as an organisation is either bent on world domination or already secretly in control of world politics. Historically Freemasonry has attracted criticism, and suppression from both the politically far right (e.g., Nazi Germany) and the far left (e.g., the former Communist states in Eastern Europe).

Freemasonry is viewed with distrust even in some modern democracies. In the UK, Masons working in the justice system, such as judges and police officers, were required to disclose their membership from 1999 to 2009. While a parliamentary inquiry found that there had been no evidence of wrongdoing, the government believed that Masons&#x27; potential loyalties to support fellow Masons should be transparent to the public. The policy of requiring a declaration of masonic membership by applicants for judicial office (judges and magistrates) was ended in 2009 by Justice Secretary Jack Straw (who had initiated the requirement in the 1990s). Straw stated that the rule was considered disproportionate since no impropriety or malpractice had been shown as a result of judges being Freemasons.

Freemasonry is both successful and controversial in France. As of the early 21st century, membership is rising, but reporting of it in popular media is often negative.

In some countries, anti-Masonry is often related to antisemitism and anti-Zionism. For example, in 1980, the Iraqi legal and penal code was changed by Saddam Hussein&#x27;s ruling Ba&#x27;ath Party, making it a felony to &quot;promote or acclaim Zionist principles, including Freemasonry, or who associate [themselves] with Zionist organisations&quot;. Professor Andrew Prescott of the University of Sheffield writes: &quot;Since at least the time of the Protocols of the Elders of Zion, antisemitism has gone hand in hand with anti-masonry, so it is not surprising that allegations that 11 September was a Zionist plot have been accompanied by suggestions that the attacks were inspired by a masonic world order&quot;.

====The Holocaust====


The preserved records of the &quot;Reichssicherheitshauptamt&quot; (the Reich Security Main Office) show the persecution of Freemasons during the Holocaust. RSHA Amt VII (Written Records), overseen by Professor Franz Six, was responsible for &quot;ideological&quot; tasks, by which was meant the creation of antisemitic and anti-Masonic propaganda. While the number of victims is not accurately known, historians estimate that between 80,000 and 200,000 Freemasons were killed under the Nazi regime. Masonic concentration camp inmates were classified as political prisoners and wore an inverted red triangle. Hitler believed Freemasons had succumbed to Jews conspiring against Germany.

The small blue forget-me-not flower was first used by the Grand Lodge &quot;Zur Sonne&quot; in 1926, as a Masonic emblem at the annual convention in Bremen, Germany. In 1938, a forget-me-not badge, made by the same factory as the Masonic badge, was chosen for the Nazi Party&#x27;s &quot;Winterhilfswerk&quot;, the annual charity drive of the National Socialist People&#x27;s Welfare (the welfare branch of the Nazi party). This coincidence enabled Freemasons to wear the forget-me-not badge as a secret sign of membership.

After World War II, the forget-me-not flower was used again as a Masonic emblem in 1948 at the first Annual Convention of the United Grand Lodges of Germany in 1948. The badge is now sometimes worn in the coat lapel by Freemasons around the world to remember all who suffered in the name of Freemasonry, especially those during the Nazi era.

==See also==
* List of general fraternities
* Secret society
* Co-Freemasonry
* Freemasonry during World War I
* Freemasonry under the Second French Empire
* Freemasonry in Latin America
* Freemasonry in the French Third Republic
* Freemasonry in Brazil
* DeMolay International, Masonic youth organization
* La Chaîne d&#x27;Union

==References==
==Further reading==

* Belton, John L., et al. &quot;Freemasonry in context: history, ritual, controversy&quot; (Lexington Books, 2004) online.
* Berger, Joachim. &quot;The great divide: Transatlantic brothering and masonic internationalism, c. 1870–c. 1930.&quot; &quot;Atlantic Studies&quot; 16.3 (2019): 405–422.
* Dickie, John. &quot;The Craft: How the Freemasons Made the Modern World&quot; (PublicAffairs, 2020).
* Fozdar, Vahid. &quot;&#x27;That Grand Primeval and Fundamental Religion&#x27;: The Transformation of Freemasonry into a British Imperial Cult.&quot; &quot;Journal of World History&quot; 22#3 (2011), pp. 493–525. online
* Hamill, John. &quot;The Craft: A History of English Freemasonry&quot; (1986) 
* Harland-Jacobs, Jessica L. &quot;Builders of Empire: Freemasons and British Imperialism, 1717–1927&quot; (2007)
* Hoffmann, Stefan-Ludwig. &quot;Freemasonry and German Civil Society, 1840–1918&quot; (U of Michigan Press, 2007).
* Jacob, Margaret C. &quot;Living the Enlightenment: Freemasonry and Politics in Eighteenth-Century Europe&quot; (1991) 
* Jacob, Margaret C. &quot;The Origins of Freemasonry: Facts and Fictions&quot; (U of Pennsylvania Press, 2007).
* Jacob, Margaret, and Matthew Crow. &quot;Freemasonry and the Enlightenment.&quot; in &quot;Handbook of Freemasonry&quot; (Brill, 2014) pp. 100–116. online
* Loiselle, Kenneth. &quot;Freemasonry and the Catholic Enlightenment in Eighteenth-Century France.&quot; &quot;Journal of Modern History&quot; 94.3 (2022): 499–536. online
* Önnerfors, Andreas. &quot;Freemasonry: a very short introduction&quot; (Oxford University Press, 2017) excerpt.
* Racine, Karen. &quot;Freemasonry&quot; in Michael S. Werner, ed. &quot;Encyclopedia of Mexico: History, Society, and Culture&quot; (Fitzroy Dearborn, 1997) 1:538–540.
* Rebold, Emmanuel &quot;General History of Freemasonry in Europe&quot; (1869)
* Ridley, Jasper. &quot;The Freemasons&quot; (1999), wide-ranging global popular history.
* Snoek Jan A.M. and Henrik Bogdan. &quot;The History of Freemasonry: An Overview&quot; in Bogdan and Snoek, eds. &quot;Handbook of Freemasonry&quot; (Brill, 2014) ch. 2 pp 13–32. online
* Stevenson, David. &quot;Four Hundred Years of Freemasonry in Scotland.&quot; &quot;Scottish Historical Review,&quot; 90#230 (2011), pp. 280–295. online
* Stevenson, David. &quot;The First Freemasons. Scotland&#x27;s Early Lodges and Their Members&quot; (1988)
* Weisberger, R. William et al.&quot; Freemasonry on Both Sides of the Atlantic: Essays concerning the Craft in the British Isles, Europe, the United States, and Mexico&quot; (2002), 969 pp
* Weisberger, R. William. &quot;Speculative Freemasonry and the Enlightenment: A Study of the Craft in London, Paris, Prague and Vienna&quot; (Columbia University Press, 1993) 243 pp.

===United States===
* Bullock, Steven C. &quot;Revolutionary brotherhood: Freemasonry and the transformation of the American social order, 1730–1840&quot; (UNC Press Books, 2011).
* Formisano, Ronald P., and Kathleen Smith Kutolowski. &quot;Antimasonry and Masonry: The Genesis of Protest, 1826–1827.&quot; &quot;American Quarterly&quot; 29.2 (1977): 139–165. online
* Hackett, David G. &quot;That Religion in Which All Men Agree : Freemasonry in American Culture&quot; (U of California Press, 2015) 
* Hinks, Peter P. et al. &quot;All Men Free and Brethren: Essays on the History of African American Freemasonry&quot; (Cornell UP, 2013).
* Kantrowitz, Stephen. &quot;&#x27;Intended for the Better Government of Man&#x27;: The Political History of African American Freemasonry in the Era of Emancipation.&quot; &quot;Journal of American History&quot; 96#4, (2010), pp. 1001–1026. online.
* Weisberger, R. William et al. &quot;Freemasonry on Both Sides of the Atlantic: Essays concerning the Craft in the British Isles, Europe, the United States, and Mexico&quot; (2002), 969pp
* York, Neil L. &quot;Freemasons and the American Revolution.&quot; &quot;Historian&quot; 55#2 (1993), pp. 315–330. online

===Historiography and memory===
* Jacob, Margaret. &quot;The Radical Enlightenment and Freemasonry: where we are now.&quot; &quot;REHMLAC: Revista de Estudios Históricos de la Masonería Latinoamericana y Caribeña&quot; 1 (2013): 11–25.online.

==External links==
* Web of Hiram at the University of Bradford. A database of donated Masonic material.
* Masonic Books Online of the &quot;Pietre-Stones Review of Freemasonry&quot;
* &quot;The Constitutions of the Free-Masons&quot; (1734), James Anderson, Benjamin Franklin, Paul Royster. Hosted by the Libraries at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* &quot;The Mysteries of Free Masonry&quot;, by William Morgan, from Project Gutenberg
* The United Grand Lodge of England&#x27;s Library and Museum of Freemasonry , London
* Articles on Judaism and Freemasonry
* Anti-Masonry: Points of View – Edward L. King&#x27;s Masonic website
*The International Order of Co-Freemasonry &quot;Le Droit Humain&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="0" end="11" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="31" end="43" title="Freemasonry" label="Free-Masonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="55" end="62" title="Freemasonry" label="Masonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q996839" start="80" end="103" title="Fraternity" label="fraternal organisations"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="142" end="147" title="guild" label="guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q19794820" start="152" end="163" title="Stonemasonry" label="stonemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138816" start="484" end="503" title="Regular Masonic jurisdiction" label="Regular Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="572" end="577" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="583" end="588" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q179461" start="609" end="618" title="scripture" label="scripture"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="687" end="700" title="God" label="Supreme Being"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507182" start="811" end="845" title="Continental Freemasonry" label="Liberal or Continental Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068304" start="942" end="995" title="Freemasonry_and_women" label="Women’s and Mixed-Gender Freemasonry (Co-Freemasonry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100564" start="1075" end="1100" title="Order of Women Freemasons" label="Order of Women Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1109" end="1152" title="Honourable Fraternity of Ancient Freemasons" label="Honourable Fraternity of Ancient Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q731738" start="1202" end="1217" title="Le Droit Humain" label="Le Droit Humain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454597" start="1520" end="1525" title="Masonic Lodge" label="Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378781" start="1663" end="1674" title="Grand Lodge" label="Grand Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275310" start="1962" end="1974" title="anti-Masonry" label="anti-Masonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="2340" end="2345" title="guild" label="guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q20773771" start="2348" end="2366" title="Apprenticeship" label="Entered Apprentice"/>
<link wikidata="Q582096" start="2368" end="2378" title="Journeyman" label="Journeyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284709" start="2578" end="2590" title="Master craftsman" label="Master Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q929047" start="2831" end="2844" title="morality play" label="morality play"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="2972" end="2983" title="Freemasonry" label="Free-Masons"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="2985" end="2995" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="2999" end="3005" title="Freemasonry" label="Masons"/>
<link wikidata="Q471855" start="3311" end="3323" title="jurisdiction" label="jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q131154844" start="3418" end="3423" title="List of Masonic rites" label="Rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473888" start="3522" end="3552" title="Rosicrucian Society of England" label="Rosicrucian Society of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275310" start="3605" end="3629" title="Anti-Masonry" label="criticism and opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="3876" end="3889" title="anti-Semitism" label="anti-Semitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="3893" end="3912" title="conspiracy theories" label="conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454597" start="4011" end="4024" title="Masonic lodge" label="Masonic lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085515" start="4174" end="4181" title="minutes" label="minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077486" start="4418" end="4432" title="Masonic ritual and symbolism" label="Masonic degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q657221" start="4572" end="4585" title="formal dinner" label="formal dinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454583" start="4695" end="4709" title="Masonic Temple" label="Masonic temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077486" start="4770" end="4784" title="Masonic ritual" label="Masonic ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444161" start="5285" end="5301" title="secret handshake" label="secret handshake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090786" start="7677" end="7696" title="Masonic Lodge Officers" label="officers of a Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259945" start="7831" end="7836" title="Tyler (Masonic)" label="Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576423" start="8057" end="8081" title="Landmarks of Freemasonry" label="Landmarks of Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543757" start="9210" end="9239" title="United Grand Lodge of England" label="United Grand Lodge of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594766" start="9296" end="9319" title="Grand Lodge of New York" label="Grand Lodge of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="9999" end="10012" title="God" label="Supreme Being"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="10253" end="10264" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635180" start="10279" end="10291" title="Swedish Rite" label="Swedish Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507182" start="10389" end="10412" title="Continental Freemasonry" label="Continental Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542667" start="10433" end="10455" title="Grand Orient de France" label="Grand Orient de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378781" start="12087" end="12098" title="Grand Lodge" label="Grand Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543757" start="12254" end="12283" title="United Grand Lodge of England" label="United Grand Lodge of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355596" start="12571" end="12593" title="Grand Lodge of Ireland" label="Grand Lodge of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="12716" end="12729" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="12850" end="12870" title="Washington, D.C." label="District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238196" start="13245" end="13268" title="Prince Hall Freemasonry" label="Prince Hall Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="13287" end="13303" title="African Americans" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543757" start="13533" end="13537" title="United Grand Lodge of England" label="UGLE"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="13783" end="13789" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542667" start="13795" end="13817" title="Grand Orient de France" label="Grand Orient de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="14090" end="14102" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238196" start="15991" end="16015" title="Prince Hall Masonry" label="Prince Hall Grand Lodges"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594752" start="16299" end="16325" title="Grand Lodge of Connecticut" label="Grand Lodge of Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576423" start="17219" end="17236" title="Masonic Landmarks" label="Masonic Landmarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764682" start="18985" end="18998" title="Scottish Rite" label="Scottish Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="19180" end="19198" title="Continental Europe" label="Continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q131621834" start="19216" end="19225" title="York Rite" label="York Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373678" start="19297" end="19307" title="Royal Arch Masonry" label="Royal Arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190772" start="19309" end="19324" title="Cryptic Masonry" label="Cryptic Masonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814398" start="19330" end="19345" title="Knights Templar (Freemasonry)" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5886057" start="19437" end="19452" title="Holy Royal Arch" label="Holy Royal Arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2683798" start="19473" end="19485" title="Order of Mark Master Masons" label="Mark Masonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245053" start="19684" end="19696" title="Duke of Kent" label="Duke of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473888" start="20079" end="20110" title="Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia" label="Societas Rosicruciana in Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="20134" end="20142" title="esoteric" label="esoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543757" start="20181" end="20210" title="United Grand Lodge of England" label="United Grand Lodge of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="20211" end="20224" title="Master Masons" label="Master Masons"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="20234" end="20250" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635180" start="20256" end="20268" title="Swedish Rite" label="Swedish Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297776" start="20570" end="20590" title="square and compasses" label="square and compasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q747382" start="20622" end="20628" title="trowel" label="trowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122603" start="20651" end="20657" title="ashlar" label="ashlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988481" start="20962" end="20992" title="Academic study of Western esotericism" label="scholar of Western esotericism"/>
<link wikidata="Q223644" start="21625" end="21642" title="Temple of Solomon" label="Temple of Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q508294" start="21695" end="21706" title="Hiram Abiff" label="Hiram Abiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q4284138" start="22079" end="22092" title="tracing board" label="tracing board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960426" start="22640" end="22660" title="Volume of Sacred Law" label="Volume of Sacred Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138689" start="23130" end="23141" title="Old Charges" label="Old Charges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138689" start="23159" end="23170" title="Regius Poem" label="Regius Poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q131384727" start="23264" end="23280" title="Operative Freemasonry" label="operative masons"/>
<link wikidata="Q41459727" start="23302" end="23322" title="Masonic myths" label="mythologised history"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257879" start="23924" end="23969" title="Lodge of Edinburgh (Mary&amp;#x27;s Chapel) No. 1" label="Lodge of Edinburgh (Mary&amp;#x27;s Chapel) No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q317160" start="24138" end="24155" title="Thomas De Quincey" label="Thomas De Quincey"/>
<link wikidata="Q194267" start="24301" end="24315" title="Rosicrucianism" label="Rosicrucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180563" start="24382" end="24393" title="Johann Gottlieb Buhle" label="J. G. Buhle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637868" start="24479" end="24501" title="Premier Grand Lodge of England" label="Grand Lodge of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238397" start="24518" end="24536" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s Day, Masonic feast" label="St John&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="25019" end="25036" title="European colonization of the Americas" label="American colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618677" start="25229" end="25259" title="Antient Grand Lodge of England" label="Antient Grand Lodge of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433308" start="25732" end="25742" title="Emulation Lodge of Improvement" label="compromise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543757" start="25876" end="25905" title="United Grand Lodge of England" label="United Grand Lodge of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355596" start="25912" end="25934" title="Grand Lodge of Ireland" label="Grand Lodge of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049535" start="25943" end="25966" title="Grand Lodge of Scotland" label="Grand Lodge of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="26173" end="26185" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637868" start="26364" end="26386" title="Premier Grand Lodge of England" label="Grand Lodge of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114965" start="26504" end="26531" title="Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania" label="Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384963" start="26545" end="26567" title="Erasmus James Philipps" label="Erasmus James Philipps"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="26642" end="26653" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="26706" end="26717" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q564536" start="26773" end="26801" title="Annapolis Royal, Nova Scotia" label="Annapolis Royal, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618677" start="26886" end="26916" title="Antient Grand Lodge of England" label="Antient Grand Lodge of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049535" start="26922" end="26945" title="Grand Lodge of Scotland" label="Grand Lodge of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355596" start="26955" end="26977" title="Grand Lodge of Ireland" label="Grand Lodge of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="27244" end="27263" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="27435" end="27452" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502117" start="27701" end="27715" title="Oath of office of the president of the United States" label="oath of office"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454184" start="27723" end="27741" title="First inauguration of George Washington" label="first inauguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q85802888" start="27768" end="27795" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s Lodge (New York)" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s Lodge No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119027" start="28039" end="28051" title="Jacob Morton" label="Jacob Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639494" start="28220" end="28253" title="George Washington Inaugural Bible" label="George Washington Inaugural Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q283676" start="28345" end="28362" title="Robert R. Livingston" label="Robert Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147519" start="28364" end="28374" title="New York Court of Chancery" label="Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594766" start="28416" end="28500" title="Grand Lodge of New York" label="Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of Free and Accepted Masons of the State of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="28831" end="28838" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q487420" start="29253" end="29286" title="Slavery Abolition Act 1833" label="full abolition of slavery in 1838"/>
<link wikidata="Q978424" start="29809" end="29820" title="Prince Hall" label="Prince Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355596" start="29932" end="29954" title="Grand Lodge of Ireland" label="Grand Lodge of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="30015" end="30021" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q55603297" start="30305" end="30330" title="African Lodge No. 459" label="African Lodge, Number 459"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="30458" end="30469" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q536650" start="31121" end="31135" title="Angelo Soliman" label="Angelo Soliman"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="31218" end="31236" title="racial segregation" label="racial segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q316689" start="31693" end="31705" title="Jack Johnson (boxer)" label="Jack Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="32384" end="32393" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637868" start="32471" end="32501" title="Premier Grand Lodge of England" label="Premier Grand Lodge of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q311637" start="32762" end="32777" title="Louis Philippe II, Duke of Orléans" label="Duke of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="32877" end="32894" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q526030" start="32987" end="33023" title="Alexandre Francois Auguste de Grasse" label="Alexandre Francois Auguste de Grasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="33099" end="33125" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q861551" start="33170" end="33184" title="Saint-Domingue" label="Saint-Domingue"/>
<link wikidata="Q689128" start="33221" end="33239" title="Haitian Revolution" label="Haitian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33307" end="33330" title="Revolutions of 1830#In Italy" label="1830 Italian revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764682" start="33428" end="33441" title="Scottish Rite" label="Scottish Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="33445" end="33455" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="33636" end="33650" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q816321" start="33727" end="33738" title="Tariqa" label="Sufi orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q83896" start="33783" end="33794" title="Young Turks" label="Young Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q467692" start="33815" end="33829" title="Bektashi Order" label="Bektashi order"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="33909" end="33929" title="European imperialism" label="European imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="33972" end="33978" title="Sufism" label="Sufism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543757" start="34219" end="34248" title="United Grand Lodge of England" label="United Grand Lodge of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q121775470" start="34413" end="34496" title="Supreme Council of Louisiana" label="Supreme Council of the Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite of the State of Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542667" start="34608" end="34630" title="Grand Orient de France" label="Grand Orient de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q4265389" start="35201" end="35246" title="Lausanne Congress of Supreme Councils of 1875" label="Lausanne Congress of Supreme Councils of 1875"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699404" start="35628" end="35644" title="existence of God" label="existence of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q193942" start="35653" end="35676" title="immortality of the soul" label="immortality of the soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543757" start="35682" end="35711" title="United Grand Lodge of England" label="United Grand Lodge of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890688" start="36050" end="36081" title="Great Architect of the Universe" label="Great Architect of the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q959344" start="36093" end="36114" title="Grande Loge de France" label="Grande Loge de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542968" start="36201" end="36290" title="Grande Loge Nationale Française" label="Grande Loge Nationale Indépendante et Régulière pour la France et les Colonies Françaises"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220111" start="36581" end="36588" title="laïcité" label="laïcité"/>
<link wikidata="Q959344" start="36764" end="36785" title="Grande Loge de France" label="Grande Loge de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507182" start="36914" end="36937" title="Continental Freemasonry" label="Continental Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054230" start="37529" end="37637" title="Centre de Liaison et d&amp;#x27;Information des Puissances maçonniques Signataires de l&amp;#x27;Appel de Strasbourg" label="Centre de Liaison et d&amp;#x27;Information des Puissances maçonniques Signataires de l&amp;#x27;Appel de Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543757" start="37934" end="37963" title="United Grand Lodge of England" label="United Grand Lodge of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543757" start="38666" end="38695" title="United Grand Lodge of England" label="United Grand Lodge of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100564" start="38729" end="38754" title="Order of Women Freemasons" label="Order of Women Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39993" end="40008" title="History of Freemasonry#Early Grand Lodge period" label="Grand Lodge era"/>
<link wikidata="Q717170" start="40028" end="40042" title="James Anderson (Freemason)" label="James Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q153704" start="40056" end="40098" title="Anderson&amp;#x27;s Constitutions" label="first printed constitutions for Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739059" start="40251" end="40269" title="Rite of Adoption" label="Lodges of Adoption"/>
<link wikidata="Q449513" start="40619" end="40634" title="Maria Deraismes" label="Maria Deraismes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509018" start="40814" end="40828" title="Georges Martin (freemason)" label="Georges Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q464318" start="40887" end="40899" title="Annie Besant" label="Annie Besant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764682" start="41551" end="41585" title="Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite" label="Ancient and Accepted Scottish Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543757" start="42210" end="42239" title="United Grand Lodge of England" label="United Grand Lodge of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="42549" end="42573" title="Age of the Enlightenment" label="Age of the Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="44161" end="44169" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q536852" start="44688" end="44709" title="Robert Roswell Palmer" label="Robert Roswell Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="44834" end="44851" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="44856" end="44873" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q376303" start="45198" end="45211" title="Norman Davies" label="Norman Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975" start="45955" end="45966" title="Montesquieu" label="Montesquieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="45968" end="45976" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q104190" start="45978" end="45996" title="Robert Walpole" label="Sir Robert Walpole"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="45998" end="46021" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="46023" end="46049" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="46051" end="46068" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="46074" end="46091" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q33550" start="46220" end="46239" title="Frederick the Great" label="Frederick the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="46467" end="46480" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="46506" end="46523" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542710" start="46659" end="46676" title="Radical Party (France)" label="the Radical Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560581" start="46974" end="46994" title="Russian Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment ideals"/>
<link wikidata="Q48211" start="47655" end="47673" title="Alexander Kerensky" label="Alexander Kerensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q478004" start="48334" end="48349" title="anticlericalism" label="anticlericalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6093359" start="48612" end="48631" title="Italian nationalism" label="Italian nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60788665" start="48838" end="48872" title="Italian entry into World War I" label="Italy&amp;#x27;s joining of the Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="48935" end="48952" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="49099" end="49108" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q468823" start="49172" end="49185" title="March on Rome" label="March on Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="49218" end="49225" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q472940" start="49255" end="49265" title="Bolshevism" label="Bolshevism"/>
<link wikidata="Q311447" start="49678" end="49698" title="Francisco de Miranda" label="Francisco de Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q134160" start="49700" end="49718" title="José de San Martin" label="José de San Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8605" start="49720" end="49733" title="Simón Bolivar" label="Simón Bolivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q28930" start="49735" end="49758" title="Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins" label="Bernardo O&amp;#x27;Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q56305658" start="49853" end="49859" title="Freemasonry in Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q723956" start="50237" end="50250" title="Joel Poinsett" label="Joel Poinsett"/>
<link wikidata="Q8310435" start="50337" end="50361" title="List of heads of state of Mexico" label="the presidency of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q311425" start="50372" end="50390" title="Guadalupe Victoria" label="Guadalupe Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q358534" start="50392" end="50413" title="Valentín Gómez Farías" label="Valentín Gómez Farías"/>
<link wikidata="Q189145" start="50415" end="50442" title="Antonio López de Santa Anna" label="Antonio López de Santa Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q182276" start="50444" end="50457" title="Benito Juárez" label="Benito Juárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q316210" start="50459" end="50484" title="Sebastián Lerdo de Tejada" label="Sebastián Lerdo de Tejada"/>
<link wikidata="Q150688" start="50486" end="50499" title="Porfirio Díaz" label="Porfirio Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q216766" start="50501" end="50520" title="Francisco I. Madero" label="Francisco I. Madero"/>
<link wikidata="Q313122" start="50522" end="50541" title="Venustiano Carranza" label="Venustiano Carranza"/>
<link wikidata="Q315066" start="50543" end="50564" title="Plutarco Elías Calles" label="Plutarco Elías Calles"/>
<link wikidata="Q296718" start="50566" end="50581" title="Lázaro Cárdenas" label="Lázaro Cárdenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q380982" start="50583" end="50600" title="Emilio Portes Gil" label="Emilio Portes Gil"/>
<link wikidata="Q455683" start="50602" end="50621" title="Pascual Ortiz Rubio" label="Pascual Ortiz Rubio"/>
<link wikidata="Q115328" start="50623" end="50644" title="Abelardo L. Rodríguez" label="Abelardo L. Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q315615" start="50650" end="50670" title="Miguel Alemán Valdés" label="Miguel Alemán Valdés"/>
<link wikidata="Q963152" start="51233" end="51246" title="Victoria, Hong Kong" label="Victoria City"/>
<link wikidata="Q8069763" start="52347" end="52359" title="Zetland Hall" label="Zetland Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="53731" end="53751" title="conspiracy theorists" label="conspiracy theorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704324" start="53784" end="53811" title="Masonic conspiracy theories" label="Masonic conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914942" start="53819" end="53850" title="Judeo-Masonic conspiracy theory" label="Judeo-Masonic conspiracy theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q449869" start="53891" end="53910" title="Nesta Helen Webster" label="Nesta Helen Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q190084" start="54217" end="54221" title="hoax" label="hoax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972509" start="54273" end="54283" title="Taxil hoax" label="Taxil hoax"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54527" end="54540" title="William Morgan (anti-Mason)#Disappearance" label="Morgan Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q44405" start="54809" end="54819" title="theocracy" label="theocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992247" start="54955" end="54964" title="heterodox" label="heterodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704324" start="55002" end="55021" title="Masonic conspiracy theories" label="conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="55055" end="55061" title="occult" label="occult"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414953" start="55186" end="55199" title="religious denomination" label="denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="55391" end="55406" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q620629" start="55517" end="55524" title="deistic" label="deistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q117850" start="55567" end="55575" title="doctrine" label="doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q133108" start="55664" end="55680" title="Pope Clement XII" label="Pope Clement XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q660652" start="55694" end="55717" title="In eminenti apostolatus" label="In eminenti apostolatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="55760" end="55772" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3682084" start="55861" end="55883" title="1917 Code of Canon Law" label="1917 Code of Canon Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="55954" end="55969" title="excommunication" label="excommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341605" start="56052" end="56061" title="Canon law (Catholic Church)" label="canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q49827" start="56097" end="56119" title="1983 Code of Canon Law" label="1983 Code of Canon Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q276548" start="56175" end="56191" title="secret societies" label="secret societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6291244" start="56408" end="56417" title="Interdict (Roman Catholic Church)" label="interdict"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="56628" end="56638" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Vatican II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="56712" end="56729" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Pope Benedict XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q16206742" start="56732" end="56746" title="Joseph Ratzinger as Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith" label="as the Prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468884" start="56754" end="56796" title="Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith" label="Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706926" start="56807" end="56842" title="Declaration on Masonic Associations" label="Declaration on Masonic Associations"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="57201" end="57215" title="Holy Communion" label="Holy Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="57232" end="57244" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712425" start="57408" end="57421" title="Julito Cortes" label="Julito Cortes"/>
<link wikidata="Q248873" start="57423" end="57432" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Dumaguete" label="Bishop of"/>
<link wikidata="Q873377" start="57433" end="57443" title="Dumaguete" label="Dumanguete"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="57510" end="57521" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="58102" end="58111" title="mysticism" label="mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="58113" end="58122" title="occultism" label="occultism"/>
<link wikidata="Q133363" start="58133" end="58141" title="Satanism" label="Satanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q366639" start="58159" end="58170" title="Albert Pike" label="Albert Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351880" start="58776" end="58803" title="Southern Baptist Convention" label="Southern Baptist Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351880" start="59310" end="59337" title="Southern Baptist Convention" label="Southern Baptist Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053814" start="59441" end="59469" title="North American Mission Board" label="North American Mission Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569665" start="59616" end="59667" title="Southern Baptist Convention conservative resurgence" label="Southern Baptist Convention conservative resurgence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066164" start="59670" end="59691" title="Free Methodist Church" label="Free Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834229" start="59700" end="59712" title="B.T. Roberts" label="B.T. Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576009" start="59869" end="59885" title="God in Abrahamic religions" label="God of the Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q505821" start="59934" end="59941" title="Greco-Roman mysteries" label="mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="60222" end="60239" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476" start="60272" end="60282" title="Archbishop" label="Archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q335473" start="60283" end="60298" title="Geoffrey Fisher" label="Geoffrey Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="60645" end="60669" title="archbishop of Canterbury" label="archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q49615" start="60671" end="60688" title="Rowan Williams" label="Dr Rowan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="61114" end="61122" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q59778" start="61123" end="61139" title="Church of Greece" label="Church of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q864968" start="61205" end="61213" title="Apostasy in Christianity" label="apostasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="61301" end="61310" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046799" start="62191" end="62210" title="Knights of Columbus" label="Knights of Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422464" start="62215" end="62238" title="Knights of Peter Claver" label="Knights of Peter Claver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373816" start="62262" end="62285" title="Royal Black Institution" label="Royal Black Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142152" start="62486" end="62492" title="temple (Latter Day Saints)" label="temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357557" start="62493" end="62500" title="Endowment (Mormonism)" label="rituals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6912692" start="62504" end="62513" title="Freemasonry and Mormonism" label="Mormonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q199481" start="62561" end="62569" title="Mahmud I" label="Mahmud I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="62598" end="62612" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="62673" end="62680" title="atheism" label="atheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="62688" end="62702" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="62740" end="62747" title="Islamic" label="Islamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914942" start="62791" end="62822" title="Judeo-Masonic conspiracy theory" label="antisemitic conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124554" start="62889" end="62907" title="Al-Masih ad-Dajjal" label="Al-Masih ad-Dajjal"/>
<link wikidata="Q878607" start="62950" end="62956" title="Syrians" label="Syrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061510" start="62957" end="62965" title="Egyptians" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q471046" start="62985" end="63005" title="Rashid Rida" label="Mūhammād Rashīd Ridâ"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="63094" end="63107" title="Muslim world" label="Islamic world"/>
<link wikidata="Q121610806" start="63302" end="63325" title="Al-Aqsa" label="Al-Aqsa Mosque compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q223644" start="63350" end="63367" title="Temple of Solomon" label="Temple of Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="63371" end="63380" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q430032" start="63402" end="63413" title="Pan-Islamism" label="pan-Islamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4702794" start="63428" end="63436" title="Al-Manār (magazine)" label="Al-Manar"/>
<link wikidata="Q133207" start="63517" end="63535" title="Muslim Brotherhood" label="Muslim Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q38799" start="63579" end="63584" title="Hamas" label="Hamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q38799" start="63617" end="63622" title="Hamas" label="Hamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q109179" start="63648" end="63654" title="Rotary International" label="Rotary"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="63872" end="63878" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="63883" end="63890" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="63949" end="63957" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="63962" end="63969" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="64074" end="64082" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131355" start="64084" end="64103" title="Zulfikar Ali Bhutto" label="Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto"/>
<link wikidata="Q735575" start="64110" end="64136" title="Prime Minister of Pakistan" label="Prime Minister of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="64246" end="64250" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543757" start="64300" end="64329" title="United Grand Lodge of England" label="United Grand Lodge of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="64577" end="64591" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="64917" end="64934" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q21187340" start="64940" end="64962" title="Unlawful Societies Act" label="Unlawful Societies Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q381045" start="65032" end="65036" title="oath" label="oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q128902" start="65146" end="65158" title="William Pitt the Younger" label="William Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="65637" end="65647" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106776" start="65741" end="65755" title="William Morgan (anti-Mason)" label="William Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040924" start="65874" end="65894" title="Jacksonian democracy" label="Jacksonian democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q574701" start="65989" end="66007" title="Anti-Masonic Party" label="Anti-Masonic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q954078" start="66162" end="66176" title="Propaganda Due" label="Propaganda Due"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542974" start="66228" end="66256" title="Grande Oriente d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Grande Oriente d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q551521" start="66338" end="66349" title="Licio Gelli" label="Licio Gelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q266456" start="66460" end="66472" title="Vatican Bank" label="Vatican Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="66624" end="66644" title="Conspiracy theorists" label="Conspiracy theorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q926348" start="66687" end="66702" title="New World Order (conspiracy theory)" label="New World Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q133957" start="66711" end="66721" title="Illuminati" label="Illuminati"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="66963" end="66975" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q849866" start="67012" end="67027" title="Communist state" label="Communist state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477307" start="67613" end="67630" title="Secretary of State for Justice" label="Justice Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q311278" start="67631" end="67641" title="Jack Straw" label="Jack Straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="68064" end="68076" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="68086" end="68093" title="Zionism" label="Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039779" start="68127" end="68132" title="Law of Iraq" label="legal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6068063" start="68137" end="68147" title="Iraqi Penal Code" label="penal code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="68163" end="68177" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878844" start="68192" end="68209" title="Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party (Iraq)" label="Ba&amp;#x27;ath Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q823917" start="68398" end="68421" title="University of Sheffield" label="University of Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q26193" start="68467" end="68498" title="The Protocols of the Elders of Zion" label="Protocols of the Elders of Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="68600" end="68612" title="11 September 2001 attacks" label="11 September"/>
<link wikidata="Q152698" start="68792" end="68817" title="Reich Security Main Office" label="Reichssicherheitshauptamt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="68899" end="68912" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q130917" start="68968" end="68977" title="Franz Six" label="Franz Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q579924" start="69244" end="69255" title="Nacht und Nebel" label="Nazi regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631700" start="69352" end="69364" title="Nazi concentration camp badge" label="red triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q147149" start="69459" end="69472" title="Myosotis" label="forget-me-not"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="69593" end="69599" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q523404" start="69732" end="69747" title="Winterhilfswerk" label="Winterhilfswerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q290410" start="69787" end="69827" title="National Socialist People&amp;#x27;s Welfare" label="National Socialist People&amp;#x27;s Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="69975" end="69987" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q451117" start="70095" end="70125" title="United Grand Lodges of Germany" label="United Grand Lodges of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149265" start="70327" end="70355" title="List of general fraternities" label="List of general fraternities"/>
<link wikidata="Q276548" start="70358" end="70372" title="Secret society" label="Secret society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086254" start="70375" end="70389" title="Co-Freemasonry" label="Co-Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q60853552" start="70392" end="70422" title="Freemasonry during World War I" label="Freemasonry during World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q86735011" start="70425" end="70467" title="Freemasonry under the Second French Empire" label="Freemasonry under the Second French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080475" start="70470" end="70498" title="Freemasonry in Latin America" label="Freemasonry in Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q109037963" start="70501" end="70541" title="Freemasonry in the French Third Republic" label="Freemasonry in the French Third Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56305658" start="70544" end="70565" title="Freemasonry in Brazil" label="Freemasonry in Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732407" start="70568" end="70589" title="DeMolay International" label="DeMolay International"/>
<link wikidata="Q22248699" start="70620" end="70642" title="La Chaîne d&amp;#x27;Union" label="La Chaîne d&amp;#x27;Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673" start="75316" end="75333" title="Project Gutenberg" label="Project Gutenberg"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11228" wikidata="Q18708" url="?curid=11228" title="Fulham F.C.">
<text>Fulham Football Club is a professional football club based in Fulham, West London, England. The club competes in the , the top tier of English football. They have played home games at Craven Cottage since 1896, other than a two-year period spent at Loftus Road whilst Craven Cottage underwent redevelopments that were completed in 2004. They contest West London derby rivalries with Chelsea, Brentford and Queens Park Rangers. The club adopted a white shirt and black shorts as its kit in 1903, which has been used ever since.

Founded in 1879, they are London&#x27;s oldest professional football club. They joined the Southern League in 1898 and won two First Division titles (1905–06 and 1906–07), as well as two Second Division titles and a Western League title. Elected into the Second Division of the Football League in 1907, Fulham would win the Third Division South in 1931–32, four years after being relegated. They won the Second Division title in 1948–49, though were relegated after three seasons. Promoted back to the First Division again in 1958–59, the form of star player Johnny Haynes helped Fulham to remain in the top-flight until consecutive relegations occurred by 1969. They were promoted in 1970–71 and went on to reach the final of the 1974–75 FA Cup.

Fulham drifted between the second and fourth tiers until being taken over by Mohamed Al-Fayed in 1997. They went on to win two divisional titles in three seasons to reach the Premier League by 2001. They won the UEFA Intertoto Cup in 2002 and were beaten in the 2010 final of the UEFA Europa League. However, thirteen consecutive seasons in the top-flight culminated in relegation in 2014. Since that time, the club have moved between the first and second tiers under new owner Shahid Khan. Fulham had changed divisions in five successive seasons between 2017–18 to 2021–22, being relegated after winning the 2018 and 2020 EFL Championship play-off finals. They then won the 2021–22 EFL Championship title, finally settling in the Premier League, where they have played since 2022.

==History==
===1879–1907: Formation and Southern League years===
Fulham were formed in 1879 as Fulham St Andrew&#x27;s Church Sunday School F.C., founded by worshippers (mostly adept at cricket) at the Church of England on Star Road, West Kensington (St Andrew&#x27;s, Fulham Fields). Fulham&#x27;s mother church still stands today with a plaque commemorating the team&#x27;s foundation. They won the West London Amateur Cup in 1887 and, having shortened the name from Fulham St Andrews to its present form in December 1888, they then won the West London League in 1893 at the first attempt. One of the club&#x27;s first ever kits was half red, half white shirts with white shorts worn in the 1886–87 season. Fulham started playing at their current ground at Craven Cottage in 1896, their first game against now defunct rivals Minerva.

The club gained professional status on 12 December 1898, the same year that they were admitted into the Southern League&#x27;s Second Division. They were the third club from London to turn professional, following Arsenal, then named Royal Arsenal 1891, and Millwall in 1893. They adopted a red and white kit during the 1896–97 season. In 1902–03, the club won promotion from this division, entering the Southern League First Division. The club&#x27;s first recorded all-white club kit came in 1903, and ever since then the club has been playing in all-white shirts and black shorts, with socks going through various evolutions of black and/or white, but are now normally white-only. The club won the Southern League twice, in 1905–06 and 1906–07.

===1907–1949: Football League===
Fulham joined The Football League after the second of their Southern League triumphs. The club&#x27;s first league game, playing in the Second Division&#x27;s 1907–08 season, saw them lose 1–0 at home to Hull City in September 1907. The first win came a few days later at Derby County&#x27;s Baseball Ground by a score line of 1–0. Fulham finished the season three points short of promotion in fourth place. The club progressed all the way to the semi-final of that season&#x27;s FA Cup, a run that included an 8–3 away win at Luton Town. In the semi-final, however, they were heavily beaten, 6–0, by Newcastle United. This is still a record loss for an FA Cup semi-final game. Two years later, the club won the London Challenge Cup in the 1909–10 season. Fulham&#x27;s first season in Division Two turned out to be the highest that the club would finish for 21 years, until in 1927–28 when the club were relegated to the 3rd Division South, created in 1920. Hussein Hegazi, an Egyptian forward, was one of the first non-British players to appear in The Football League, though he only played one game for Fulham in 1911, marked with a goal, afterwards playing for non-league Dulwich Hamlet.

During this period, businessman and politician Henry Norris was the club chairman and curiously he had an indirect role in the foundation of Fulham&#x27;s local rivals Chelsea. When he rejected an offer from businessman Gus Mears to move Fulham to land where the present-day Chelsea stadium Stamford Bridge is situated, Mears decided to create his own team to occupy the ground. In 1910, Norris started to combine his role at Fulham with the chairmanship of Arsenal. Fulham became the first British team to sell hot dogs at their ground in 1926. Fulham had several high-profile international players during the 1920s, including Len Oliver and Albert Barrett.

After finishing fifth, seventh and ninth (out of 22 teams) in their first three seasons in the Third Division South, Fulham won the division in the 1931–32 season. In doing so they beat Torquay United 10–2, won 24 out of 42 games and scored 111 goals, thus being promoted back to the Second Division. The next season they missed out on a second consecutive promotion, finishing third behind Tottenham Hotspur and Stoke City. A mixed bag of league performances followed, although the club also reached another FA Cup semi-final during the 1935–36 season. Fulham were also to draw with Austria in 1936 before Anschluss. On 8 October 1938, Craven Cottage saw its all-time highest attendance at a match against Millwall, with a crowd of 49,335 watching the game.

League and cup football were severely disrupted by the outbreak of World War II in 1939, with the Football League split into regional divisions temporarily, with a national Football League War Cup and a London War Cup up for grabs. Craven Cottage was used like many grounds for fitness and training of the army youth reserves. Post-war, a full league programme was only restored for 1946–47. In the third season of what is now considered the modern era of football, Fulham finished top of the Second Division, with a win–loss–draw record of 24–9–9 (identical to that which won them the Third Division South 17 years previously). John Fox Watson made a pioneering transfer to Real Madrid in 1948, becoming one of the first players from the United Kingdom to sign for a high-profile side abroad.

===1949–1970: First Division Cottagers===
Promotion to the top tier of English football saw the club perform poorly, finishing 17th in their first year and 18th in their second. In only their third season of First Division football, Fulham finished rock bottom of the 22-team league in the 1951–52 season, winning only eight of 42 games. On 20 May 1951, Fulham played one of their first ever games in North America in an exhibition match against Celtic at Delorimier Stadium in Montreal in front of 29,000 spectators.

Possibly the single most influential character in Fulham&#x27;s history is Johnny Haynes. &quot;Mr. Fulham&quot; or &quot;The Maestro&quot;, as Haynes later came to be known, signed for The Cottagers as a schoolboy in 1950, making his first team debut on Boxing Day against Southampton at Craven Cottage in the 1951/52 relegation season. Haynes played for another 18 years, notching 657 appearances (along with many other club records too), his last appearance for Fulham coming on 17 January 1970. He is often considered as the greatest player in Fulham history, and never played for another team in Britain. He gained 56 caps for England (22 as captain), with many being earned while playing for Fulham in the Second Division. Haynes was injured in a car accident in Blackpool in 1962, but by his own admissions never regained the fitness or form to play for England again, missing out on England&#x27;s victory in the 1966 FIFA World Cup for which he would have stood a chance of being selected. The Stevenage Road Stand was renamed in his honour after his death in a car crash in 2005.

Fulham reached the 1957–58 FA Cup semi-finals, the best cup run of Haynes&#x27; career and nearest he came to a major trophy win playing in England. They were eliminated in a replay by the remnants of Manchester United&#x27;s Busby Babes team that had been decimated in the Munich air disaster the month before. United were the first top division team Fulham played in that cup run. Fulham won promotion back to the First Division in the following season by finishing second to Sheffield Wednesday. Also joining Fulham in 1958 was Graham Leggat, who went on to score 134 goals in 277 appearances, (making him the club&#x27;s fifth all-time top scorer). In the 1959–60 season, they achieved tenth position in the First Division, which until finishing ninth in the 2003–04 season was their highest-ever league position. This accompanied another appearance in the last four of the FA Cup in 1962.
By this time, the club were regularly playing in front of 30,000 plus crowds at Craven Cottage, despite struggling in the league.

The club earned a reputation for constantly battling against relegation most seasons, with numerous narrow escapes; none more so than in 1965–66. On the morning of 26 February 1966, Fulham were bottom with just 15 points from 29 matches. The last 13 games saw Fulham win nine and draw two to reach safety. Eventually, however, the club suffered relegation in the 1967–68 season, having won just ten out of their 42 games. Even that, however, was not as catastrophic as the calamity of next season. Winning only seven in 42, the club were relegated to the Third Division.

===1970–1994: Mixed fortunes outside the top flight===
The aforementioned Third Division hiatus lasted only two seasons before the club was promoted back to the Second Division as runners-up in 1970–71. This spell also saw Fulham invited to the Anglo-Italian Cup, which saw the club draw four out of four games in 1972–73 season. This preceded a period of high-profile signings for the club under Alec Stock in the mid-1970s, including Alan Mullery and Bobby Moore. Fulham reached their only FA Cup final to date in 1975, having won their first semi-final in five attempts. The club lost 2–0 to West Ham United in the final at Wembley Stadium. This gained the club qualification for another European tournament, the Anglo-Scottish Cup, where they reached the final, losing to Middlesbrough.

George Best played 47 times for the club in the 1976–77 season. Rodney Marsh, who having grown up with Fulham in the 1960s went on to play First Division football and play for England, rejoined the club in the same season, playing only 16 games. This capped one of the most successful eras in Fulham history.

The club were relegated again after winning only 11 in 42 matches in the 1979–80 season, which eventually resulted in Bobby Campbell&#x27;s dismissal in October 1980, to be replaced by Malcolm Macdonald. With a strong squad during his 1980–1984 period in charge (with players such as Ray Houghton, Tony Gale, Paul Parker, Gerry Peyton and Ray Lewington), they won promotion again in 1981–82 back to the Second Division, although the promotion was overshadowed by the suicide of former defender Dave Clement a few weeks before promotion was sealed.

In 1980, Fulham founded the rugby league club that is now London Broncos designed to be an extra stream of income for the football club, but which made financial losses every year while linked to Fulham F.C. Then called &quot;Fulham Rugby League,&quot; they played at Craven Cottage until moving away from the parent club in 1984.

In 1978, Fulham had signed Gordon &quot;Ivor&quot; Davies who, during two spells at Fulham, became the club&#x27;s leading goalscorer of all time with a total of 178 goals in all competitions; the record still stands. Fulham narrowly missed out on back-to-back promotions to the First Division, losing 1–0 to Derby County away on the last day of the 1982–83 season – although the match was abandoned after 88 minutes due to a pitch invasion and inexplicably never replayed or finished. The side which had shown so much promise was quickly sold off as the club were in debt, so it was little surprise when the club were relegated again to the Third Division in 1986. The club nearly went out of business in 1987 via an ill-advised merger attempt with Queens Park Rangers. It was only the intervention of ex-player Jimmy Hill that allowed the club to stay in business by formation of a new company, Fulham FC (1987) Ltd. In 1987, the club took part in what was then the longest penalty deciders ever recorded – it needed 28 spot kicks to sort out a winner between them and Aldershot following a Football League Trophy match.

In 1992, the foundation of the Premier League, and the resignation of 22 clubs from The Football League, restored Fulham to that league&#x27;s Second Division. However, the club were relegated to the new Third Division after a poor 1993–94 season, following which Ian Branfoot was appointed as team manager.

===1994–1997: Fulham&#x27;s lowest ebb===
After an eighth-place finish in Branfoot&#x27;s first season in charge, the club hit its lowest-ever final league position in the 1995–96 season, finishing 17th out of 24.&lt;ref name=&quot;Final 1994/1995 Football League Two Table&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=&quot;Final 1995/1996 Football League Two Table&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Branfoot was dismissed as manager, but remained at the club in other capacities for a short while. In February 1996, Micky Adams became player-manager. Adams oversaw an upturn in form that lifted the side out of relegation danger. The next season, he engineered a second-place league finish, missing out on first place because several years previously the league had dropped the old &quot;goal difference&quot; system in favour of a &quot;goals scored&quot; tally, meaning Fulham finished behind Wigan Athletic. The club&#x27;s chairman Jimmy Hill had argued in 1992 that goals scored should decide places of teams tied on points, and the Football League clubs had voted the system in.

===1997–2001: Al-Fayed takeover===
Egyptian businessman Mohamed Al-Fayed bought the club for £6.25 million in the summer of 1997. The club was purchased via Bill Muddyman&#x27;s Muddyman Group. Al-Fayed had Micky Adams replaced in the aftermath of a mid-table start to the season. He installed a two-tier management &quot;dream team&quot; of Ray Wilkins as First Team Manager and Kevin Keegan as chief operating officer, pledging that the club would reach the Premier League within five years. After an argument over team selection, Wilkins left the club in May 1998 to hand over the full managerial duties to Keegan. Keegan then helped steer the club to promotion the next season, winning 101 points out of a possible 138, after spending £1.1 million to sign Paul Peschisolido from West Bromwich Albion. Peschisolido was top scorer and captained by Chris Coleman – then the most expensive footballer outside the top two divisions of the English league.

In 1999, Keegan left Fulham to become manager of England, and Paul Bracewell was put in charge.
Bracewell was dismissed in March 2000, as Fulham&#x27;s promising early season form dwindled away to a mid-table finish. Frenchman Jean Tigana was put in charge and, having signed a number of young stars (including French striker Louis Saha), he guided Fulham to their third promotion in five seasons in the 2000–01 season, giving Fulham top-flight status for the first time since 1968. Fulham once again amassed 101 points out of a possible 138 in their scintillating title run, which was crowned with an open-top bus parade down Fulham Palace Road. They are the only team to have twice reached 100 points in a season. During the season, Chris Coleman was involved in a car crash that put him out of action for well over a year and eventually ended his playing career after he failed to make a sufficient recovery. Fulham&#x27;s run through the divisions saw a large turnover of players, with the only player to play for the club in all four leagues being Sean Davis.

===2001–2007: Early Premier League years===

Fulham returned to the top division of English football, and competed in the Premier League for the first time. The club finished the 2001–02 season in 13th place. Fulham were the only team to host top-flight football with some standing areas in the 21st century, but due to restrictions on standing, this was not allowed to continue; clubs promoted from the second division had only three years to make their ground all-seater. Fulham were forced to groundshare with QPR at Loftus Road during the 2002–03 and 2003–04 seasons while Craven Cottage was rebuilt as an all-seated stadium. There were fears that Fulham would not return to the Cottage, after it was revealed that Al-Fayed had sold the first right to build on the ground to a property development firm.

In 2002–03, Fulham spent most of the season in the lower half of the table. Chairman Al-Fayed told manager Jean Tigana that his contract would not be renewed at the end of the season. However, with five games left to play and relegation still possible, Tigana was dismissed, and Chris Coleman was temporarily put in charge. Fulham won 10 points from a possible 15 and managed to avoid relegation. Coleman was appointed manager on a permanent basis in the summer of 2003; despite predictions that the inexperience of Coleman would result in Fulham&#x27;s relegation, he kept the club well clear of relegation, guiding them to a club record ninth-place finish in his debut season. This might have been greater had the club not come under significant financial pressure to sell Louis Saha to Manchester United, for whom they received a club record £13 million.

Fulham lost a legal case against former manager Tigana in 2004 after Al-Fayed wrongly alleged that Tigana had overpaid more than £7 million for new players and had negotiated transfers in secret.

Coleman notched up another satisfactory performance in the 2004–05 season and guided Fulham to a secure 13th-place finish. The following season Fulham improved by one place, finishing 12th – the high point of the season was a 1–0 win over local rivals and reigning champions Chelsea in the West London derby – Chelsea had only lost two games in two and a half years. The 2006–07 season proved to be Coleman&#x27;s last, as on 10 April 2007, Fulham terminated his contract with immediate effect. His replacement was Northern Ireland manager Lawrie Sanchez. Fulham only gained four points from five games with Sanchez as caretaker manager. They ensured top-flight survival that season by defeating a weakened Liverpool side 1–0 in the penultimate match of the season, and Sanchez was appointed manager.


===2007–2010: Hodgson&#x27;s transformation===
Sanchez received strong financial backing from the board and made a number of signings during the summer break, but, after just two league wins in the first five months of the season and with Fulham in the relegation zone, he was dismissed on 21 December 2007 after a defeat to Newcastle United. Roy Hodgson was named as the new manager of Fulham on 28 December 2007 and took up his contractual duties on 30 December, just two days before the January transfer window opened.

Hodgson&#x27;s tenure did not start well and it took a month to secure his first win, against Aston Villa, courtesy of a Jimmy Bullard free-kick. Fulham continued to struggle and a 3–1 home defeat in April at the hands of fellow strugglers Sunderland left Hodgson on the verge of tears in the post-match press conference and many pundits writing off Fulham&#x27;s survival chances. Despite the negative press, Hodgson continued to believe survival was attainable. The turning point of the season came in the third-to-last match, against Manchester City. Fulham trailed 2–0 at half-time and had the Premier League scores at that time become results, they would have been relegated. However, the introduction of Diomansy Kamara heralded the start of a fantastic comeback—Kamara struck twice as Fulham registered an amazing 3–2 victory. Fulham then won a crucial match against fellow strugglers Birmingham City at Craven Cottage, leaving survival in the club&#x27;s own hands. Barring a goal-rush from fellow strugglers Reading, a win against a Portsmouth side looking ahead to their fourth FA Cup final would guarantee survival.

With 15 minutes to play at Portsmouth, Fulham were drawing, and with Birmingham City and Reading leading comfortably against Blackburn Rovers and Derby County respectively, they looked likely to be relegated. However, Fulham earned a free-kick with 76 minutes played; Jimmy Bullard&#x27;s delivery found Danny Murphy, who headed home the decisive goal, sparking manic celebrations from the travelling fans. Hodgson had ensured survival against all odds, breaking several club records in the process and cementing his place in Fulham folklore. Fulham narrowly missed out on a UEFA Cup place via Fairplay by a dubious 0.8 of a point behind Manchester City, who lost 8–1 at Middlesbrough.

In the 2008–09 season, Fulham finished seventh, their highest-ever league placing, earning qualification for the inaugural UEFA Europa League, the second time that the club had entered a UEFA competition.

2009–10 was arguably the most successful season in the club&#x27;s history. They were eliminated from the FA Cup in the quarter-finals for the second year running, and finished 12th in the Premier League, despite fielding weakened teams in the last few matches. In the inaugural Europa League season, however, Fulham reached the final, meeting Spanish club Atlético Madrid, who had dropped down from the Champions League, at the Volksparkstadion in Hamburg. In their first European cup final, the Cottagers were beaten 2–1 after extra time, having drawn 1–1 after full-time. The achievement of taking Fulham so unexpectedly far, beating famous teams like Hamburger SV, Juventus, holders Shakhtar Donetsk and Basel in the competition, led to Roy Hodgson being voted the LMA Manager of the Year by the widest margin in the history of the award. The home match in the round of 16 was arguably Fulham&#x27;s greatest result in the history of the club. Despite losing 3–1 in the first leg at Italian giants Juventus and falling behind minutes into the second leg at Craven Cottage, Fulham scored four goals with no reply from Juventus.

At the end of the season, Hodgson left Fulham to manage Liverpool.

===2010–2013: Established in the Premier League===
On 29 July 2010, Mark Hughes was named the successor to Hodgson, signing a two-year contract with the club. Hughes had previously managed Manchester City, the Welsh national team and Blackburn. Hughes&#x27; first match in charge was against Bolton Wanderers at the Reebok Stadium. The highlight of the season was a 4–0 win in the FA Cup over London rivals Tottenham Hotspur, all goals coming in the first half. Hughes resigned as manager of Fulham on 2 June 2011, having spent fewer than 11 months at the club. The Whites had an encouraging finish in eighth position and qualified for the Europa League via Fairplay.

On 7 June 2011, Martin Jol signed a two-year contract with Fulham, becoming successor to Hughes. Jol&#x27;s first match was a 3–0 Europa League win against NSÍ Runavík of the Faroe Islands on 30 June. Fulham then navigated their way with some ease to the group stage in the Europa League through late summer. However, the Cottagers were knocked out with the last seconds of the group stage matches, Odense Boldklub equalising to make a draw, leaving Fulham in third place, with Polish side Wisła Kraków instead progressing to the next round.

Fulham&#x27;s Premier League form in the 2011–12 season was mixed, with the continuing away-record hangover of previous seasons dragging on. In October 2011, Fulham had an emphatic 6–0 home win over neighbours QPR, with Andrew Johnson scoring a hat-trick for Fulham in the match. The January 2012 transfer window saw Bobby Zamora move over the Hammersmith flyover to Loftus Road, with Russian striker Pavel Pogrebnyak coming in place from VfB Stuttgart.

The New Year saw two further hat-tricks scored by Clint Dempsey. On 11 February 2012, Progrebnyak scored on his debut in the 2–1 win over Stoke City. In March 2012, a 5–0 win against Wolverhampton Wanderers saw a hat-trick from Pogrebnyak. The Cottagers broke their historic drought on Merseyside with a 1–0 win over Liverpool at Anfield on May Day and another win against Sunderland in the last home game meant Fulham were only one point short of equalling their largest points haul in the Premier League, with just one game remaining. However, they failed to achieve this after losing their last game away at Tottenham.

In the 2012–13 season, Fulham ended a seven-match winless run by beating Swansea City 3–0 away at the Liberty Stadium on the final game of the season on 19 May 2013. Fulham finished the season in 12th place.

===2013–present: Shahid Khan&#x27;s ownership===
Shahid Khan took over as chairman in July 2013, but after a poor start to the 2013–14 season, having only amassed 10 points from 13 games, Martin Jol was dismissed as manager in December 2013, with René Meulensteen taking charge as head coach. Meulensteen was replaced by Felix Magath after just 17 games in charge following no upturn in form, but fortunes did not improve, and Fulham were eventually relegated to the Championship after a 4–1 defeat away to Stoke on 3 May.

Fulham broke the Championship transfer record that summer in a restructuring of the squad by Magath, but after a disastrous start to the new season, amassing just one point in seven games, Magath was dismissed in September 2014, with Kit Symons appointed as caretaker manager. Fulham eventually finished the season in 17th place. The team suffered an inconsistent start to the following season and after a 5–2 loss at home to Birmingham City, and lying in 12th place, Kit Symons was dismissed as manager in November 2015. It paved the way for Serbian Slaviša Jokanović to be appointed on 27 December 2015. Fulham&#x27;s fortunes did not improve greatly following Jokanović&#x27;s appointment, but the team finished the 2015–16 Championship season in 20th place, avoiding relegation by 11 points.

The 2016–17 season saw huge improvements in both results and performances. Despite an inconsistent start, the team saw a significant improvement from October onwards which saw them secure a 6th-place finish. They entered the play-offs, but lost to Reading 2–1 on aggregate in the semi-final. During this time, club owner Shahid Khan&#x27;s son Tony Khan was named as Vice Chairman and Director of Football Operations, and he also holds the roles of General Manager and Sporting Director. Despite a slow start to the following season, the club went on a club-record 23 game unbeaten run in the league which led to a 3rd-place finish, narrowly missing out automatic promotion. The team went on to win the EFL Championship play-off final against Aston Villa to return to the Premier League on 26 May 2018.

During the season, the club signed Aleksandar Mitrović, initially on loan until the end of the season. Mitrović would go on to score more than 100 goals for the club, becoming the eighth player in Fulham&#x27;s history to do so.

Following a poor start to life back in the Premier League, Jokanović was dismissed in November 2018 and replaced with former Leicester manager Claudio Ranieri. Results ultimately did not improve under Ranieri, as well as him alienating several key players, and he left the club in February 2019. He was replaced by Scott Parker as caretaker manager who could not save the club from relegation on 3 April 2019. Parker was appointed as manager on a permanent basis on 10 May 2019. In a season that was interrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic, Parker led the club straight back to the Premier League on 4 August 2020, defeating London rivals Brentford 2–1 in the play-off final after a fourth-place finish. However, the club would once again be relegated after just a single season back in the top flight after a 2–0 defeat to Burnley on 10 May 2021.

In the aftermath of relegation, Parker left the club by mutual consent and was replaced by former Everton manager Marco Silva. After relegation, Fulham under Silva earned promotion back to the top tier with four games to go, winning the 2021–22 Championship title. Fulham started the 2022–23 Premier League season much better than prior years. At the halfway point, Fulham sat in 6th place, had tallied a 2–1 win over West London rivals Chelsea, whom they had not defeated in nearly 16 years, and collected a string of four consecutive top-flight victories for the first time since April 1966.

==Grounds==
Between the years 1879 and when Fulham had a ground to call their own in 1896, they played at a number of stadiums, only some of which were recorded and this should not be regarded as a full or complete list. Only rivals and former landlords Queens Park Rangers have played at more home stadiums. Some of the early grounds listed below are likely to have been parks and parkland, which have now been developed. Even when the club purchased Craven Cottage and the surrounding land in 1894, they had to wait two years before they could play a game there.

* 1879–1883: &#x27;The Mud Pond&#x27;, Star Road, Fulham
* 1883–1886: Lillie Road, Fulham
* 1886–1888: Ranelagh House, Fulham
* 1888–1889: Barn Elms Playing Fields, Barnes (this was the site of The Ranelagh Club)
* 1889–1891: Parsons Green, Fulham and Roskell&#x27;s Fields (next to Parsons Green Underground station)
* 1891–1895: The Half Moon, Putney
* 1895–1896: Captain James Field, near Halford Road, West Brompton
* 1896–2002: Craven Cottage, Fulham
* 2002–2004: Loftus Road, Shepherd&#x27;s Bush (groundshare with Queens Park Rangers during Craven Cottage&#x27;s renovation)
* 2004–present: Craven Cottage, Fulham

==Club identity==
===Kit===

Fulham&#x27;s sponsorship by Betfair in 2002–03 was the first gambling sponsorship in English football, and came before the Gambling Act 2005 permitted the industry to advertise on television and radio; within fifteen years half of Premier League teams were sponsored by such companies.

On 27 July 2021, it was announced that World Mobile would become the official principal partner for the next three years.

In July 2022, it was announced that the gambling company W88 would sponsor the team in a kit deal for the 2022–23 season. The deal saw the betting firm&#x27;s logo placed on the front of both the men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s kit. The confirmation of the deal came during a decrease in gambling sponsors for Premier League teams. In June 2023, it was announced that betting company SBOBET would replace W88 as the team&#x27;s main sponsor for the 2023–24 season. In Feb 2024, it was announced that FlyFish Limited become official partner.

===Mascot===
The Fulham mascot is Billy the Badger, who was the winning design sent in by Kyle Jackson after an online competition by the club. Billy the Badger wears the number 79 Fulham shirt, in reference to the club&#x27;s year of founding, 1879. Controversy first surrounded Billy when he tried to cheer up Chelsea manager Avram Grant during a home match in front of the television cameras. Secondly, Billy was seen on television being sent off during the home game against Aston Villa on 3 February 2008 for break-dancing in the corner of the pitch after the referee had commenced the game. Billy blamed his badger hearing and eyesight for the incident, and apologised to referee Chris Foy. On 11 March 2009, Billy walked across the goal during a match although it was not spotted by the referee. The former mascot for Fulham was Sir Craven of Cottage, the Knight. The cheerleaders were known as the Cravenettes.

==Rivalries and supporters==
Fulham fans consider their main rivals to be Chelsea. Despite this fixture not being played that often in the years preceding Fulham&#x27;s ascent to the top division, this is a clear local derby as Chelsea&#x27;s ground, Stamford Bridge, is within Fulham and only 1.8 miles from Craven Cottage.

Fulham consider their secondary rivals to be Queens Park Rangers. Fulham beat QPR twice in the 2011–12 Premier League season. They won 6–0 at Craven Cottage, and also 1–0 away from home at Loftus Road. The two clubs have played each other several times since in the Championship.

Fulham&#x27;s third closest rivalry is with Brentford, who they defeated 2–1 on 4 August 2020 in the Championship play-off final. Fulham also have rivalries with several other London clubs to a lesser extent, such as Crystal Palace.

Outside of London, Gillingham are still considered rivals to some Fulham supporters despite the two clubs not having played in the same division since the 2000–01 season. Fulham and Gillingham were involved in several ill-tempered matches in the lower leagues, including the death of a Fulham supporter.

Fulham&#x27;s fan base has fluctuated over the years, with high crowds coinciding with the club&#x27;s success in the Premier League. Fulham supporters have played a vital role in the club&#x27;s long term stay at Craven Cottage. When the club moved temporarily to Loftus Road, a committee known as Back to the Cottage was formed, committed to ensuring the club continued to play at their traditional home. Fulham fans have traditionally come from the Fulham and Hammersmith areas, and also from other areas in South-West London, such as Putney, Richmond, Sutton and Worcester Park.

In July 2012, the club website asked supporters using Facebook and Twitter to pick their best FFC Premier League XI from 2001 to the present. The supporters picked their favourite goalkeeper, full-backs, centre-backs, wingers, centre midfielders and forwards in a classic 4–4–2 formation. In August 2022, the club asked fans for an updated all time Premier League XI as part of the Premier League&#x27;s 30th anniversary celebrations.

==Records and statistics==
===Fulham in Europe===
Fulham are a member of the European Club Association, having qualified four times for European Competition, firstly the UEFA Intertoto Cup after their inaugural season in the Premier League, then the UEFA Cup as a result of winning that, and then the UEFA Europa League twice. Fulham are unbeaten at home in European competition, in 23 games, with a record of 17 wins and six draws. In 2010, Fulham reached the UEFA Europa League final, which they lost 2–1 to Atlético Madrid.

==Players==
===Current squad===










===Out on loan===


===Academy===
===Women’s team===
==Club management==
===Coaching positions===
===Managerial history===
Fulham have had 37 managers in 114 years. Prior to the appointment of the first manager at the club (Bradshaw in 1904), the duties normally assigned to a modern-day manager would have been shared between club secretary, captain, and other officials.

* * Frank Osborne was employed continuously by the club from 1948 to 1963, but only spent the above periods as designated manager.
* ** Ian Branfoot continued to be employed by the club after his dismissal as manager.
* † Kevin Keegan was employed by the club as chief operating officer (during which time he essentially acted as an assistant manager) during the time of his predecessor (Ray Wilkins) being the actual manager.
* § René Meulensteen was appointed as head coach under previous manager Martin Jol (during which time he essentially acted as an assistant manager), but never took on the title of &quot;manager&quot; after Jol&#x27;s departure, despite assuming the duties usually assigned to one. He remained as head coach for four days after Magath&#x27;s appointment before being released.
* ± Some managers have only had the official description of &quot;head coach&quot; rather than &quot;manager&quot;: René Meulensteen, Slaviša Jokanović, Scott Parker, and Marco Silva, as well as interim head coach Peter Grant.

Managerial records:
*Only one man has managed the club through two different spells, Frank Osborne, in 1948–49 and then 1953–56.
*The longest spell as Fulham manager was by Phil Kelso, 15 years (1909–1924)
*Several managers have failed to last more than a year at the club: Bobby Robson, Ray Wilkins, Paul Bracewell, Lawrie Sanchez, Mark Hughes, René Meulensteen, Felix Magath, and Claudio Ranieri. Further to this, Frank Osborne only had a year after his initial arrival at the club during which he was principally in charge of the team (before Dodgin, senior) arrived, although he later took sole charge of the club for an extended period.

Temporary managers at the club have included:
*Johnny Haynes: Took over after Bobby Robson was dismissed in 1968 for only a handful of matches. &quot;The Maestro&quot; was offered the role permanently but had no inclination to become a manager.
*Karl-Heinz Riedle: when Paul Bracewell was dismissed halfway through the 1999–2000 season, there was a temporary period of Fulham being managed by their striker Karl-Heinz Riedle, assisted his old boss at Liverpool, Roy Evans. Riedle injured a lung in the season&#x27;s penultimate game.
*Chris Coleman: after Tigana resigned four months before planned in 2003, Chris Coleman was appointed as caretaker manager, much to the delight of the fans. Having initially denied he wanted the post, Coleman accepted the role of full-time manager that summer.
*Lawrie Sanchez: when Coleman was dismissed, Sanchez came in to take control of the club for the remaining five games of the season. (See above)
*Ray Lewington: took temporary charge of Fulham for three games following Lawrie Sanchez&#x27;s dismissal in December 2007. Lewington also took temporary charge of the club in July 2010 after Roy Hodgson had left the club until the appointment of Mark Hughes.
*Kit Symons: temporarily took charge of Fulham after Felix Magath&#x27;s dismissal in September 2014 before being appointed on 29 October.
*Peter Grant: took charge of Fulham for three games after Kit Symons&#x27; dismissal.
*Stuart Gray: succeeded Grant as temporary manager (holding down the job title of &quot;senior coach&quot;) after poor results in Grant&#x27;s three games in charge whilst the board looked for a permanent successor to Kit Symons.
*Scott Parker: took over as caretaker after Claudio Ranieri left the club on 28 February 2019 until he was permanently appointed on 10 May 2019.

===Ownership===


Fulham Football Club is owned by Shahid Khan. Khan completed his purchase of the club from Mohamed Al-Fayed on 12 July 2013 for a reported £150–200 million.

During his ownership of Fulham, Al-Fayed had provided the club with £187 million in interest-free loans. In March 2011, Fulham posted annual losses of £16.9 million, with Al-Fayed stating that he would &quot;continue to make funds available to achieve our goals both on and off the pitch&quot; and that &quot;the continued success of Fulham and its eventual financial self-sustainability is my priority.&quot; Fulham were effectively debt-free as Al-Fayed converted the loans into equity in the club.

==Honours==
:Source:

League
*Second Division / First Division / Championship (level 2)
**Champions: 1948–49, 2000–01, 2021–22
**Runners-up: 1958–59
**Play-off winners: 2018, 2020
*Third Division South / Third Division / Second Division (level 3)
**Champions: 1931–32, 1998–99
**Runners-up: 1970–71
**Promoted: 1981–82
*Third Division (level 4)
**Runners-up: 1996–97

Cup
*FA Cup
**Runners-up: 1974–75
*UEFA Europa League
**Runners-up: 2009–10
*UEFA Intertoto Cup
**Winners: 2002

Minor titles
*Southern League First Division
**Champions: 1905–06, 1906–07
*Southern League Second Division
**Champions: 1901–02, 1902–03
*Western League Division One Section A
**Champions: 1906–07
*West London League
**Champions: 1892–93
*London Challenge Cup 
**Winners: 1909–10, 1931–32, 1951–52
*West London Cup
**Winners: 1886–87, 1890–91 1892–93
*London Fives Tournament
**Winners: 1955, 1957, 1982

==References==
==External links==

=== Independent websites ===
* Fulham at Sky Sports
* Fulham FC at Premier League
* Fulham FC at UEFA
* Fulham FC at Football24-7</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="0" end="20" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="39" end="47" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367868" start="62" end="68" title="Fulham" label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559" start="135" end="151" title="English football league system" label="English football"/>
<link wikidata="Q318043" start="184" end="198" title="Craven Cottage" label="Craven Cottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q31670" start="249" end="260" title="Loftus Road" label="Loftus Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q968636" start="350" end="367" title="West London derby" label="West London derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="383" end="390" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q19571" start="392" end="401" title="Brentford F.C." label="Brentford"/>
<link wikidata="Q18723" start="406" end="425" title="Queens Park Rangers F.C." label="Queens Park Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18573" start="619" end="634" title="Southern Football League" label="Southern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422930" start="744" end="758" title="Western Football League" label="Western League"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="783" end="798" title="Football League Second Division" label="Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="806" end="821" title="English Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q769716" start="852" end="872" title="Football League Third Division South" label="Third Division South"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="1030" end="1044" title="Football League First Division" label="First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q319193" start="1087" end="1100" title="Johnny Haynes" label="Johnny Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858420" start="1246" end="1251" title="1975 FA Cup final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q946014" start="1259" end="1273" title="1974–75 FA Cup" label="1974–75 FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q365913" start="1353" end="1369" title="Mohamed Al-Fayed" label="Mohamed Al-Fayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="1451" end="1465" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q182068" start="1488" end="1506" title="UEFA Intertoto Cup" label="UEFA Intertoto Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195287" start="1510" end="1514" title="2002 UEFA Intertoto Cup" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046534" start="1538" end="1542" title="2010 UEFA Europa League final" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="1556" end="1574" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276408" start="1754" end="1765" title="Shahid Khan" label="Shahid Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q54279936" start="1885" end="1889" title="2018 EFL Championship play-off final" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q97357188" start="1894" end="1898" title="2020 EFL Championship play-off final" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q106636704" start="1951" end="1975" title="2021–22 EFL Championship" label="2021–22 EFL Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q27087202" start="2161" end="2184" title="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Church, Fulham" label="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="2261" end="2278" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567431" start="2293" end="2308" title="West Kensington" label="West Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985790" start="2602" end="2620" title="West London League" label="West London League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556189" start="2752" end="2766" title="1886–87 in English football" label="1886–87 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q318043" start="2818" end="2832" title="Craven Cottage" label="Craven Cottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q22097835" start="2886" end="2893" title="Minerva F.C." label="Minerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q18573" start="3000" end="3015" title="Southern Football League" label="Southern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="3109" end="3116" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19487" start="3153" end="3161" title="Millwall F.C." label="Millwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501044" start="3215" end="3229" title="1896–97 in English football" label="1896–97 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439896" start="3234" end="3241" title="1902–03 in English football" label="1902–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q18573" start="3299" end="3329" title="Southern Football League" label="Southern League First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q18573" start="3596" end="3611" title="Southern Football League" label="Southern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="3691" end="3710" title="English Football League" label="The Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="3813" end="3828" title="Football League Second Division" label="Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3836" end="3850" title="1907–08 in English football#Second Division" label="1907–08 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q19477" start="3881" end="3890" title="Hull City A.F.C." label="Hull City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19470" start="3949" end="3961" title="Derby County F.C." label="Derby County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772400" start="3969" end="3984" title="Baseball Ground" label="Baseball Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="4157" end="4163" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18520" start="4204" end="4214" title="Luton Town F.C." label="Luton Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="4278" end="4294" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242807" start="4417" end="4431" title="1909–10 in English football" label="1909–10 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838664" start="4555" end="4562" title="1927–28 in English football" label="1927–28"/>
<link wikidata="Q769716" start="4599" end="4617" title="Football League Third Division South" label="3rd Division South"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044573" start="4636" end="4650" title="Hussein Hegazi" label="Hussein Hegazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313546" start="4853" end="4867" title="Dulwich Hamlet F.C." label="Dulwich Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q332778" start="4917" end="4929" title="Henry Norris (businessman)" label="Henry Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="5038" end="5045" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q955255" start="5090" end="5099" title="Gus Mears" label="Gus Mears"/>
<link wikidata="Q171458" start="5161" end="5176" title="Stamford Bridge (stadium)" label="Stamford Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q181055" start="5382" end="5389" title="hot dog" label="hot dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521904" start="5498" end="5508" title="Len Oliver (footballer)" label="Len Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709702" start="5513" end="5527" title="Albert Barrett" label="Albert Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242978" start="5678" end="5692" title="1931–32 in English football" label="1931–32 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q47965" start="5716" end="5730" title="Torquay United F.C." label="Torquay United"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242994" start="5835" end="5846" title="1932–33 in English football" label="next season"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="5921" end="5938" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q18736" start="5943" end="5953" title="Stoke City F.C." label="Stoke City"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838688" start="6068" end="6082" title="1935–36 in English football" label="1935–36 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="6137" end="6146" title="Anschluss" label="Anschluss"/>
<link wikidata="Q19487" start="6237" end="6245" title="Millwall F.C." label="Millwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6357" end="6369" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436485" start="6463" end="6486" title="Football League War Cup" label="Football League War Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671017" start="6493" end="6507" title="London War Cup" label="London War Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16240233" start="6673" end="6680" title="1946–47 in English football" label="1946–47"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243132" start="6685" end="6701" title="1948–49 in English football" label="the third season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233819" start="6919" end="6934" title="John Fox Watson" label="John Fox Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8682" start="6965" end="6976" title="Real Madrid CF" label="Real Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="7144" end="7152" title="Football League First Division" label="top tier"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838698" start="7375" end="7389" title="1951–52 in English football" label="1951–52 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="7531" end="7537" title="Celtic F.C." label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q935412" start="7541" end="7559" title="Delorimier Stadium" label="Delorimier Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="7563" end="7571" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q319193" start="7679" end="7692" title="Johnny Haynes" label="Johnny Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18732" start="7878" end="7889" title="Southampton F.C." label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q179304" start="8227" end="8231" title="cap (sport)" label="caps"/>
<link wikidata="Q170377" start="8373" end="8382" title="Blackpool" label="Blackpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q134202" start="8525" end="8544" title="1966 FIFA World Cup" label="1966 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753531" start="8714" end="8728" title="1957–58 FA Cup" label="1957–58 FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="8896" end="8913" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q373507" start="8921" end="8932" title="Busby Babes" label="Busby Babes"/>
<link wikidata="Q308923" start="8969" end="8988" title="Munich air disaster" label="Munich air disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465184" start="9133" end="9149" title="1958–59 in English football" label="following season"/>
<link wikidata="Q19498" start="9173" end="9192" title="Sheffield Wednesday F.C." label="Sheffield Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593014" start="9226" end="9239" title="Graham Leggat" label="Graham Leggat"/>
<link wikidata="Q16248910" start="9355" end="9369" title="1959–60 in English football" label="1959–60 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q817262" start="9458" end="9472" title="2003–04 FA Premier League" label="2003–04 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436178" start="9857" end="9864" title="1965–66 in English football" label="1965–66"/>
<link wikidata="Q2949041" start="10083" end="10097" title="1967–68 in English football" label="1967–68 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436448" start="10275" end="10289" title="Football League Third Division" label="Third Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436199" start="10486" end="10493" title="1970–71 in English football" label="1970–71"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342576" start="10537" end="10554" title="Anglo-Italian Cup" label="Anglo-Italian Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066281" start="10689" end="10699" title="Alec Stock" label="Alec Stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343112" start="10728" end="10740" title="Alan Mullery" label="Alan Mullery"/>
<link wikidata="Q191492" start="10745" end="10756" title="Bobby Moore" label="Bobby Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="10887" end="10902" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858420" start="10910" end="10915" title="1975 FA Cup final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q541298" start="11008" end="11026" title="Anglo-Scottish Cup" label="Anglo-Scottish Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18661" start="11068" end="11081" title="Middlesbrough F.C." label="Middlesbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q164521" start="11084" end="11095" title="George Best" label="George Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436230" start="11132" end="11146" title="1976–77 in English football" label="1976–77 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179220" start="11148" end="11160" title="Rodney Marsh" label="Rodney Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436239" start="11467" end="11481" title="1979–80 in English football" label="1979–80 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q832731" start="11512" end="11526" title="Bobby Campbell (English footballer)" label="Bobby Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144432" start="11579" end="11596" title="Malcolm Macdonald" label="Malcolm Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q703538" start="11678" end="11690" title="Ray Houghton" label="Ray Houghton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442541" start="11692" end="11701" title="Tony Gale" label="Tony Gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q769780" start="11703" end="11714" title="Paul Parker (footballer)" label="Paul Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563672" start="11716" end="11728" title="Gerry Peyton" label="Gerry Peyton"/>
<link wikidata="Q10600" start="11733" end="11746" title="Ray Lewington" label="Ray Lewington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436249" start="11777" end="11784" title="1981–82 in English football" label="1981–82"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069718" start="11888" end="11900" title="Dave Clement" label="Dave Clement"/>
<link wikidata="Q863469" start="12001" end="12015" title="London Broncos" label="London Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="12554" end="12568" title="Football League First Division" label="First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q211394" start="12625" end="12639" title="1982–83 in English football" label="1982–83 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198858" start="12701" end="12715" title="pitch invasion" label="pitch invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q18723" start="13025" end="13044" title="Queens Park Rangers F.C." label="Queens Park Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608520" start="13088" end="13098" title="Jimmy Hill" label="Jimmy Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300305" start="13346" end="13355" title="Aldershot F.C." label="Aldershot"/>
<link wikidata="Q843159" start="13368" end="13390" title="EFL Trophy" label="Football League Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="13430" end="13444" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365269" start="13631" end="13645" title="1993–94 in English football" label="1993–94 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3147240" start="13663" end="13675" title="Ian Branfoot" label="Ian Branfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461745" start="13798" end="13810" title="1994–95 in English football" label="first season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3166467" start="13880" end="13887" title="1995–96 in English football" label="1995–96"/>
<link wikidata="Q604475" start="14203" end="14214" title="Micky Adams" label="Micky Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q379533" start="14222" end="14236" title="Player-coach" label="player-manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q18750" start="14582" end="14596" title="Wigan Athletic F.C." label="Wigan Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q365913" start="14829" end="14845" title="Mohamed Al-Fayed" label="Mohamed Al-Fayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q352820" start="15115" end="15126" title="Ray Wilkins" label="Ray Wilkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q152832" start="15153" end="15165" title="Kevin Keegan" label="Kevin Keegan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718609" start="15533" end="15550" title="Paul Peschisolido" label="Paul Peschisolido"/>
<link wikidata="Q18744" start="15556" end="15576" title="West Bromwich Albion F.C." label="West Bromwich Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q381769" start="15623" end="15636" title="Chris Coleman (footballer)" label="Chris Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q550487" start="15790" end="15804" title="Paul Bracewell" label="Paul Bracewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q295559" start="15955" end="15966" title="Jean Tigana" label="Jean Tigana"/>
<link wikidata="Q484968" start="16054" end="16064" title="Louis Saha" label="Louis Saha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16132" end="16146" title="2000–01 in English football#Football League First Division" label="2000–01 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q74305" start="16781" end="16791" title="Sean Davis (footballer, born 1979)" label="Sean Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q338385" start="16973" end="16987" title="2001–02 FA Premier League" label="2001–02 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348518" start="17114" end="17138" title="Taylor Report" label="restrictions on standing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611020" start="17290" end="17301" title="groundshare" label="groundshare"/>
<link wikidata="Q31670" start="17314" end="17325" title="Loftus Road" label="Loftus Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q817255" start="17606" end="17613" title="2002–03 FA Premier League" label="2002–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q817262" start="18261" end="18280" title="2003–04 FA Premier League" label="in his debut season"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="18392" end="18409" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q456869" start="18718" end="18732" title="2004–05 FA Premier League" label="2004–05 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q968636" start="18949" end="18966" title="West London derby" label="West London derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q190112" start="19030" end="19044" title="2006–07 FA Premier League" label="2006–07 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q190978" start="19174" end="19190" title="Northern Ireland national football team" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q919436" start="19199" end="19213" title="Lawrie Sanchez" label="Lawrie Sanchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="19366" end="19375" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q203781" start="19805" end="19816" title="Roy Hodgson" label="Roy Hodgson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="20079" end="20090" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q382052" start="20106" end="20119" title="Jimmy Bullard" label="Jimmy Bullard"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="20225" end="20235" title="Sunderland A.F.C." label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="20522" end="20537" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q314368" start="20695" end="20710" title="Diomansy Kamara" label="Diomansy Kamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q19444" start="20877" end="20892" title="Birmingham City F.C." label="Birmingham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18729" start="21002" end="21009" title="Reading F.C." label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604" start="21027" end="21037" title="Portsmouth F.C." label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446" start="21238" end="21254" title="Blackburn Rovers F.C." label="Blackburn Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q296589" start="21417" end="21429" title="Danny Murphy (footballer, born 1977)" label="Danny Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="21688" end="21696" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q179184" start="21707" end="21715" title="UEFA Respect Fair Play ranking" label="Fairplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q186869" start="21807" end="21821" title="2008–09 Premier League" label="2008–09 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="21923" end="21941" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q188937" start="22006" end="22013" title="2009–10 Premier League" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q206626" start="22285" end="22305" title="2009–10 UEFA Europa League" label="Europa League season"/>
<link wikidata="Q8701" start="22363" end="22378" title="Atlético Madrid" label="Atlético Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="22410" end="22426" title="UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q150933" start="22435" end="22451" title="Volksparkstadion" label="Volksparkstadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="22455" end="22462" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q51974" start="22661" end="22673" title="Hamburger SV" label="Hamburger SV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422" start="22675" end="22683" title="Juventus FC" label="Juventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q172969" start="22693" end="22709" title="FC Shakhtar Donetsk" label="Shakhtar Donetsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q189671" start="22714" end="22719" title="FC Basel" label="Basel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22775" end="22798" title="League Managers Association Awards#LMA Manager of the Year" label="LMA Manager of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q214513" start="23274" end="23285" title="Mark Hughes" label="Mark Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q180857" start="23416" end="23435" title="Wales national football team" label="Welsh national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q19451" start="23498" end="23514" title="Bolton Wanderers F.C." label="Bolton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q242772" start="23522" end="23536" title="Toughsheet Community Stadium" label="Reebok Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q211915" start="23846" end="23859" title="2011–12 UEFA Europa League" label="Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q310181" start="23891" end="23901" title="Martin Jol" label="Martin Jol"/>
<link wikidata="Q216857" start="24031" end="24042" title="NSÍ Runavík" label="NSÍ Runavík"/>
<link wikidata="Q211912" start="24274" end="24289" title="Odense Boldklub" label="Odense Boldklub"/>
<link wikidata="Q190943" start="24365" end="24377" title="Wisła Kraków" label="Wisła Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489492" start="24459" end="24473" title="2011–12 Premier League" label="2011–12 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q276306" start="24638" end="24652" title="Andrew Johnson (footballer, born 1981)" label="Andrew Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q152286" start="24735" end="24747" title="Bobby Zamora" label="Bobby Zamora"/>
<link wikidata="Q205778" start="24819" end="24835" title="Pavel Pogrebnyak" label="Pavel Pogrebnyak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4512" start="24857" end="24870" title="VfB Stuttgart" label="VfB Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q201860" start="24923" end="24936" title="Clint Dempsey" label="Clint Dempsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q19500" start="25056" end="25079" title="Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C." label="Wolverhampton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23100" start="25159" end="25169" title="Merseyside" label="Merseyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q45671" start="25203" end="25210" title="Anfield" label="Anfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q388682" start="25503" end="25517" title="2012–13 Premier League" label="2012–13 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q18659" start="25569" end="25581" title="Swansea City A.F.C." label="Swansea City"/>
<link wikidata="Q580480" start="25598" end="25613" title="Swansea.com Stadium" label="Liberty Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276408" start="25754" end="25765" title="Shahid Khan" label="Shahid Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11607290" start="25832" end="25846" title="2013–14 Premier League" label="2013–14 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380943" start="25952" end="25968" title="René Meulensteen" label="René Meulensteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q153293" start="26026" end="26038" title="Felix Magath" label="Felix Magath"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="26246" end="26258" title="EFL Championship" label="Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992556" start="26366" end="26376" title="2014–15 Fulham F.C. season" label="new season"/>
<link wikidata="Q196089" start="26463" end="26473" title="Kit Symons" label="Kit Symons"/>
<link wikidata="Q944426" start="26780" end="26797" title="Slaviša Jokanović" label="Slaviša Jokanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q29772796" start="27251" end="27260" title="2017 English Football League play-offs" label="play-offs"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636022" start="27370" end="27379" title="Tony Khan" label="Tony Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q54279936" start="27729" end="27760" title="2018 EFL Championship play-off Final" label="EFL Championship play-off final"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="27769" end="27780" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q84086" start="27865" end="27884" title="Aleksandar Mitrović" label="Aleksandar Mitrović"/>
<link wikidata="Q235068" start="28203" end="28218" title="Claudio Ranieri" label="Claudio Ranieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q213989" start="28375" end="28387" title="Scott Parker" label="Scott Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="28579" end="28596" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q97357188" start="28717" end="28731" title="2020 EFL Championship play-off final" label="play-off final"/>
<link wikidata="Q6757714" start="29020" end="29031" title="Marco Silva" label="Marco Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q106636704" start="29143" end="29163" title="2021–22 EFL Championship" label="2021–22 Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q111134726" start="29190" end="29219" title="2022–23 Premier League" label="2022–23 Premier League season"/>
<link wikidata="Q968636" start="29324" end="29342" title="West London derby" label="West London rivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367868" start="30117" end="30123" title="Fulham" label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861296" start="30206" end="30230" title="Barn Elms" label="Barn Elms Playing Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q668140" start="30232" end="30238" title="Barnes, London" label="Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018528" start="30265" end="30278" title="Ranelagh Club" label="Ranelagh Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q15265537" start="30293" end="30306" title="Parsons Green (The green)" label="Parsons Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457814" start="30350" end="30383" title="Parsons Green tube station" label="Parsons Green Underground station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738651" start="30398" end="30411" title="The Half Moon, Putney" label="The Half Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465220" start="30413" end="30419" title="Putney" label="Putney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926028" start="30473" end="30486" title="Brompton, London" label="West Brompton"/>
<link wikidata="Q318043" start="30500" end="30514" title="Craven Cottage" label="Craven Cottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q31670" start="30536" end="30547" title="Loftus Road" label="Loftus Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026182" start="30549" end="30569" title="Shepherd&amp;#x27;s Bush" label="Shepherd&amp;#x27;s Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q683281" start="30747" end="30754" title="Betfair" label="Betfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519686" start="30842" end="30859" title="Gambling Act 2005" label="Gambling Act 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q118904487" start="31186" end="31189" title="TGP Europe" label="W88"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640705" start="31509" end="31515" title="SBOBET" label="SBOBET"/>
<link wikidata="Q18670161" start="31691" end="31697" title="mascot" label="mascot"/>
<link wikidata="Q274632" start="31995" end="32006" title="Avram Grant" label="Avram Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314712" start="32353" end="32362" title="Chris Foy (referee)" label="Chris Foy"/>
<link wikidata="Q171458" start="32838" end="32853" title="Stamford Bridge (stadium)" label="Stamford Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18723" start="32958" end="32977" title="Queens Park Rangers F.C." label="Queens Park Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q31670" start="33102" end="33113" title="Loftus Road" label="Loftus Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q19571" start="33238" end="33247" title="Brentford F.C." label="Brentford"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="33411" end="33425" title="Crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q48943" start="33447" end="33457" title="Gillingham F.C." label="Gillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q31670" start="33998" end="34009" title="Loftus Road" label="Loftus Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q841054" start="34830" end="34855" title="European Club Association" label="European Club Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q182068" start="34923" end="34941" title="UEFA Intertoto Cup" label="UEFA Intertoto Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q629461" start="35003" end="35011" title="2002–03 UEFA Cup" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="35054" end="35072" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046534" start="35214" end="35238" title="2010 UEFA Europa League final" label="UEFA Europa League final"/>
<link wikidata="Q8701" start="35263" end="35278" title="Atlético Madrid" label="Atlético Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488819" start="35701" end="35714" title="Frank Osborne (footballer)" label="Frank Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q41583" start="36030" end="36047" title="Coach (sport)" label="assistant manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q310181" start="36196" end="36206" title="Martin Jol" label="Martin Jol"/>
<link wikidata="Q319193" start="37418" end="37431" title="Johnny Haynes" label="Johnny Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q189587" start="37449" end="37461" title="Bobby Robson" label="Bobby Robson"/>
<link wikidata="Q159951" start="37617" end="37634" title="Karl-Heinz Riedle" label="Karl-Heinz Riedle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139783" start="37690" end="37699" title="1999–2000 in English football" label="1999–2000"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37770" end="37777" title="Forward (association football)#Striker" label="striker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="37822" end="37831" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q927681" start="37833" end="37842" title="Roy Evans" label="Roy Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q381769" start="37906" end="37919" title="Chris Coleman (footballer)" label="Chris Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q919436" start="38167" end="38181" title="Lawrie Sanchez" label="Lawrie Sanchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q10600" start="38312" end="38325" title="Ray Lewington" label="Ray Lewington"/>
<link wikidata="Q196089" start="38572" end="38582" title="Kit Symons" label="Kit Symons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067879" start="38711" end="38722" title="Peter Grant (footballer, born 1965)" label="Peter Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q196089" start="38768" end="38778" title="Kit Symons" label="Kit Symons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3976227" start="38797" end="38808" title="Stuart Gray (footballer, born 1960)" label="Stuart Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q213989" start="39027" end="39039" title="Scott Parker" label="Scott Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q235068" start="39070" end="39085" title="Claudio Ranieri" label="Claudio Ranieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276408" start="39223" end="39234" title="Shahid Khan" label="Shahid Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q365913" start="39281" end="39297" title="Mohamed Al-Fayed" label="Mohamed Al-Fayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="39880" end="39895" title="Football League Second Division" label="Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q754839" start="39898" end="39912" title="Football League First Division" label="First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="39915" end="39927" title="EFL Championship" label="Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39951" end="39958" title="1948–49 Football League#Second Division" label="1948–49"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39960" end="39967" title="2000–01 Football League#First Division" label="2000–01"/>
<link wikidata="Q106636704" start="39969" end="39976" title="2021–22 EFL Championship" label="2021–22"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39991" end="39998" title="1958–59 Football League#Second Division" label="1958–59"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40019" end="40023" title="2018 English Football League play-offs#Championship" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40025" end="40029" title="2020 English Football League play-offs#Championship" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q769716" start="40031" end="40051" title="Football League Third Division South" label="Third Division South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436448" start="40054" end="40068" title="Football League Third Division" label="Third Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40110" end="40117" title="1931–32 Football League#Third Division South" label="1931–32"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40119" end="40126" title="1998–99 Football League#Second Division" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40141" end="40148" title="1970–71 Football League#Third Division" label="1970–71"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40161" end="40168" title="1981–82 Football League#Third Division" label="1981–82"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436448" start="40170" end="40184" title="Football League Third Division" label="Third Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40209" end="40216" title="1996–97 Football League#Third Division" label="1996–97"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="40223" end="40229" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q946014" start="40244" end="40251" title="1974–75 FA Cup" label="1974–75"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="40253" end="40271" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q206626" start="40286" end="40293" title="2009–10 UEFA Europa League" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q182068" start="40295" end="40313" title="UEFA Intertoto Cup" label="UEFA Intertoto Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195287" start="40325" end="40329" title="2002 UEFA Intertoto Cup" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q18573" start="40345" end="40360" title="Southern Football League" label="Southern League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40389" end="40396" title="1905–06 Southern Football League#Division One" label="1905–06"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40398" end="40405" title="1906–07 Southern Football League#Division One" label="1906–07"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40452" end="40459" title="1901–02 Southern Football League#Division Two" label="1901–02"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40461" end="40468" title="1902–03 Southern Football League#Division Two" label="1902–03"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422930" start="40470" end="40484" title="Western Football League" label="Western League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40521" end="40528" title="1906–07 Western Football League#Division One" label="1906–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985790" start="40530" end="40548" title="West London League" label="West London League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670222" start="40571" end="40591" title="London Challenge Cup" label="London Challenge Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q104845492" start="40684" end="40707" title="London Five-a-Sides" label="London Fives Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="40869" end="40873" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11229" wikidata="Q73597" url="?curid=11229" title="Frankie Goes to Hollywood">
<text>Frankie Goes to Hollywood were an English pop band that formed in Liverpool in 1980. They comprised Holly Johnson (vocals), Paul Rutherford (backing vocals), Mark O&#x27;Toole (bass), Brian Nash (guitar) and Peter Gill (drums). They were among the first openly gay pop acts and made gay rights and sexuality a theme of their music and performances.

Frankie Goes to Hollywood signed to ZTT Records in 1983. Their debut album, &quot;Welcome to the Pleasuredome&quot; (1984), produced by Trevor Horn, achieved advance sales of more than a million, and their first three singles, &quot;Relax&quot;, &quot;Two Tribes&quot; and &quot;The Power of Love&quot;, reached number one on the UK singles chart. The BBC briefly banned them from broadcast for their provocative themes, drawing further publicity. In 2014, the music journalist Paul Lester wrote that &quot;no band has dominated a 12-month period like Frankie ruled 1984&quot;.

Johnson, Gill and O&#x27;Toole received the 1984 Ivor Novello Award for Best Song Musically and Lyrically for &quot;Two Tribes&quot;. In 1985, Frankie Goes to Hollywood won the Brit Award for British Breakthrough Act and were nominated for Best New Artist at the Grammy Awards and MTV Video Music Awards.

Frankie Goes to Hollywood&#x27;s second album, &quot;Liverpool&quot; (1986), sold fewer copies, and they disbanded acrimoniously in 1987. Johnson successfully sued ZTT to leave his contract and began a solo career. He declined invitations to reunite and tried to block the band from using the name. In 2004, Frankie Goes to Hollywood reunited without Johnson and Nash to perform at a Prince&#x27;s Trust charity concert, with Ryan Molloy on vocals, and held a tour in 2005. They reunited with Johnson and Nash for the first time since 1987 to perform for the 2023 Eurovision Song Contest.

==History==

===1980–1982: Formation===
Frankie Goes to Hollywood formed in Liverpool in 1980. The lead singer, Holly Johnson, had previously played in Big in Japan and had released some unsuccessful solo singles. He formed the first version of Frankie Goes to Hollywood with Phil Hurst (drums), Ambrose (bass), Steve Lovell (guitar), but the group soon split. The name came from an advertisement announcing Frank Sinatra&#x27;s film debut.

In 1982, Johnson restarted the group with Peter Gill (drums) and the brothers Mark (bass) and Jed O&#x27;Toole (guitar). Jed left before 1983, and was replaced by his cousin, Brian Nash. Within the band, O&#x27;Toole, Nash and Gill constituted a group known as the Lads. Frankie Goes to Hollywood played their first gig at a Liverpool pub, Pickwick&#x27;s, where they recruited the dancer and backing singer Paul Rutherford.

Nash said the band admired the Liverpool groups Echo &amp; the Bunnymen, Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark and the Teardrop Explodes: &quot;That was music from Liverpool but from our generation. You would see these people walking around town, you&#x27;d see Ian McCulloch getting on the bus. I never saw any of the Beatles on the bus.&quot;

=== 1983–1984: &quot;Relax&quot;, &quot;Two Tribes&quot; and success ===

In February 1983, Frankie Goes to Hollywood performed on the Channel 4 show &quot;The Tube&quot;, dressed in fetish wear. That May, they became the first act signed by ZTT Records, a new record label co-founded by the producer Trevor Horn. Horn admired the &quot;dangerous&quot; sexuality of their music. &quot;Relax&quot; was selected as their first single. After recording several versions, Horn created a dramatically different arrangement without the band, using electronic instruments such as a drum machine and the Fairlight, an early sampling synthesiser.

&quot;Relax&quot; was released in October 1983, backed by a music video set in an S&amp;M club. &quot;Sound on Sound&quot; described it as a &quot;hi-NRG brand of dance-synth-pop&quot; that &quot;broke new sonic ground, while epitomising &#x27;80s excess in all its garish, overblown glory&quot;. Initial sales were slow, but rose after the band performed on the BBC series &quot;Top of the Pops&quot; the following January. Soon after, the BBC banned &quot;Relax&quot; from its broadcasts, deeming it obscene. The ban created publicity, associating Frankie Goes to Hollywood with youth rebellion. Within two weeks, &quot;Relax&quot; reached number one on the UK singles chart and stayed there for four weeks, and the BBC was forced to reverse its ban. &quot;Relax&quot; won the 1985 Brit Award for Best British Single.

The ZTT co-founder Paul Morley devised a promotional campaign involving &quot;advertising-based slogans, playful propaganda and pseudo-philosophy&quot;. This included a line of T-shirts inspired by shirts created by Katharine Hamnett, bearing slogans such as &quot;Frankie say relax&quot; and &quot;Frankie say arm the unemployed&quot;. Morley said he wanted to challenge the idea of music merchandise, asking: &quot;Why did it have to have a face on it, couldn&#x27;t it be a walking billboard?&quot; The shirts quickly became popular, and &quot;Music Week&quot; reported in July 1984 that they were outselling the singles in some stores. By December, more than 250,000 T-shirts had been sold.

Frankie Goes to Hollywood appeared in the 1984 thriller &quot;Body Double&quot; by Brian De Palma. In June, Frankie Goes to Hollywood released their second single, &quot;Two Tribes&quot;, featuring an &quot;annihilating&quot; bassline and lyrics about the Cold War. Its music video, depicting a fight between Ronald Reagan and Konstantin Chernenko, was played extensively on MTV. The single spent nine weeks at number one on the UK singles chart. Frankie Goes to Hollywood held the top two spots of the chart simultaneously when &quot;Relax&quot; rose back to number two that August.

=== 1984–1985: &quot;Welcome to the Pleasuredome&quot; ===
Frankie Goes to Hollywood released their debut album, &quot;Welcome to the Pleasuredome&quot;, featuring &quot;Relax&quot; and &quot;Two Tribes&quot;, in October 1984. It had advance sales of a million copies. A third single, the ballad &quot;The Power of Love&quot;, was released in November and reached number one in December. This made Frankie Goes to Hollywood the second act in the history of the UK charts to reach number one with their first three singles, after another Liverpool band, Gerry and the Pacemakers, in the 1960s. This record remained unbeaten until the Spice Girls achieved a six-single streak in 1996–1997. Writing in the &quot;Guardian&quot; in 2014, Paul Lester wrote that &quot;no band has dominated a 12-month period like Frankie ruled 1984&quot;. As of 2014, &quot;Relax&quot; and &quot;Two Tribes&quot; were the sixth and 22nd-bestselling singles in UK history.

In 1985, Frankie Goes to Hollywood won the Brit Award for British Breakthrough Act. In the US, where they were associated with the Second British Invasion, they received nominations for Best New Artist at the 27th Annual Grammy Awards and the 1985 MTV Video Music Awards. Their fourth single, &quot;Welcome to the Pleasuredome&quot;, was released in March 1985, and reached number two. That year, Ocean Software published a Frankie Goes to Hollywood game for the Commodore 64, Amstrad CPC and ZX Spectrum. The player completes a series of minigames to solve a murder mystery, with references to the band&#x27;s lyrics, videos and artwork.

=== 1985–1986: &quot;Liverpool&quot; and decline ===

By the end of 1984, following promotional touring in the United States, Johnson had distanced himself from the band. He spent time with his new boyfriend, Wolfgang Kuhle, who later became his manager. In 1985, Frankie Goes to Hollywood left the UK for a year for tax purposes and wrote songs for their second album in Ireland. The media reported that disputes had formed within the band. They began recording their second album, &quot;Liverpool&quot;, in Wisseloord Studios, near Amsterdam, in November 1985. Between March and June 1986, they worked in ZTT&#x27;s studio Sarm West in London. The album was produced by the ZTT engineer Stephen Lipson; Horn took over mixing in its final stages.

Johnson remained distant from the band during the sessions and was unhappy about the album&#x27;s focus on rock over dance. Jill Sinclair, Horn&#x27;s wife and one of the ZTT founders, later alleged that Johnson had been uncooperative and absent for most of the sessions. According to Nash, Duran Duran singer Simon Le Bon declined an invitation to replace Johnson. Pete Wylie was also approached, but Johnson remained and completed &quot;Liverpool&quot;.

In August 1986, the first single from &quot;Liverpool&quot;, &quot;Rage Hard&quot;, was released, reaching number 4 in the UK. &quot;Liverpool&quot; was released in October 1986 and reached UK No. 5. It received poor reviews and chart returns declined rapidly with the follow-up singles &quot;Warriors of the Wasteland&quot; (No. 19) and &quot;Watching the Wildlife&quot; (No. 28). Horn spent three months creating remixes of &quot;Watching the Wildlife&quot; and &quot;Warriors of the Wasteland&quot; for the single releases, spending an estimated £50,000. By March 1988, &quot;Liverpool&quot; had sold around 800,000 copies.

=== 1987–1988: disbandment and lawsuit ===
During the &quot;Liverpool&quot; tour, the relationship between Johnson and the band deteriorated. Before a concert at Wembley Arena in January, a fight broke out backstage between Johnson and O&#x27;Toole. Johnson said that ZTT had encouraged the rift as a means of divide and rule, and that Horn had once suggested Johnson and Rutherford fire the other members and work as a duo. Sinclair instead blamed Johnson&#x27;s manager and boyfriend, Kuhle, who she said was a negative influence and had triggered resentment in the band. Nash recalled: &quot;During the last tour, everybody knew it would end, as the relationship between Holly and the rest of us was so strained. He didn&#x27;t want to be in a band situation anymore. Everybody was fed up with the whole thing.&quot; Their last concert was on 1 March 1987, at Rotterdam Ahoy in the Netherlands.

On 23 July, Johnson told ZTT that he planned to leave and sign to MCA Records. ZTT filed an injunction to prevent this, as their record contract specified that any member who left would remain contracted to ZTT. In court, ZTT argued that the success of Frankie Goes to Hollywood was a result of ZTT&#x27;s production and marketing and that Johnson had been disruptive and uncooperative. Johnson&#x27;s team argued that ZTT had been financially irresponsible when recording &quot;Liverpool&quot;, and that their contract constituted an unreasonable restraint of trade. In 1988, the High Court found in Johnson&#x27;s favour and the band members were released from their contract. Horn later wrote that his decision to pursue the lawsuit had been &quot;stupid&quot;.

Soon after the breakup, Nash, O&#x27;Toole and Gill attempted to re-form Frankie Goes to Hollywood with a new singer, Grant Boult. According to Nash, they recorded songs in a deal with London Records. Johnson blocked the project, saying it would devalue their achievements.

=== 1989–present: solo projects ===

Johnson began a solo career with MCA, and released a number-one album, &quot;Blast&quot;, in 1989. His second solo album, &quot;Dreams That Money Can&#x27;t Buy&quot;, released in 1991, was unsuccessful. That year, Johnson was diagnosed with HIV and retreated from public life to focus on his health. In 1994, he published an autobiography, &quot;A Bone in My Flute&quot;. He has since released further albums and studied at the Royal College of Art.

Nash returned to work as an electrician, and signed to Swanyard Records to record music with Boult as Low. He later became an officiator of weddings and funerals and a tour guide of Liverpool&#x27;s musical heritage. He published a memoir, &quot;Nasher Says Relax&quot;, in 2012. O&#x27;Toole moved to Los Angeles, where he wrote and demoed new music, and later moved to Florida. Gill toured as part of an Australian soap actor&#x27;s band, and formed a music production company, Love Station, which released singles featuring vocalists including Lisa Hunt.

Rutherford released a single, a cover of the Chic track &quot;I Want Your Love&quot;, and an album, &quot;Oh World&quot;, in 1989, which were unsuccessful. He released the single &quot;That Moon&quot; with Pressure Zone in 1991, and worked as a stylist for bands. He appeared in the music videos for &quot;Walking on Broken Glass&quot; (1992) by Annie Lennox and &quot;Give In to Me&quot; (1993) by Michael Jackson. He later moved to New Zealand.

=== 1998–2000: American impostor band ===
In 1998, a band using the name Frankie Goes to Hollywood began to tour the United States. They were led by an American using the stage name Davey Johnson, who claimed he was Holly&#x27;s brother and had performed uncredited on &quot;Welcome to the Pleasuredome&quot;. Horn and the members of Frankie Goes to Hollywood refuted both claims. O&#x27;Toole, who had been living in Florida, became aware of the impostor band and warned concert promoters not to hire them.

The Flock of Seagulls frontman Mike Score, who had been a Liverpool acquaintance of the members of Frankie Goes to Hollywood, removed the impostor band from his tour. After Johnson contacted the trade magazine &quot;Pollstar&quot; to confirm that the act was unauthorised, they were dropped by a booking agent, but were booked by small clubs throughout the southern United States. In September 2000, a feature on the incident was published in &quot;Spin&quot;. In 2000, ZTT released a Frankie Goes to Hollywood greatest-hits compilation, &quot;Maximum Joy&quot;, featuring remixes by acts including Apollo 440.

=== 2003–2007: reunion, performances with Ryan Molloy and trademark dispute ===
The members of Frankie Goes to Hollywood reunited in Holloway, London, for a 2003 episode of the VH1 show &quot;Bands Reunited&quot;, but did not perform. In an interview the following year, Johnson said he had not wanted to perform with the band again and felt the episode was a &quot;debacle&quot;. In his 2012 memoir, Nash, who had also been uninterested in a reunion, described the VH1 episode as a &quot;circus&quot; that had tried to depict Johnson negatively.

On 11 November 2004, Frankie Goes to Hollywood reunited without Johnson and Nash to perform at a Prince&#x27;s Trust charity concert at Wembley Arena celebrating Horn&#x27;s 25 years as a record producer. Johnson and Nash declined to take part. In his memoir, Nash wrote that he gave the band his blessing and watched from the audience. Following open auditions held on 31 October in Leicester Square, London, Ryan Molloy was selected as the new vocalist. O&#x27;Toole&#x27;s brother Jed, who had played in the band in the 1980s, replaced Nash.

&quot;PopMatters&quot; wrote that the Wembley performance had &quot;unstoppable 1984 pop glory&quot; and that &quot;even strong detractors of the group would likely be won over by energy the band members radiate&quot;. The &quot;Independent&quot; wrote that it &quot;fell somewhat flat&quot;. Writing in &quot;The Guardian&quot;, Alexis Petridis wrote that the show &quot;ultimately underwhelms&quot; and that the songs &quot;were designed as studio-bound production extravaganzas, not live showstoppers&quot;. Nash praised the performance and wrote that &quot;Molloy did a great job filling Holly&#x27;s shoes&quot;. In his memoir, Horn wrote that Molloy was &quot;a hell of a good frontman&quot;.

The Wembley performance was followed by a series of concerts across Europe in 2005, including at Northampton Balloon Festival, and Big Gay Out in Finsbury Park, London. In 2006, Molloy said he had written new songs for Frankie Goes to Hollywood. However, the material went unreleased and a European tour was canceled. The group remained active until 2007 using the name Forbidden Hollywood, as Johnson would not allow them to use the original name.

In April 2004, Johnson attempted to register the name Frankie Goes to Hollywood as a trademark for his exclusive use, arguing that it was his intellectual property as he had used it for a previous band. The other band members opposed the registration. In 2007 it was blocked by an Intellectual Property Office judge, who ruled that Johnson had acted in bad faith in an attempt to prevent the band performing without him.

=== 2011–2023: reissues, reunion with Johnson and film ===
In 2011, ZTT reissued &quot;Liverpool&quot; in an expanded edition, plus &quot;The Art of the 12&quot;&quot;, a compilation of tracks from ZTT artists including Frankie Goes to Hollywood. In 2017, Universal Music purchased ZTT, including the Frankie Goes to Hollywood back catalogue.

On 7 May 2023, Frankie Goes to Hollywood, including Johnson and Nash, reunited for a concert featuring multiple acts celebrating Liverpool music for the Eurovision Song Contest. They performed one song, &quot;Welcome to the Pleasuredome&quot;. It was their first performance together since 1987. The performance drew praise but disappointed those hoping for more songs. The &quot;Telegraph&quot; gave the whole concert three out of five, writing about the segment by Frankie Goes to Hollywood that Johnson remained &quot;a commanding presence&quot; but that the short set was disappointing. The BBC wrote: &quot;Maybe one song is as much time as the five band members can bear to share a stage for—but at least they proved that they and their music can still sound compelling and fresh.&quot;

On 10 May, Working Title Films announced it was developing a Frankie Goes to Hollywood biographical film, &quot;Relax&quot;, based on Johnson&#x27;s memoir. Bernard Rose, the director of the first &quot;Relax&quot; music video, is set to direct, with Callum Scott Howells as Johnson.

== Style and legacy ==
Johnson and Rutherford are openly gay, and Frankie Goes to Hollywood made gay rights and sexuality a theme of their music and performances. They were connected to a rise in gay culture in 1980s Britain, alongside bands such as Bronski Beat. Morley said that Frankie Goes to Hollywood combined the &quot;exploratory gay energy&quot; of Johnson and Rutherford with the &quot;heterosexual scouse energy&quot; of the other band members. Bernard Rose, who directed the first &quot;Relax&quot; video, said Frankie Goes to Hollywood were the first openly gay major pop act, before gay artists such as Boy George, George Michael, Freddie Mercury or Elton John had come out, and &quot;caused a shockwave&quot;.

As Frankie Goes to Hollywood rose in popularity, some outlets reported that they were a &quot;manufactured&quot; group controlled by ZTT. A 1984 article in the &quot;Washington Post&quot; described them as &quot;a modern-day Monkees, a post-punk Village People sprung forth fully armed from the brow of junk culture&quot;. As only Johnson performed on the studio version of &quot;Relax&quot;, and the band did not tour during 1984 at the height of their popularity, rumours spread that they could not play their instruments. Johnson said the media had undermined them and underestimated their contributions to their records. Horn said later that the British music media often misunderstood the processes involved in studio recording. He said the band were &quot;better than people gave them credit for&quot;, and cited &quot;The Power of Love&quot;, &quot;Born to Run&quot; and &quot;Krisco Kisses&quot; as examples of their playing on &quot;Welcome to the Pleasuredome&quot;.

In 2014, the music journalist Paul Lester wrote that although Frankie Goes to Hollywood were &quot;arguably the last great British pop sensation&quot;, they were rarely cited as an influence on other artists. He wrote that this was because &quot;it would be impossible to recreate what they did&quot;. Morley observed that despite having released two of the most successful records of the 1980s, they had become &quot;slightly lost ... The fact that something was so successful yet is part of a shadowy history is ultimate proof that it was special. They were like some contorted, profound novelty band.&quot; However, he argued that they had changed how commercial pop music was marketed, with more artistic and &quot;beautiful&quot; packaging and music videos.

==Personnel==

* Holly Johnson – vocals (1980–1987, 2023)
* Mark O&#x27;Toole – bass, vocals (1981–1987, 2004–2007, 2023)
* Peter Gill – drums (1981–1987, 2004–2007, 2023)
* Jed O&#x27;Toole – guitars, vocals (1981–1982, 2004–2007)
* Paul Rutherford – vocals, keyboards, tambourine (1982–1987, 2004–2007, 2023)
* Brian Nash – guitars, vocals (1982–1987, 2023)
* Ryan Molloy – vocals (2004–2007)

==Awards and nominations==
{| class=wikitable
! Year !! Awards !! Work !! Category !! Result
| rowspan=&quot;4&quot; | 1984
| Ivor Novello Awards
| rowspan=&quot;2&quot; | &quot;Two Tribes&quot;
| Best Song Musically And Lyrically
|-
| rowspan=&quot;3&quot; | NME Awards
| Promo Video
|-
| &quot;Welcome to the Pleasuredome&quot;
| Best Dressed Sleeve
|-
| rowspan=&quot;3&quot; | &quot;Relax&quot;
| Best Single
|-
| rowspan=&quot;9&quot; | 1985
| Ivor Novello Awards
| Best Contemporary Song
|-
| rowspan=&quot;5&quot; | Brit Awards
| Best British Single
|-
| rowspan=&quot;2&quot; | Themselves
| Best British Newcomer
|-
| Best British Group
|-
| &quot;Welcome to the Pleasuredome&quot;
| Best British Album
|-
| rowspan=&quot;3&quot; | &quot;Two Tribes&quot;
| Best British Single
|-
| rowspan=&quot;2&quot; | MTV Video Music Awards
| Best New Artist
|-
| Best Concept Video
|-
| rowspan=&quot;2&quot; | Pollstar Concert Industry Awards
| Themselves
| Which Artist is Most Likely to Successfully Headline Arenas for the First time in 1985?
|-
| 1986
| Tour
| Small Hall/Club Tour of the Year
|-
| 2010
| Q Awards
| &quot;Relax&quot;
| Classic Song


==Discography==
* &quot;Welcome to the Pleasuredome&quot; (1984)
* &quot;Liverpool&quot; (1986)

==Concert tours==
* English Tour (1983)
* North American-English &quot;Welcome To The Pleasuredome&quot; Tour (1984)
* British-European-North American-Japanese Tour (1985) 
* British-European &quot;Liverpool&quot; Tour (1987)
* European-British &quot;Reunion&quot; Tour (2005)

==References==
==External links==

* Frankie Goes to Hollywood official website
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q73597" start="0" end="25" title="Frankie Goes to Hollywood" label="Frankie Goes to Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="66" end="75" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350303" start="100" end="113" title="Holly Johnson" label="Holly Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062087" start="124" end="139" title="Paul Rutherford (singer)" label="Paul Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="283" end="293" title="gay rights" label="gay rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q136485" start="386" end="397" title="ZTT Records" label="ZTT Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q966700" start="432" end="459" title="Welcome to the Pleasuredome" label="Welcome to the Pleasuredome"/>
<link wikidata="Q313092" start="486" end="497" title="Trevor Horn" label="Trevor Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q104175596" start="583" end="588" title="Relax (song)" label="Relax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549629" start="602" end="612" title="Two Tribes" label="Two Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857814" start="629" end="646" title="The Power of Love (Frankie Goes to Hollywood song)" label="The Power of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="680" end="696" title="UK singles chart" label="UK singles chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="702" end="705" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371690" start="828" end="839" title="Paul Lester" label="Paul Lester"/>
<link wikidata="Q61116" start="978" end="996" title="Ivor Novello Awards" label="Ivor Novello Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985318" start="1106" end="1145" title="Brit Award for Best New Artist" label="Brit Award for British Breakthrough Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542276" start="1192" end="1205" title="27th Annual Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q532052" start="1210" end="1232" title="1985 MTV Video Music Awards" label="MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358484" start="1288" end="1297" title="Liverpool (album)" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758242" start="1619" end="1638" title="Prince&amp;#x27;s Trust" label="Prince&amp;#x27;s Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178087" start="1661" end="1672" title="Ryan Molloy" label="Ryan Molloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q107599005" start="1794" end="1822" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2023" label="2023 Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350303" start="1937" end="1950" title="Holly Johnson" label="Holly Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q859552" start="1977" end="1989" title="Big in Japan (band)" label="Big in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q40912" start="2233" end="2246" title="Frank Sinatra" label="Frank Sinatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062087" start="2675" end="2690" title="Paul Rutherford (singer)" label="Paul Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q925641" start="2741" end="2764" title="Echo &amp;amp; the Bunnymen" label="Echo &amp;amp; the Bunnymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q956500" start="2766" end="2799" title="Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark" label="Orchestral Manoeuvres in the Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971690" start="2804" end="2825" title="the Teardrop Explodes" label="the Teardrop Explodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666679" start="2951" end="2964" title="Ian McCulloch (singer)" label="Ian McCulloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="3004" end="3015" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="3170" end="3179" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770679" start="3191" end="3199" title="The Tube (1982 TV series)" label="The Tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q770546" start="3218" end="3229" title="Fetish fashion" label="fetish wear"/>
<link wikidata="Q136485" start="3277" end="3288" title="ZTT Records" label="ZTT Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q313092" start="3336" end="3347" title="Trevor Horn" label="Trevor Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q104175596" start="3420" end="3425" title="Relax (song)" label="Relax"/>
<link wikidata="Q512222" start="3630" end="3639" title="Fairlight CMI" label="Fairlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q596446" start="3650" end="3658" title="Sampling (music)" label="sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211650" start="3755" end="3762" title="S&amp;amp;M" label="S&amp;amp;M"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290478" start="3775" end="3789" title="Sound on Sound" label="Sound on Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q606393" start="3820" end="3826" title="hi-NRG" label="hi-NRG"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="4036" end="4039" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="4053" end="4068" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247682" start="4110" end="4162" title="List of songs banned by the BBC" label="the BBC banned &amp;quot;Relax&amp;quot; from its broadcasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="4333" end="4349" title="UK singles chart" label="UK singles chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632219" start="4452" end="4467" title="1985 Brit Awards" label="1985 Brit Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q707039" start="4513" end="4524" title="Paul Morley" label="Paul Morley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376197" start="4710" end="4727" title="Katharine Hamnett" label="Katharine Hamnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328489" start="5041" end="5051" title="Music Week" label="Music Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197501" start="5252" end="5263" title="Body Double" label="Body Double"/>
<link wikidata="Q189526" start="5273" end="5287" title="Brian De Palma" label="Brian De Palma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549629" start="5360" end="5370" title="Two Tribes" label="Two Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="5446" end="5454" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="5499" end="5512" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q127442" start="5517" end="5537" title="Konstantin Chernenko" label="Konstantin Chernenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="5565" end="5568" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q966700" start="5894" end="5921" title="Welcome to the Pleasuredome" label="Welcome to the Pleasuredome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857814" start="6077" end="6094" title="The Power of Love (Frankie Goes to Hollywood song)" label="The Power of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q733400" start="6328" end="6352" title="Gerry and the Pacemakers" label="Gerry and the Pacemakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641" start="6408" end="6419" title="Spice Girls" label="Spice Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="6484" end="6492" title="The Guardian" label="Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371690" start="6508" end="6519" title="Paul Lester" label="Paul Lester"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="6768" end="6778" title="Brit Award" label="Brit Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985318" start="6783" end="6807" title="Brit Award for Best New Artist" label="British Breakthrough Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443137" start="6856" end="6879" title="Second British Invasion" label="Second British Invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542276" start="6934" end="6959" title="27th Annual Grammy Awards" label="27th Annual Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q532052" start="6968" end="6995" title="1985 MTV Video Music Awards" label="1985 MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980829" start="7024" end="7051" title="Welcome to the Pleasuredome (song)" label="Welcome to the Pleasuredome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408498" start="7122" end="7136" title="Ocean Software" label="Ocean Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q5490976" start="7149" end="7179" title="Frankie Goes to Hollywood (video game)" label="Frankie Goes to Hollywood game"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="7188" end="7200" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q478829" start="7202" end="7213" title="Amstrad CPC" label="Amstrad CPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="7218" end="7229" title="ZX Spectrum" label="ZX Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358484" start="7854" end="7863" title="Liverpool (album)" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619418" start="7874" end="7892" title="Wisseloord Studios" label="Wisseloord Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256786" start="7990" end="7999" title="Sarm West" label="Sarm West"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973201" start="8054" end="8068" title="Stephen Lipson" label="Stephen Lipson"/>
<link wikidata="Q22004596" start="8238" end="8251" title="Jill Sinclair" label="Jill Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q58381" start="8405" end="8416" title="Duran Duran" label="Duran Duran"/>
<link wikidata="Q436150" start="8424" end="8436" title="Simon Le Bon" label="Simon Le Bon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172351" start="8480" end="8490" title="Pete Wylie" label="Pete Wylie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282857" start="8638" end="8647" title="Rage Hard" label="Rage Hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973164" start="8915" end="8936" title="Watching the Wildlife" label="Watching the Wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q815571" start="9361" end="9374" title="Wembley Arena" label="Wembley Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q68951" start="9509" end="9524" title="divide and rule" label="divide and rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q179426" start="10062" end="10076" title="Rotterdam Ahoy" label="Rotterdam Ahoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338889" start="10164" end="10175" title="MCA Records" label="MCA Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495575" start="10190" end="10200" title="injunction" label="injunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316269" start="10646" end="10664" title="restraint of trade" label="restraint of trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617747" start="10679" end="10689" title="High Court of Justice" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q935090" start="11049" end="11063" title="London Records" label="London Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925365" start="11253" end="11258" title="Blast (album)" label="Blast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306711" start="11304" end="11336" title="Dreams That Money Can&amp;#x27;t Buy" label="Dreams That Money Can&amp;#x27;t Buy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="11418" end="11421" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753535" start="11605" end="11625" title="Royal College of Art" label="Royal College of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q131367237" start="11730" end="11733" title="Low (English band)" label="Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q30141091" start="12175" end="12184" title="Lisa Hunt" label="Lisa Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q516712" start="12232" end="12236" title="Chic (band)" label="Chic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5979544" start="12249" end="12265" title="I Want Your Love (Chic song)" label="I Want Your Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3881279" start="12293" end="12301" title="Oh World" label="Oh World"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017815" start="12493" end="12516" title="Walking on Broken Glass" label="Walking on Broken Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q151231" start="12533" end="12545" title="Annie Lennox" label="Annie Lennox"/>
<link wikidata="Q171787" start="12556" end="12569" title="Give In to Me" label="Give In to Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="12586" end="12601" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q300409" start="13148" end="13165" title="Flock of Seagulls" label="Flock of Seagulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848741" start="13175" end="13185" title="Mike Score" label="Mike Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q774443" start="13360" end="13368" title="Pollstar" label="Pollstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="13593" end="13597" title="Spin (magazine)" label="Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795860" start="13688" end="13699" title="Maximum Joy (album)" label="Maximum Joy"/>
<link wikidata="Q619067" start="13743" end="13753" title="Apollo 440" label="Apollo 440"/>
<link wikidata="Q124308" start="13889" end="13905" title="Holloway, London" label="Holloway, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="13933" end="13936" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854705" start="13948" end="13962" title="Bands Reunited" label="Bands Reunited"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758242" start="14401" end="14420" title="Prince&amp;#x27;s Trust" label="Prince&amp;#x27;s Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q848912" start="14688" end="14704" title="Leicester Square" label="Leicester Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178087" start="14714" end="14725" title="Ryan Molloy" label="Ryan Molloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322364" start="14856" end="14866" title="PopMatters" label="PopMatters"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="15079" end="15090" title="The Independent" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="15160" end="15172" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721514" start="15180" end="15195" title="Alexis Petridis" label="Alexis Petridis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057590" start="15647" end="15675" title="Northampton Balloon Festival" label="Northampton Balloon Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q65074407" start="15681" end="15692" title="Big Gay Out (London)" label="Big Gay Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453189" start="15696" end="15709" title="Finsbury Park" label="Finsbury Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="16085" end="16094" title="trademark" label="trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052127" start="16281" end="16309" title="Intellectual Property Office (United Kingdom)" label="Intellectual Property Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706138" start="16353" end="16362" title="bad faith" label="bad faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q38903" start="16678" end="16693" title="Universal Music Group" label="Universal Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q107599005" start="16919" end="16942" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2023" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="17146" end="17155" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060840" start="17571" end="17590" title="Working Title Films" label="Working Title Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q645928" start="17647" end="17664" title="biographical film" label="biographical film"/>
<link wikidata="Q323074" start="17717" end="17729" title="Bernard Rose (director)" label="Bernard Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q105070508" start="17811" end="17831" title="Callum Scott Howells" label="Callum Scott Howells"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="17942" end="17952" title="gay rights" label="gay rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q51389" start="18041" end="18052" title="gay culture" label="gay culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q927927" start="18095" end="18107" title="Bronski Beat" label="Bronski Beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804441" start="18254" end="18260" title="scouse" label="scouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q312883" start="18462" end="18472" title="Boy George" label="Boy George"/>
<link wikidata="Q130311" start="18474" end="18488" title="George Michael" label="George Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q15869" start="18490" end="18505" title="Freddie Mercury" label="Freddie Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="18509" end="18519" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q208099" start="18524" end="18532" title="Coming out" label="come out"/>
<link wikidata="Q464036" start="18796" end="18803" title="The Monkees" label="Monkees"/>
<link wikidata="Q219874" start="18817" end="18831" title="Village People" label="Village People"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734366" start="19427" end="19438" title="Born to Run (Bruce Springsteen song)" label="Born to Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371690" start="19579" end="19590" title="Paul Lester" label="Paul Lester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350303" start="20330" end="20343" title="Holly Johnson" label="Holly Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062087" start="20547" end="20562" title="Paul Rutherford (singer)" label="Paul Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178087" start="20675" end="20686" title="Ryan Molloy" label="Ryan Molloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q61116" start="20835" end="20854" title="Ivor Novello Awards" label="Ivor Novello Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549629" start="20887" end="20897" title="Two Tribes" label="Two Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637268" start="20969" end="20979" title="NME Awards" label="NME Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q966700" start="21005" end="21032" title="Welcome to the Pleasuredome" label="Welcome to the Pleasuredome"/>
<link wikidata="Q104175596" start="21096" end="21101" title="Relax (song)" label="Relax"/>
<link wikidata="Q61116" start="21158" end="21177" title="Ivor Novello Awards" label="Ivor Novello Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q223313" start="21232" end="21243" title="Brit Awards" label="Brit Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q966700" start="21365" end="21392" title="Welcome to the Pleasuredome" label="Welcome to the Pleasuredome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549629" start="21455" end="21465" title="Two Tribes" label="Two Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q223703" start="21523" end="21545" title="MTV Video Music Awards" label="MTV Video Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q774443" start="21617" end="21625" title="Pollstar" label="Pollstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783310" start="21817" end="21825" title="Q Awards" label="Q Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q104175596" start="21834" end="21839" title="Relax (song)" label="Relax"/>
<link wikidata="Q966700" start="21887" end="21914" title="Welcome to the Pleasuredome" label="Welcome to the Pleasuredome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358484" start="21936" end="21945" title="Liverpool (album)" label="Liverpool"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11231" wikidata="Q210947" url="?curid=11231" title="Factors of production">
<text>In economics, factors of production, resources, or inputs are what is used in the production process to produce output—that is, goods and services. The utilised amounts of the various inputs determine the quantity of output according to the relationship called the production function. There are four &quot;basic&quot; resources or factors of production: land, labour, capital and entrepreneur (or enterprise). The factors are also frequently labeled &quot;producer goods or services&quot; to distinguish them from the goods or services purchased by consumers, which are frequently labeled &quot;consumer goods&quot;.

There are two types of factors: &quot;primary&quot; and &quot;secondary&quot;. The previously mentioned primary factors are land, labour and capital. Materials and energy are considered secondary factors in classical economics because they are obtained from land, labour, and capital. The primary factors facilitate production but neither become part of the product (as with raw materials) nor become significantly transformed by the production process (as with fuel used to power machinery). Land includes not only the site of production but also natural resources above or below the soil. Recent usage has distinguished human capital (the stock of knowledge in the labor force) from labour. Entrepreneurship is also sometimes considered a factor of production. Sometimes the overall state of technology is described as a factor of production. The number and definition of factors vary, depending on theoretical purpose, empirical emphasis, or school of economics.

== Historical schools and factors ==
In the interpretation of the currently dominant view and of a classical economic theory developed by neoclassical economists, the term &quot;factors&quot; did not exist until after the classical period and is not to be found in any of the literature of that time.

Differences are most stark when it comes to deciding which factor is the most important.

=== Physiocracy ===
Physiocracy (from the Greek for &quot;government of nature&quot;) is an economic theory developed by a group of 18th century Enlightenment French economists who believed that the wealth of nations was derived solely from the value of &quot;land agriculture&quot; or &quot;land development&quot; and that agricultural products should be highly priced.

=== Classical ===

The classical economics of Adam Smith, David Ricardo, and their followers focus on physical resources in defining its factors of production and discuss the distribution of cost and value among these factors. Adam Smith and David Ricardo referred to the &quot;component parts of price&quot; as the costs of using:
* Land or natural resource — naturally occurring goods like water, air, soil, minerals, flora, fauna and climate that are used in the creation of products. The payment given to a landowner is rent, loyalties, commission and goodwill.
* Labor — human effort used in production which also includes technical and marketing expertise. The payment for someone else&#x27;s labor and all income received from one&#x27;s own labor is wages. Labor can also be classified as the physical and mental contribution of an employee to the production of the good(s).
* Capital stock — human-made goods which are used in the production of other goods. These include machinery, tools, and buildings. They are of two types, fixed and working. Fixed are one time investments like machines, tools and working consists of liquid cash or money in hand and raw material.

The classical economists also employed the word &quot;capital&quot; in reference to money. Money, however, was not considered to be a factor of production in the sense of capital stock since it is not used to directly produce any good. The return to loaned money or to loaned stock was styled as interest while the return to the actual proprietor of capital stock (tools, etc.) was styled as profit. See also returns.

=== Marxism ===
Marx considered the &quot;elementary factors of the labor-process&quot; or &quot;productive forces&quot; to be:
* Labor
* Subject of labor (objects transformed by labor)
* Instruments of labor (or means of labor).

The &quot;subject of labor&quot; refers to natural resources and raw materials, including land. The &quot;instruments of labor&quot; are tools, in the broadest sense. They include factory buildings, infrastructure, and other human-made objects that facilitate labor&#x27;s production of goods and services.

This view seems similar to the classical perspective described above. But unlike the classical school and many economists today, Marx made a clear distinction between labor actually done and an individual&#x27;s &quot;labor power&quot; or ability to work. Labor done is often referred to nowadays as &quot;effort&quot; or &quot;labor services&quot;. Labor-power might be seen as a stock which can produce a flow of labor.

Labor, not labor power, is the key factor of production for Marx and the basis for earlier economists&#x27; labor theory of value. The hiring of labor power only results in the production of goods or services (&quot;use-values&quot;) when organized and regulated (often by the &quot;management&quot;). How much labor is actually done depends on the importance of conflict or tensions within the labor process.

=== Neoclassical economics ===
Neoclassical economics, one of the branches of mainstream economics, started with the classical factors of production of land, labor, and capital. However, it developed an alternative theory of value and distribution. Many of its practitioners have added various further factors of production (see below).

Further distinctions from classical and neoclassical microeconomics include the following:
* Capital — this has many meanings, including the financial capital raised to operate and expand a business. In much of economics, however, &quot;capital&quot; (without any qualification) means goods that can help produce other goods in the future, the result of investment. It refers to machines, roads, factories, schools, infrastructure, and office buildings which humans have produced to create goods and services.
* Fixed capital — this includes machinery, factories, equipment, new technology, buildings, computers, and other goods that are designed to increase the productive potential of the economy for future years. Nowadays, many consider computer software to be a form of fixed capital and it is counted as such in the National Income and Product Accounts of the United States and other countries. This type of capital does not change due to the production of the good.
* Working capital — this includes the stocks of finished and semi-finished goods that will be economically consumed in the near future or will be made into a finished consumer good in the near future. These are often called inventory. The phrase &quot;working capital&quot; has also been used to refer to liquid assets (money) needed for immediate expenses linked to the production process (to pay salaries, invoices, taxes, interests...) Either way, the amount or nature of this type of capital usually changes during the production process.
* Financial capital — this is simply the amount of money the initiator of the business has invested in it. &quot;Financial capital&quot; often refers to his or her net worth tied up in the business (assets minus liabilities) but the phrase often includes money borrowed from others.
* Technological progress — For over a century, economists have known that capital and labor do not account for all economic growth. To include the technological progress into the theory, it was proposed to introduce capital service and labour service as production factors in line with capital and labour. This is reflected in &quot;total factor productivity&quot; and the &quot;Solow residual&quot; used in economic models called &quot;production functions&quot; that account for the contributions of capital and labor, yet have some unexplained contributor which is commonly called &quot;technological progress&quot;. Russian economist Vladimir Pokrovskii proposed to consider capital service as one of independent production factors in line with labour and capital. Capital service as production factor was interpreted by Ayres and Warr as useful work of production equipment, which makes it possible to reproduce historical rates of economic growth with considerable precision and without recourse to exogenous and unexplained technological progress, thereby overcoming the major flaw of the Solow Theory of economic growth.

=== Ecological economics ===
Ecological economics is an alternative to neoclassical economics. It integrates, among other things, the first and second laws of thermodynamics (see: Laws of thermodynamics) to formulate more realistic economic systems that adhere to fundamental physical limitations. In addition to the neoclassical focus on efficient allocation, ecological economics emphasizes sustainability of scale and just distribution. Ecological economics also differ from neoclassical theories in its definitions of factors of production, replacing them with the following:
* Matter — the material from which products are produced. Matter can be recycled or reused through refining or reforming, but it cannot be created or destroyed, placing an upper limit on the amount of material that can be withdrawn and used. Consequently, the total amount of available matter is fixed, and once all the available matter is used, nothing more can be produced without recycling or reusing matter from prior products.
* Energy — the physical but non-material inputs of production. We can place different forms of energy on a scale of utility depending on how useful it is for creating a product. Due to the law of entropy, energy tends to decrease in utility over time. (e.g. electricity, a very useful form of energy, is used to run a machine that builds a stuffed bear. In the process, however, electricity is converted to heat, a less useful form of energy). Like matter, energy can neither be created nor destroyed and thus there is also an upper limit to the total amount usable energy.
* Design intelligence — a factor that incorporates the knowledge, creativity, and efficiency of how goods are created - the better the design, the more efficient and beneficial the creation is. Designs are usually improvements on their predecessors since our store of accumulated knowledge grows with time. One possible neoclassical analogue of design intelligence is technological progress.

Integral to ecological economics is the following notion: at the maximum rates of sustainable matter and energy uptake, the only way to increase productivity would be through an increase in design intelligence. This provides the basis for a core tenet of ecological economics, namely that infinite growth is impossible.

== Fourth factor ==
In the first half of the 20th century, some authors added the work of organization or entrepreneurship as a fourth factor of production. This became standard in the post-war Neoclassical synthesis. For example, J. B. Clark saw the co-ordinating function in production and distribution as being served by entrepreneurs; Frank Knight introduced managers who co-ordinate using their own money (financial capital) and the financial capital of others. In contrast, many economists today consider &quot;human capital&quot; (skills and education) as the fourth factor of production, with entrepreneurship as a form of human capital. Yet others refer to intellectual capital. More recently, many have begun to see &quot;social capital&quot; as a factor, as contributing to production of goods and services.

=== Entrepreneurship ===
In markets, entrepreneurs combine the other factors of production, land, labor, and capital, to make a profit. Often these entrepreneurs are seen as innovators, developing new ways to produce new products. In a planned economy, central planners decide how land, labor, and capital should be used to provide for maximum benefit for all citizens. Just as with market entrepreneurs, the benefits may mostly accrue to the entrepreneurs themselves.

The sociologist C. Wright Mills refers to &quot;new entrepreneurs&quot; who work within and between corporate and government bureaucracies in new and different ways. Others (such as those practicing public choice theory) refer to &quot;political entrepreneurs&quot;, i.e., politicians and other actors.

Much controversy rages about the benefits produced by entrepreneurship. But the real issue is about how well institutions they operate in (markets, planning, bureaucracies, government) serve the public. This concerns such issues as the relative importance of market failure and government failure.

In the book &quot;Accounting of Ideas&quot;, &quot;intequity&quot;, a neologism, is abstracted from equity to add a newly researched production factor of the capitalist system. Equity, which is regarded as part of capital, was divided into equity and intequity. Intequity means capital of ideas. Entrepreneurship was divided into network-related matters and creating-related matters. Network-related matters function in the sphere of equity, and creating-related matters in spheres of intequities.

=== Natural resources ===
Ayres and Warr (2010) are among the economists who criticize orthodox economics for overlooking the role of natural resources and the effects of declining resource capital. See also: &quot;Natural resource economics&quot;

=== Energy ===
Reiner Kümmel worked on the evaluation of energy, or more precisely exergy, as a production factor. He showed it can be seen as individual factor of production, with an elasticity larger than labor. A cointegration analysis support results derived from linear exponential (LINEX) production functions. The work of Ayres shows similar results.

=== Cultural heritage ===
C. H. Douglas disagreed with classical economists who recognized only three factors of production. While Douglas did not deny the role of these factors in production, he considered the &quot;Cultural heritage&quot; as the primary factor. He defined cultural inheritance as the knowledge, techniques, and processes that have accrued to us incrementally from the origins of civilization (i.e., progress). Consequently, mankind does not have to keep &quot;reinventing the wheel&quot;. &quot;We are merely the administrators of that cultural inheritance, and to that extent, the cultural inheritance is the property of all of us, without exception. Adam Smith, David Ricardo, and Karl Marx claimed that labor creates all value. While Douglas did not deny that all costs ultimately relate to labour charges of some sort (past or present), he denied that the present labour of the world creates all wealth. Douglas carefully distinguished between value, costs and prices. He claimed that one of the factors resulting in a misdirection of thought in terms of the nature and function of money was economists&#x27; near-obsession about values and their relation to prices and incomes. While Douglas recognized &quot;value in use&quot; as a legitimate theory of values, he also considered values as subjective and not capable of being measured in an objective manner.

Peter Kropotkin argued for the common ownership of all intellectual and useful property due to the collective work that went into creating it. Kropotkin does not argue that the product of a worker&#x27;s labor should belong to the worker. Instead, Kropotkin asserts that every individual product is essentially the work of everyone since every individual relies on the intellectual and physical labor of those who came before them as well as those who built the world around them. Because of this, Kropotkin proclaims that every human deserves an essential right to well-being because every human contributes to the collective social product: Kropotkin goes on to say that the central obstacle preventing humanity from claiming this right is the state&#x27;s violent protection of private property. Kropotkin compares this relationship to feudalism, saying that even if the forms have changed, the essential relationship between the propertied and the landless is the same as the relationship between a feudal lord and their serfs.

== See also ==

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="3" end="12" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q210947" start="14" end="35" title="Factors of production" label="factors of production"/>
<link wikidata="Q210947" start="37" end="46" title="Factors of production" label="resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q210947" start="51" end="57" title="Factors of production" label="inputs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148708" start="112" end="118" title="output (economics)" label="output"/>
<link wikidata="Q28877" start="128" end="133" title="goods" label="goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406919" start="138" end="146" title="service (economics)" label="services"/>
<link wikidata="Q524004" start="265" end="284" title="production function" label="production function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554231" start="319" end="328" title="resources" label="resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q210947" start="457" end="483" title="Factors of production" label="producer goods or services"/>
<link wikidata="Q868404" start="596" end="610" title="consumer goods" label="consumer goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q271857" start="826" end="845" title="classical economics" label="classical economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q192355" start="994" end="1006" title="raw material" label="raw material"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408286" start="1053" end="1071" title="production process" label="production process"/>
<link wikidata="Q188460" start="1167" end="1183" title="natural resource" label="natural resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="1204" end="1208" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q165687" start="1241" end="1254" title="human capital" label="human capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q13440398" start="1286" end="1297" title="labor force" label="labor force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="1312" end="1328" title="Entrepreneurship" label="Entrepreneurship"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="1413" end="1423" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048444" start="1564" end="1583" title="school of economics" label="school of economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q183244" start="1998" end="2009" title="Physiocracy" label="Physiocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q271857" start="2373" end="2392" title="classical economics" label="classical economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="2396" end="2406" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q160270" start="2408" end="2421" title="David Ricardo" label="David Ricardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554231" start="2461" end="2469" title="resource" label="resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085066" start="2684" end="2688" title="Land (economics)" label="Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q188460" start="2692" end="2708" title="natural resource" label="natural resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q157171" start="2874" end="2878" title="Renting" label="rent"/>
<link wikidata="Q28161" start="2918" end="2923" title="Labor (economics)" label="Labor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3108" end="3113" title="Returns (economics)#Wages" label="wages"/>
<link wikidata="Q8137" start="3235" end="3248" title="Capital (economics)" label="Capital stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921032" start="3939" end="3946" title="Returns (economics)" label="returns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433881" start="4046" end="4063" title="productive forces" label="productive forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438793" start="4162" end="4176" title="means of labor" label="means of labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748888" start="4706" end="4717" title="labor power" label="labor power"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714114" start="4869" end="4874" title="stock and flow" label="stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714114" start="4895" end="4899" title="stock and flow" label="flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q584987" start="5019" end="5040" title="labor theory of value" label="labor theory of value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497178" start="5127" end="5137" title="use value" label="use-values"/>
<link wikidata="Q60571" start="5353" end="5375" title="Neoclassical economics" label="Neoclassical economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q73273" start="5400" end="5420" title="mainstream economics" label="mainstream economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q39072" start="5713" end="5727" title="microeconomics" label="microeconomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8137" start="5753" end="5760" title="Capital (economics)" label="Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897397" start="5801" end="5818" title="financial capital" label="financial capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351664" start="6014" end="6024" title="investment (macroeconomics)" label="investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113011" start="6172" end="6185" title="Fixed capital" label="Fixed capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="6410" end="6418" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070759" start="6482" end="6518" title="National Income and Product Accounts" label="National Income and Product Accounts"/>
<link wikidata="Q823288" start="6635" end="6650" title="Working capital" label="Working capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q815410" start="6857" end="6866" title="inventory" label="inventory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897397" start="7178" end="7195" title="Financial capital" label="Financial capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q46737" start="7375" end="7380" title="asset" label="asset"/>
<link wikidata="Q96776939" start="7388" end="7399" title="Liability (financial accounting)" label="liabilities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7675" end="7690" title="capital service" label="capital service"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7695" end="7709" title="labour service" label="labour service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936153" start="7792" end="7817" title="total factor productivity" label="total factor productivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156779" start="7838" end="7852" title="Solow residual" label="Solow residual"/>
<link wikidata="Q524004" start="7896" end="7915" title="production function" label="production function"/>
<link wikidata="Q107657750" start="8097" end="8116" title="Vladimir Pokrovskii" label="Vladimir Pokrovskii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049066" start="8618" end="8638" title="Ecological economics" label="Ecological economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q60571" start="8660" end="8682" title="neoclassical economics" label="neoclassical economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q849392" start="8769" end="8791" title="Laws of thermodynamics" label="Laws of thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977531" start="11083" end="11105" title="Neoclassical synthesis" label="Neoclassical synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q704893" start="11120" end="11131" title="John Bates Clark" label="J. B. Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="11213" end="11225" title="entrepreneur" label="entrepreneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q355223" start="11228" end="11240" title="Frank Knight" label="Frank Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q165687" start="11406" end="11419" title="human capital" label="human capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329252" start="11555" end="11575" title="intellectual capital" label="intellectual capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="11945" end="11960" title="planned economy" label="planned economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q312837" start="12195" end="12210" title="C. Wright Mills" label="C. Wright Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q674530" start="12378" end="12398" title="public choice theory" label="public choice theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210298" start="12415" end="12437" title="political entrepreneur" label="political entrepreneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q622657" start="12742" end="12756" title="market failure" label="market failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q38427" start="12761" end="12779" title="government failure" label="government failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q130989" start="12852" end="12861" title="neologism" label="neologism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299701" start="13496" end="13522" title="Natural resource economics" label="Natural resource economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140448" start="13545" end="13558" title="Reiner Kümmel" label="Reiner Kümmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q663290" start="13613" end="13619" title="exergy" label="exergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q223639" start="13714" end="13724" title="Elasticity (economics)" label="elasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751675" start="13746" end="13759" title="cointegration" label="cointegration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341675" start="13859" end="13864" title="Robert Ayres (scientist)" label="Ayres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101288" start="13915" end="13928" title="C. H. Douglas" label="C. H. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q271857" start="13944" end="13964" title="classical economists" label="classical economists"/>
<link wikidata="Q210272" start="14106" end="14123" title="Cultural heritage" label="Cultural heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351730" start="14307" end="14315" title="Progress (history)" label="progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738807" start="14368" end="14389" title="reinventing the wheel" label="reinventing the wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="14560" end="14570" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q160270" start="14572" end="14585" title="David Ricardo" label="David Ricardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="14591" end="14600" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q584987" start="14614" end="14637" title="labour theory of value" label="labor creates all value"/>
<link wikidata="Q868257" start="14856" end="14861" title="value (economics)" label="value"/>
<link wikidata="Q362098" start="14863" end="14868" title="historical cost" label="costs"/>
<link wikidata="Q160151" start="14873" end="14878" title="price" label="price"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497178" start="15116" end="15140" title="use value" label="&amp;quot;value in use&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5752" start="15274" end="15289" title="Peter Kropotkin" label="Peter Kropotkin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11232" wikidata="Q49268" url="?curid=11232" title="Fort Wayne, Indiana">
<text>Fort Wayne is a city in and the county seat of Allen County, Indiana, United States. Located in northeastern Indiana, the city is west of the Ohio border and south of the Michigan border. The city&#x27;s population was 263,886 as of the 2020 census, making it the second-most populous city in Indiana after Indianapolis, and the 83rd-most populous city in the United States. It is the principal city of the Fort Wayne metropolitan area, consisting of Allen and Whitley counties which had an estimated population of 423,038 as of 2021. Fort Wayne is the cultural and economic center of northeastern Indiana.

Fort Wayne was built in 1794 by the United States Army under the direction of American Revolutionary War general Anthony Wayne, the last in a series of forts built near the Miami village of Kekionga. Named in Wayne&#x27;s honor, the European-American settlement developed at the confluence of the St. Joseph, St. Marys, and Maumee rivers, known originally as Fort Miami, a trading post constructed by Jean Baptiste Bissot, Sieur de Vincennes around 1706. The modern city was platted in 1823 following its revitalization after the War of 1812 and its siege. It underwent tremendous growth after completion of the Wabash and Erie Canal and advent of the railroad.

Once a booming manufacturing town located in what became known as the Rust Belt, Fort Wayne&#x27;s economy in the 21st century is based upon distribution, transportation and logistics; healthcare, professional and business services; leisure and hospitality, and financial services. The city is a center for the defense industry which employs 1–2% of the population. Fort Wayne was an All-America City Award recipient in 1983, 1998, 2009, and 2021. The city also received an Outstanding Achievement City Livability Award by the U.S. Conference of Mayors in 1999.

==History==
===Early history===
====The Native Americans and New France====
==== Original settlement and French control (1706-1760) ====
This area here on the river confluence was occupied by successive cultures of indigenous peoples for as long as 10,000 years. The Miami tribe would eventually establish its settlement of Kekionga at this confluence of the Maumee, St. Joseph, and St. Marys rivers in the late stages of the Beaver Wars in the 1690s. It was the capital of the Miami nation and related Algonquian tribes.

In 1696, Comte de Frontenac appointed Jean Baptiste Bissot, Sieur de Vincennes, who began visiting Kekionga in 1702, and would later build the original Fort Miami here in the wilderness and pays d&#x27;en Haut of New France around 1706; Initially, a small trading outpost. It was part of a group of forts and trading posts built between Quebec and St. Louis. The first census in 1744 recorded a population of approximately 40 Frenchmen and 1,000 Miamians.

====From the British back to the Miami (1760-1776)====
Increasing tension between France and Great Britain developed over control of the territory. In 1760, France ceded the area to Britain after its forces in North America surrendered during the Seven Years&#x27; War, known on the North American front as the French and Indian War. Managing to hold down the fort for only a mere couple of years, the British lost control of it in 1763 when various Native American nations rebelled against British rule and retook the fort as part of Pontiac&#x27;s Rebellion. From this point forward in 1763, no active fort existed at Kekionga for the next three decades until American General Anthony Wayne established Fort Wayne in 1794, following the Battle of Fallen Timbers. The fort throughout this period was described as a, &quot;Defiant mixture of Indian warriors and lawless renegades of the frontier, such as the Girties. It was also the home of a heterogeneous population of English and French traders and their families, French &#x27;engages&quot;, and Miami, Delaware and Shawnee tribes.&quot;

In 1772, the British regained influence over the village after Sir William Johnson suggested to the government that the fort be reoccupied. The mixed population of the Kekionga area had moved past antipathy with the British by this point, and accepted their friendship. In 1776, Officer Jacques LaSalle moved into the village to conduct strict supervision on behalf of the British government, ensuring that the natives remained loyal to the British, and to check passports with travelers coming down from Fort Detroit.

====American Revolution to the Old Northwest====
The British continued to monitor Kekionga and Fort Miami throughout the American Revolutionary War. In 1780, French Canadian soldiers coming to assist the U.S. with the revolution were slaughtered in several nearby locations in what is known as La Balme&#x27;s Defeat. At the end of the Revolutionary War, in the Treaty of Paris in 1783, Britain ceded this area to the new United States, though they continued to maintain an influence on trading activity and the forts of Miami, with the primary objective of slowing American expansion into the Great Lakes region. The young United States formally organized the region in the Land Ordinance of 1785 and negotiated treaties allowing settlement, but the Western Confederacy of Native American nations were not party to these treaties and did not cede their ownership of those lands.

American land speculators and pioneers began flooding down the Ohio River into the area, leading to conflict with an alliance of native tribes known as the Western Confederacy. It was headquartered at Kekionga, where the Miami had permitted two refugee tribes dislodged by white homesteaders, the Delaware and the Shawnee, to resettle. The confederacy—which included other Great Lakes and Algonquin tribes as well—began sending war parties to raid settlers, hoping to drive them back across the Appalachian Mountains, and refused to meet for negotiations over a possible treaty to instead cede land for white settlement. The growing violence led to the Northwest Indian War.

In 1790, President George Washington ordered the U.S. Army to subdue and pacify the tribes. The first expedition, led by General Josiah Harmar reached Kekionga and exercised scorched earth tactics on the village and crops. Miami war chief Little Turtle, who had been long tracking the whereabouts of Harmar though the aid of various agents such as Simon Girty, would quickly drive Harmar and the US troops away. The confederacy warriors attacked the second invading force, led in 1791 by General Arthur St. Clair, before it could get that far and wiped it out, in a massacre known as St. Clair&#x27;s Defeat at modern-day Fort Recovery, Ohio. It&#x27;s known as the greatest defeat of the U.S. Army by Native Americans in history. This defeat left the US army crippled and borders open to attacks from the British and allied native tribes. General Anthony Wayne was recalled from civilian life to lead a third expedition, defeating the confederacy&#x27;s warriors at the Battle of Fallen Timbers, near modern-day Toledo, Ohio on August 20, 1794. Wayne&#x27;s men then marched up the Maumee River, systematically burning evacuated native towns, crops, and winter food stores, until they reached its headwaters, where Kekionga remained in ruins. Wayne then confronted the British at Fort Miami, where the British debated an attack. Later, Wayne selected the site for construction of Fort Wayne, he ordered a fort that could withstand heavy British artillery, especially a 24-pound cannon, along with attacks from their army or native allies.

The following year, Wayne negotiated a peace accord, the Treaty of Greenville with tribal leaders, in which they agreed to stop fighting, end support of the British, and ceded most of what is now Ohio along with certain tracts further west, including the area around Fort Wayne encompassing Kekionga and the land portage. Wayne promised the remainder would remain Indian lands, which is why the territory west of Ohio was named Indiana. Wayne would die one year later and a Spanish spy James Wilkinson would assume his role as General. In subsequent years, the government used Fort Wayne to hand out annual payments under the treaty. But in a recurring cycle, the tribes ran up debts to white traders who came there to sell them alcohol and manufactured goods, and the government pushed tribal leaders—including through bribes—to sell more reservation land to pay off those debts and, when the land was gone, then to agree to have the tribe removed to the Far West.

In 1802, a United States fur trade factory was established in Fort Wayne. It was burned by the local Indians at the beginning of the War of 1812.

====Settlement permitted by Treaty of St. Mary&#x27;s====
The first settlement started in 1815. In 1819, the military garrison abandoned the fort and moved to Detroit. In 1822, a federal land office opened to sell land ceded by local Native Americans by the Treaty of St. Mary&#x27;s in 1818. Platted in 1823 at the Ewing Tavern, the village became an important frontier outpost and was incorporated as the Town of Fort Wayne in 1829, with a population of 300. The Wabash and Erie Canal&#x27;s opening improved travel conditions to the Great Lakes and Mississippi River, exposing Fort Wayne to expanded economic opportunities. The population topped 2,000 when the town was incorporated as the City of Fort Wayne on February 22, 1840.

Pioneer newspaperman George W. Wood was elected the city&#x27;s first mayor. Fort Wayne&#x27;s &quot;Summit City&quot; nickname dates from this period, referring to the city&#x27;s position at the highest elevation along the canal&#x27;s route. As influential as the canal was to the city&#x27;s earliest development, it quickly became obsolete after briefly competing with the city&#x27;s first railroad, the Pittsburgh, Fort Wayne and Chicago Railway, completed in 1854.

===Modern history===
At the turn of the 20th century, the population of Fort Wayne nearly reached 50,000, attributed to a large influx of German and Irish immigrants. Fort Wayne&#x27;s &quot;urban working class&quot; thrived in industrial and railroad-related jobs. The city&#x27;s economy was substantially based on manufacturing, ushering in an era of innovation with several notable inventions and developments coming out of the city over the years, such as gasoline pumps (1885), the refrigerator (1913), and in 1972, the first home video game console. The Great Flood of 1913 caused seven deaths, left 15,000 homeless, and damaged over 5,500 buildings in the worst natural disaster in the city&#x27;s history.

As the automobile&#x27;s prevalence grew, Fort Wayne became a fixture on the Lincoln Highway. Aviation arrived in 1919 with the opening of the city&#x27;s first airport, Smith Field. The airport served as Fort Wayne&#x27;s primary commercial airfield until Baer Field (now Fort Wayne International Airport) was transferred to the city in 1947 after serving as a military base during World War II.

Fort Wayne was hit by the Great Depression beginning in 1929, with most factories cutting their workforce. The stock market crash did not discourage plans to build the city&#x27;s first skyscraper and Indiana&#x27;s tallest building at the time, the Lincoln Bank Tower. By 1935, the New Deal&#x27;s WPA put over 7,000 residents back to work through local infrastructure improvements, including the construction of new parks, bridges, viaducts, and a $5.2 million sewage treatment facility.

The post-World War II economic boom helped the city prosper once again. Between 1950 and 1955, more than 5,000 homes were built, many in large subdivisions in rural Allen County. In 1950, Fort Wayne&#x27;s first bypass, Coliseum Boulevard, opened on the north side of the city, followed by the city&#x27;s first arena, War Memorial Coliseum, bringing new opportunities for suburban expansion. The Coliseum was home to the NBA&#x27;s Fort Wayne Pistons from 1952 to 1957. The opening of enclosed shopping malls and the construction of Interstate 69 through rural areas north and west of the city proper further drove the exodus of retail from downtown through the 1960s. According to the Fort Wayne Home Builders Association estimates, more than 80 percent of new home construction occurred outside the city proper in the 1970s.

Like many cities in the Rust Belt, deindustrialization in the 1980s brought urban blight, increased crime, and a decrease in blue-collar manufacturing jobs. Downtown and surrounding neighborhoods continued declining as residents and businesses sprawled further into rural Allen County. A 1982 flood forced an evacuation of 9,000 residents, damaging 2,000 buildings, and costing $56.1 million (1982 USD, $137 million 2015 USD), prompting a visit from then president of the United States, Ronald Reagan.

In the 1990s, the city began a turnaround. Local leaders focused on crime reduction, economic diversification, and downtown redevelopment. By 1999, Fort Wayne&#x27;s crime rate decreased to the lowest levels since 1974, and the city&#x27;s economy recovered, with the unemployment rate hovering at 2.4 percent in 1998. Clearing blighted buildings downtown resulted in new public greenspaces, including Headwaters Park, which has become the premier community gathering space and centerpiece in the city&#x27;s $50 million flood control project. Fort Wayne celebrated its bicentennial in 1994.

The city continued to concentrate on downtown redevelopment and investment in the 2000s. The decade saw the beginnings of its transformation, with renovations and expansions of the Allen County Public Library, Grand Wayne Convention Center, and Fort Wayne Museum of Art. In 2007, the $130 million Harrison Square development was launched, creating Parkview Field. Suburban growth continued, with the opening of Fort Wayne&#x27;s first lifestyle center, Jefferson Pointe, and the half-billion dollar Parkview Regional Medical Center in 2012.

==Geography==
Fort Wayne is in the East North Central region of the Midwestern United States, in northeastern Indiana, west of Ohio and south of Michigan. According to the 2010 census, Fort Wayne has a total area of , of which (or 99.81%) is land and (or 0.19%) is water.

===Topography===
For a regional summit, the city is situated on flat land characterized by little topographical relief, a result of the Wisconsin glaciation episode. Receding glaciers eroded the land, depositing an evenly distributed layer of sediment during the last glacial period. The most distinguishable topographical feature is Cedar Creek Canyon, just north of the city proper near Huntertown. The Fort Wayne Moraine follows two of the city&#x27;s three rivers: the St. Marys and St. Joseph. The two rivers converge to form the Maumee, which eventually empties into Lake Erie. Land east of the moraine includes the former Great Black Swamp, a lacustrine plain formed by Glacial Lake Maumee. The Little River flows southwest of Fort Wayne, a tributary of the Wabash River, and remnant of the Maumee Torrent.

Fort Wayne is situated on the Saint Lawrence River Divide, a continental divide separating the Great Lakes Basin from the Gulf of Mexico watershed.

The most important geographical feature of the area is the short distance over land between the Three Rivers system, which eventually flows to the Atlantic, and the Wabash system, which eventually flows to the Gulf of Mexico. This came to be the &quot;portage&quot; or carrying place, over which travelers could transport their cargoes from one system to the next. This natural crossroads attracted the Native Americans for thousands of years. It later attracted the European explorers and traders and the American pioneer settlers who continued to develop the area as a transportation and communications center. Chief Little Turtle of the Miami Nation expressed its importance eloquently at the treaty of Greenville in 1795 when he called it &quot;that glorious gate...through which all the words of our chiefs had to pass through from north to south and from east to west&quot;.

Fort Wayne&#x27;s urban tree canopy is 29 percent, double the state average of 14.5 percent and above the national average of 27.1 percent. The canopy is decreasing, notably from development and the emerald ash borer infestation. Fort Wayne has been designated a Tree City USA since 1990.

===Cityscape===

Historically, Fort Wayne has been divided into four unofficial quadrants: northeast, northwest, southeast, and southwest. Calhoun Street divides the southwest and southeast, while the St. Joseph River divides the northwest and northeast quadrants. The Maumee River separates the northeast and southeast, while portions of the St. Marys River and Chicago, Fort Wayne and Eastern Railroad separate the northwest and southwest quadrants.

Fort Wayne&#x27;s early 20th century development was influenced by the City Beautiful movement and centered on a park and boulevard plan conceived by urban planner Charles Mulford Robinson in 1909 and finalized by landscape architect George Kessler in 1912. The master plan proposed a network of parkways and boulevards connecting the city&#x27;s three rivers and Spy Run Creek to dozens of neighborhoods and parks. Several parks were designed by noted landscape architect Arthur Asahel Shurcliff. Much of the original plan was implemented by 1955. In 2010, the Fort Wayne Park and Boulevard System was listed on the National Register of Historic Places, consisting of 11 public parks, four parkways, and ten boulevards, covering .

====Architecture====

During the 19th century, Fort Wayne was dominated by Greek Revival, Gothic Revival, and Italianate architecture. Examples of Greek Revival architecture remain in the city, with one being the Richardville House (1827), a National Historic Landmark. Gothic and Gothic Revival architecture can be found in some of the city&#x27;s most prominent churches, including Trinity English Lutheran Church (1846), Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception (1860), Trinity Episcopal Church (1865), and Saint Paul&#x27;s Evangelical Lutheran Church (1889).

Popular early 20th century architectural styles found in the city include Queen Anne, Richardsonian Romanesque, Neoclassical, Colonial Revival, Dutch Colonial Revival, Tudor Revival, Prairie, American Craftsman, American Foursquare, and Art Deco. Richardsonian Romanesque buildings include Fort Wayne City Hall (1893) and John H. Bass Mansion (1902), each designed by Wing &amp; Mahurin. Notable examples of Neoclassical architecture include the Masonic Temple (1926) and North Side High School (1927). Beaux-Arts, an architectural style closely related to Neoclassical, gained popularity during the City Beautiful movement of the 1890s and early 1900s, which is reflected in the Allen County Courthouse (1902).

The Pennsylvania Railroad Station, also known as Baker Street Station (1914), was designed in American Craftsman style. At , the Art Deco-style Lincoln Bank Tower was Fort Wayne&#x27;s first high-rise and Indiana&#x27;s tallest building from 1930 to 1962. The E. Ross Adair Federal Building and United States Courthouse (1932) is another example of Art Deco architecture. Williams–Woodland Park Historic District includes examples of Queen Anne and Colonial Revival residential homes, while the Forest Park Boulevard Historic District includes Tudor Revival homes.

Modern and Postmodern architecture can be found in buildings constructed during the second half of the 20th century in Fort Wayne. The John D. Haynes House (1952) was designed by Frank Lloyd Wright, while the campus of Concordia Theological Seminary (1953) was designed by Eero Saarinen. Postmodern architect Michael Graves&#x27; first commissions were built in the city, including Hanselmann House (1967) and Snyderman House (1972, now demolished). Louis Kahn&#x27;s design for the Arts United Center (1973) was inspired by a violin and its case. Other notable buildings include Indiana Michigan Power Center (1982), the tallest building in the city and tallest building in Indiana outside of Indianapolis, at .

The 1970s characterized an era in Fort Wayne that saw substantial changes to the downtown area in accommodation of increasing suburbanization and urban sprawl that began in the city during the early 1950s, of which resulted in the demolition of several prominent and historical buildings and homes around the downtown area. This included several hotels, such as the historic thirteen-floor Hotel Anthony. Most of which, were demolished for surface-level parking lots. One example was the Ewing Homestead, built by William Ewing in 1838, it once stood at the northwest corner of Berry Street:This three-story brick mansion was one of the finest examples of Greek Revival architecture in Fort Wayne until it was destroyed in 1970 to make way for a parking lot.

===Rivers===
Since at least the early 20th century, Fort Wayne has maintained a combined sewage overflow program, which has resulted in the city routinely discharging untreated human waste, raw sewage from businesses and homes, toxic waste from industrial sites, and agricultural runoff into all three rivers in a number of locations, particularly during heavy rainfall events. However, as of 2023, a several million dollar citywide sewage overflow tunnel project is set to be completed, among additional efforts, such as a $135 million investment from the city into rain gardens, to prevent further discharge into the rivers. There has been growing investment and development along the riverfront since at least 2019.

=== Climate ===

Fort Wayne lies in the humid continental climate zone (Köppen: &quot;Dfa&quot;), experiencing four distinct seasons. The city is located in USDA hardiness zones 5b and 6a. Typically, summers are hot, humid, and wet. Winters are generally cold with moderate snowfall. The average annual precipitation is , recorded at Fort Wayne International Airport. During the winter season, snowfall accumulation averages per year. Lake-effect snow is not uncommon to the region, but usually appears in the form of light snow flurries.

The National Weather Service reports the highest recorded temperature in the city at , most recently on June 28, 2012, and the lowest recorded temperature at on January 12, 1918. The wettest month on record was June 2015, with of precipitation. The greatest 24-hour rainfall was on August 1, 1926. The snowiest month on record was January 2014, with of snowfall. The greatest calendar-day snowfall was on February 28, 1900.

===Severe weather===
Severe weather is not uncommon in Fort Wayne, particularly in the spring and summer months; the city experiences an average of 39 thunderstorm days and about 10 severe weather days annually.

The city has endured several tornadoes throughout its history. On July 19, 1950, a weak tornado formed on the city&#x27;s west central side and moved northeast, striking the downtown area. On May 26, 2001, an EF1 tornado struck a shopping center on the city&#x27;s northeast side, flipping cars and damaging roofs and windows on nearby residences and businesses. Three people were injured in the storm.

The city experienced wind gusts in the June 2012 North American derecho, knocking out power to 78,000, uprooting approximately 500 trees, and costing $2.5 million.

==Demographics==
Fort Wayne is the principal city of the Fort Wayne metropolitan area, consisting of Allen and Whitley counties in Indiana. It had an estimated population of 423,038 as of 2021. In addition to the two core counties, the greater Fort Wayne combined statistical area includes Adams, DeKalb, Huntington, Noble, Steuben, and Wells counties, with an estimated population of 649,105 in 2021.

===2020 census===
===2010 census===

According to the 2010 census, there were 253,691 people and 113,541 households. The racial makeup of the city is 73.62% White, 15.41% Black or African American, 0.37% Native American or Alaska Native, 3.3% Asian (1.4% Burmese, 0.4% Indian, 0.3% Vietnamese, 0.2% Chinese, 0.2% Filipino, 0.1% Korean, 0.1% Laotian, 0.1% Thai), 0.06% Pacific Islander, 3.72% from other races, and 3.52% from two or more races. 7.96% of the population are Hispanic or Latino of any race. Among the Hispanic population, 6.1% are Mexican, 0.4% Puerto Rican, and 0.3% Guatemalan. Non-Hispanic Whites were 70.3% of the population in 2010, down from 87.7% in 1970.

There were 101,585 households, of which 30.1% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 42.3% were married couples living together, 14.8% had a female householder with no husband present, 4.9% had a male householder with no wife present, and 38.0% were non-families. 31.2% of all households were made up of individuals, and 9.7% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.44 and the average family size was 3.09.

The median age in the city was 34.5 years. 26.4% of residents were under the age of 18; 10.2% were between the ages of 18 and 24; 26.5% were from 25 to 44; 24.9% were from 45 to 64; and 12% were 65 years of age or older. The gender makeup of the city was 48.4% male and 51.6% female.

Fort Wayne has one of the largest Burmese American population in the U.S., estimated at 8,000. Burmese refugee settlement and &quot;secondary migrants&quot; doubled the city&#x27;s Asian population between 2000 and 2010.

===Religion===

Fort Wayne is sometimes referred to as the &quot;City of Churches&quot;, an unofficial moniker dating to the late-19th century when the city was the regional hub of Catholic, Lutheran, and Episcopal faiths. Today, there are 360 churches in the city. 54 percent of Fort Wayne residents identify as religious, where 16 percent are Catholic, 9 percent are Lutheran, 6.5 percent are Baptist, 5 percent are Methodist, and 16.5 percent adhere to other Christian faiths. 0.14 percent of residents are Jewish. Increasing religious minorities are found among the city&#x27;s immigrant communities, including Buddhism, Hinduism, and Islam.

Major churches include the Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception, Saint Paul&#x27;s Evangelical Lutheran Church and Trinity Episcopal Church. Fort Wayne&#x27;s Reform Judaism population is served by Congregation Achduth Vesholom, the oldest Jewish congregation in Indiana, founded in 1848. In 2013, construction began on the first Burmese Muslim mosque to be built worldwide since the mid-1970s.

As of December 2012, four national Christian denominations were headquartered in the city: the American Association of Lutheran Churches, the Fundamental Baptist Fellowship Association, the Missionary Church and the Fellowship of Evangelical Churches. Fort Wayne is the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Fort Wayne–South Bend, covering 14 counties in Northern Indiana, and the Indiana District of the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod, encompassing all of Indiana and north central Kentucky.

==Economy==
In 2017, the Fort Wayne metropolitan area had a gross domestic product (GDP) of $25.7 billion. The top four industries were manufacturing ($8.1B), health care ($2.54B), retail trade ($1.4B), and finance and insurance ($1.3B). Government, if it had been a private industry, would have tied for third, generating $1.4 billion.

Manufacturing is deeply rooted in Fort Wayne&#x27;s economic history, dating to the earliest days of the city&#x27;s growth as an important trade stop along the Wabash and Erie Canal. Railroads, introduced shortly after the canal&#x27;s arrival, eased travel from Fort Wayne to other booming industrial centers along the Great Lakes, such as Chicago, Detroit, Toledo, and Cleveland. Throughout the early and mid-20th century, manufacturing dominated the city&#x27;s economic landscape. From 1900 to 1930, Fort Wayne&#x27;s industrial output expanded by 747 percent, with total production valued at $95 million in 1929, up from $11 million in 1899. The total workforce also increased from 18,000 in 1900 to nearly 50,000 in 1930.

Companies that had a significant presence in the city include Dana Holding Corporation, Falstaff Brewing Corporation, Fruehauf Corporation, General Electric, International Harvester, Magnavox, Old Crown Brewing Corporation, and Tokheim, among several others, producing goods such as refrigerators, washing machines, automatic phonographs, meat packing products, televisions, garbage disposals, automotive parts and motors, trailers, gasoline pumps, trucks, beer, tents and awnings. Magnet wire was an especially important export for the city. In 1960, Fort Wayne companies supplied nearly 90 percent of North America&#x27;s magnet wire market.

The 1970s and 1980s were times of economic depression in Fort Wayne, when much of the city&#x27;s manufacturing foundation eroded and the blue-collar workforce shrank. Fort Wayne joined several other cities reeling economically within the Rust Belt. At the same time, General Electric also downsized much of its more than 10,000-person workforce. Amid other area plant closures and downsizing, coupled with the early 1980s recession, the city lost 30,000 jobs and reached a 12.1 percent unemployment rate. The arrival of General Motors in 1987 helped fill the void from shuttered manufacturers and aided in the area&#x27;s recovery, employing 3,000 at its Fort Wayne Assembly. In 2024, General Motors was the largest manufacturer in the city, employing 4,320. The plant assembles GMC Sierra and Chevrolet Silverado regular and double cab light- and heavy-duty pickup trucks.

Through the 1990s and into the 2000s, the city diversified its economy; manufacturing now employs 16.9 percent of Allen County&#x27;s workforce. Other sectors include distribution, transportation, and logistics (23.1 percent), health care (17.9 percent), professional and business services (12.1 percent), leisure and hospitality (11.1 percent), and financial services (6.3 percent). The leisure and hospitality sector has especially grown, with 5.8 million visitors spending $545 million in 2013, a 4.3 percent increase over the previous year. The city is a center for the defense industry, employing thousands at such companies as BAE Systems (1,150), L3Harris (888), Raytheon Technologies (950), and the Fort Wayne Air National Guard Station (423).

Despite economic diversification, the city was significantly impacted by the Great Recession. According to a report from Pew Research Center, the city lost nearly a quarter of its manufacturing jobs and 11% of its economic status between 2000 and 2014. Economic Innovation Group&#x27;s 2016 Distressed Communities Index Report ranked Fort Wayne among the most unequal large cities in the U.S. in terms of linking economic opportunities to its distressed ZIP codes. , Allen County&#x27;s labor force was 180,637 with an unemployment rate of 2.5 percent.

Companies based in Fort Wayne include Brotherhood Mutual, Do it Best, Franklin Electric, Genteq, Global Van Lines, Home Reserve, Indiana Michigan Power, K&amp;K Insurance, MedPro Group, North American Van Lines, Rea Magnet Wire, Steel Dynamics, Sweetwater Sound, and Vera Bradley. Steel Dynamics is the only &quot;Fortune&quot; 500 company headquartered in the city. Other prominent non-government employers include Parkview Health, Amazon, Lutheran Health Network, Lincoln Financial Group, and BFGoodrich.

In 2024, Google announced plans to build a data center in Fort Wayne.

==Culture==

===Performing arts===
The Embassy Theatre is a 2,471-seat performing arts theater, which hosts over 200,000 patrons annually. Since its founding in 1944, the Fort Wayne Philharmonic Orchestra has often been hosted at the Embassy. The University of Saint Francis Robert Goldstine Performing Arts Center, located on its Downtown Campus, contains a 2,086-seat auditorium.

Since its establishment in 2010, Arts Campus Fort Wayne has been home to several of the city&#x27;s cultural institutions, including the Fort Wayne Museum of Art, Auer Center for Arts and Culture, Arts United Center, and Hall Community Arts Center. Arts United Center houses the Fort Wayne Civic Theater, Fort Wayne Dance Collective, and Fort Wayne Youtheatre. Auer Center for Arts and Culture houses Fort Wayne Ballet. Hall Community Arts Center houses Cinema Center, an independent film venue.

Though used mainly for exhibitions and conventions, the Grand Wayne Convention Center hosts dance and choir productions, such as the annual Foundation for Art and Music in Education (FAME) Northeast Festival. Foellinger Theatre, a 2,500-seat amphitheater in Franke Park, hosts seasonal acts and outdoor concerts during warmer months. Located west of downtown, Arena Dinner Theatre is a nonprofit community arts corporation with a focus on live theater production, annually hosting seven full-length theatrical productions.

===Attractions===
The Fort Wayne Children&#x27;s Zoo has been lauded as one of the nation&#x27;s foremost zoos. Covering and containing 1,000 animals of 200 different species, the zoo is the largest regional attraction, regularly drawing over 500,000 visitors annually. The Foellinger-Freimann Botanical Conservatory gardens cover , displaying over 1,200 plants of 502 different species and 72 types of cacti. Science Central, an interactive science center, contains permanent displays and temporary exhibits, drawing 130,000 visitors annually.

Established in 1921, the Fort Wayne Museum of Art (FWMoA) is accredited by the American Alliance of Museums, specializing in the collection and exhibition of American art. The FWMoA annually receives 100,000 visitors.

The History Center, located in Fort Wayne&#x27;s Old City Hall, manages a collection of more than 23,000 artifacts recalling the region&#x27;s history. The center is overseen by the Allen County–Fort Wayne Historical Society, which maintains the Richardville House, one of two National Historic Landmarks in the city. Historic Fort Wayne, a replica of the 1815 fortification, hosts scheduled tours and historical reenactments throughout the year. Other cultural museums include the African/African–American Historical Museum, Fort Wayne Firefighters Museum, Greater Fort Wayne Aviation Museum, and Baer Field Heritage Air Park.

The Allen County Public Library&#x27;s Fred J. Reynolds Historical Genealogy Department is the second-largest genealogy collection in North America. The collection contains 350,000 printed volumes and 513,000 items of microfilm and microfiche.

===Festivals and events===
The city hosts a variety of cultural festivals and events annually. Festivals commemorating ethnic food, dance, music, and art include Germanfest, Greek Festival, and Japanese Cherry Blossom Festival. Initiated in 1997, Fort Wayne Pride celebrates northeast Indiana&#x27;s LGBTQ community. BBQ RibFest showcases barbecue rib cooks and live entertainment, attracting 40,000 visitors annually.

Fort4Fitness is a certified half marathon, run/walk, and health fair. Over 9,000 participated in the 2011 half marathon. In 2012, Fort4Fitness debuted a spring cycle, Bike-the-Fort, which included three bicycling tours with over 1,000 participants. HolidayFest begins with the Night of Lights on Thanksgiving eve, with the lighting of the PNC Santa and Reindeer, Wells Fargo Holiday Display, and Indiana Michigan Power Christmas Wreath, ending with a fireworks finale at Parkview Field.

The largest annual events in the city are the Johnny Appleseed Festival, Taste of the Arts, Middlewaves and the Three Rivers Festival. The Johnny Appleseed Festival draws 300,000 visitors. The festival is held at Johnny Appleseed Park, where American folklore legend John Chapman is believed to be buried. Apple-themed cuisine, crafts, and historical demonstrations recalling 19th century American pioneering are among some of the festival&#x27;s events. Three Rivers Festival, a celebration of Fort Wayne, spans nine days each July, attracting 400,000 visitors. Three Rivers features over 200 events, including a parade, midway, hot dog eating contest, bed race, raft race, arts fair, and fireworks spectacular. Other annual events include the Allen County Fair, BAALS Music Festival, National Soccer Festival, and the Vera Bradley Outlet Sale.

==Sports==

Fort Wayne is home to two minor league professional sports franchises: the Fort Wayne Komets of the ECHL and the Fort Wayne TinCaps of the High-A Central. Other teams based in the city include Fort Wayne FC, a pre-professional soccer club which competes in the USL2, and the Fort Wayne Derby Girls of the Women&#x27;s Flat Track Derby Association Division 2. Fort Wayne&#x27;s primary sports venues include the Allen County War Memorial Coliseum and Parkview Field.

The city has been home to other professional sports franchises, including the National Basketball Association&#x27;s Fort Wayne Pistons (which moved to Detroit in 1957), the Fort Wayne Daisies of the All-American Girls Professional Baseball League, and the Fort Wayne Kekiongas of the National Association of Professional Base Ball Players (precursor to Major League Baseball).

Intercollegiate sports in the city include the Purdue Fort Wayne Mastodons, representing Purdue University Fort Wayne (PFW) in the NCAA&#x27;s Division I Horizon League, and NAIA schools Indiana Tech (Wolverine–Hoosier Athletic Conference) and University of Saint Francis (Crossroads League and Mid-States Football Association). The Mastodons had represented Indiana University–Purdue University Fort Wayne (IPFW) prior to its 2018 split into two separate institutions (see below), and from 2016 to 2018 were branded as the Fort Wayne Mastodons, but the athletic brand was changed to &quot;Purdue Fort Wayne&quot; shortly before the split took effect.

Some notable events in sports history occurred in Fort Wayne. On June 2, 1883, Fort Wayne hosted the Quincy Professionals for one of the first lighted evening baseball games ever recorded. Fort Wayne is also credited as the birthplace of the NBA, as Pistons&#x27; coach Carl Bennett brokered the merger of the BAA and the NBL in 1948 from his Alexander Street home. On March 10, 1961, Wilt Chamberlain became the first player in the NBA to reach 3,000 points in a single season while competing at the War Memorial Coliseum.

==Parks and recreation==
Fort Wayne Parks and Recreation maintains 86 public parks totaling . Three public and 20 private golf courses are located in Allen County. Several notable parks include Johnny Appleseed Park (home to a campground and John Chapman&#x27;s grave), McCulloch Park (home to Samuel Bigger&#x27;s grave), and the Old Fort Park (The first and oldest park in Fort Wayne, site of the original well used in this fort). Downtown, there are a number of parks including Foellinger-Freimann Botanical Conservatory, Headwaters Park, Promenade Park, Swinney Park, and Lawton Park (named for Major-General Henry Lawton), which includes a skate park. Franke Park is the most extensive city park, covering . Franke is home to the Foellinger Theatre, Shoaff Lake, and the Fort Wayne Children&#x27;s Zoo.

Starting in the 1970s, the city developed a system of recreational trails along the riverbanks, known as the Rivergreenway, with the aim of beautifying the riverfronts and promoting active lifestyles for residents. The Rivergreenway was designated a National Recreation Trail in 2009. As of 2018, the Rivergreenway had expanded with additional trails to encompass nearly throughout the city and county, with about 550,000 annual users. With the expansion of trails in recent years, cycling has become an emerging mode of transportation for residents. In 2009, the city&#x27;s first bicycle lanes were established with the installation of 250 bike parking places. In 2016, Fort Wayne was designated a Bronze Level bicycle friendly community by the League of American Bicyclists.

Hurshtown Reservoir, near Grabill, is the largest body of water in Allen County and is popular with watersports enthusiasts for sailing and fishing. Some 300 lakes are located within of the city. Located downtown along the St. Marys River, Fort Wayne Outfitters offers canoe, kayak, stand-up paddle board, and pontoon boat rentals for recreation along the three rivers.

According to the Trust for Public Land&#x27;s 2017 ParkScore Index, some 56% of Fort Wayne residents are underserved.

==Government==


Fort Wayne has a mayor–council government. The mayor, city clerk, and city council members serve four-year terms. Citizens Square houses the executive and legislative branches of city government. As the county seat of Allen County, Fort Wayne serves as the administrative center for county-level elected offices and government functions.

Fort Wayne&#x27;s current mayor is Sharon Tucker, a Democrat. Tucker – a former county and city councilwoman – succeeded Tom Henry, a record four-term mayor who died from stomach cancer in March 2024. On April 20, 2024, Tucker won a county party caucus to finish Henry&#x27;s term, making her the city&#x27;s first Black mayor. Fort Wayne City Council has nine elected members, one representative from each of the city&#x27;s six council districts and three at-large members, serving four-year terms.

The city is represented in the Indiana General Assembly by three Senate Districts and seven House Districts. Fort Wayne&#x27;s state senators include Dennis Kruse (14th District), Liz Brown (15th), and David Long (16th). Representatives include Dan Leonard (50th District), Ben Smaltz (52nd), Phil GiaQuinta (80th), Martin Carbaugh (81st), Christopher Judy (83rd), Bob Morris (84th), and Dave Heine (85th). Federally, Fort Wayne is part of Indiana&#x27;s 3rd congressional district, represented by Republican Jim Banks, who was first elected in 2016.

Under the Unigov provision of Indiana Law, Fort Wayne would have automatically consolidated with Allen County when its population exceeded 250,000, previously the minimum population for a first class city in Indiana. Fort Wayne nearly met the state requirements for first class city designation on January 1, 2006, when of neighboring Aboite Township (and a small section of Wayne Township) including 25,094 people were annexed. However, a 2004 legislative change raised the population threshold for first-class status from 250,000 to 600,000, which ensured Indianapolis&#x27; status as the only first class city in Indiana.

Fort Wayne&#x27;s E. Ross Adair Federal Building and U.S. Courthouse houses the United States District Court for the Northern District of Indiana, which was authorized by Congress in 1928.

===Public safety===
Municipal and state laws are enforced by the Fort Wayne Police Department, an organization of 460 officers. In 2006, Fort Wayne&#x27;s crime rate was 5104.1 per 100,000 people, slightly above the national average of 4479.3. There were 18 murders, 404 robberies, and 2,128 burglaries in 2006. Steve Reed was appointed to the position of police chief in 2016. In 2014, former police chief Rusty York was appointed to the position of director of public safety. York previously served as police chief from 2000 to 2014.

The city is currently served by the Allen County Jail in downtown Fort Wayne, controlled by the Allen County Sheriff&#x27;s department. In January 2020, a class action lawsuit was filed by Vincent Morris, an inmate at the jail, and the ACLU of Indiana against the Sheriff of Allen County. The lawsuit alleges understaffing of the jail, as well as overpopulation, among other complaints resulting in dangerous housing conditions. In March 2022, Judge Damon Leichty of the United States District Court for the Northern District of Indiana ruled that conditions in the jail were in violation of the 8th Amendment and 14th Amendment. In his injunction, Judge Leichty ruled that there needed to be substantial progress in the construction of a new jail with expanding capacity. Since this injunction there have been 8 proposed sites for the new jail to be constructed, with the most prominent being at the Allen County Sheriffs department training facility land off of Paulding and Adams Center Roads, which the county already owns. However, this location is being heavily contested for being on the Southeast side of Fort Wayne, as another negative for an already disadvantaged area. At its current location, the jail also sits on what is very valuable land given the city&#x27;s recent riverfront development, right in between some hallmark developments for the revitalization of the downtown area.

As of 2010, the Fort Wayne Fire Department included 375 uniformed firefighters and 18 fire stations. Eric Lahey was appointed fire chief in 2014.

===Politics===
==Education==

===Primary and secondary education===

Four K–12 public school districts serve portions of the city. Fort Wayne Community Schools (FWCS) is the largest public school district in Indiana, enrolling nearly 31,000 students in the 2013–2014 academic year. FWCS operate 51 facilities, including 31 elementary schools, ten middle schools, and five high schools. The student body is diverse, with 75 spoken languages in the district. East Allen County Schools (EACS) operate 14 schools, with a total enrollment of 10,010. Northwest Allen County Schools (NACS) operate seven elementary schools, two middle schools, and one high school, with a total enrollment of 6,853. Southwest Allen County Schools (SACS) operate six elementary schools, two middle schools, and one high school, with a total enrollment of 6,995. Private primary and secondary education is offered largely through Lutheran Schools of Indiana and the Roman Catholic Diocese of Fort Wayne–South Bend. Amish Parochial Schools of Indiana oversees schooling through the eighth grade in rural eastern Allen County.

===Higher education===

Fort Wayne hosts regional campuses affiliated with both of Indiana&#x27;s major state university systems. Indiana University Fort Wayne (IU Fort Wayne) and Purdue University Fort Wayne (PFW) were established in 2018 following the dissolution of their predecessor institution, Indiana University–Purdue University Fort Wayne (IPFW). IPFW&#x27;s degree programs in health sciences were transferred to IU Fort Wayne; as such, that institution is now home to the Fort Wayne Center for Medical Education, a branch of the Indiana University School of Medicine. All remaining IPFW degree programs were taken over by PFW. Indiana&#x27;s community college system, Ivy Tech, manages two campuses and several learning sites throughout the city.

Three private universities are based in Fort Wayne. Concordia Theological Seminary is a seminary affiliated with the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod. Established in 1846, it is the oldest higher education institution in the city. Indiana Tech, founded in 1930, has a full-time enrollment of about 3,900 students. In 1890, the Sisters of St. Francis of Perpetual Adoration established the University of Saint Francis, later relocating the Catholic institution to Fort Wayne in 1944. In 2023, it had a full-time enrollment of about 1,700 students. Several private institutions operate branch campuses in the city, including the College of Biblical Studies, Huntington University, Indiana Wesleyan University, Manchester University, and Trine University.

===Libraries===

Fort Wayne is home to the main library and thirteen branches of the Allen County Public Library. It is among the 20 largest public library systems in the U.S., and ranks 89th factoring in academic libraries, with 3.4 million volumes. The library&#x27;s foundation is also among the nation&#x27;s largest, with $14 million in assets. The entire library system underwent an $84.1 million overhaul from 2002 to 2007. In 2009, over 7.4 million materials were borrowed by patrons, with over 3 million visits made throughout the library system. The Main Library in downtown Fort Wayne houses the second largest genealogical research collection in the U.S.

==Media==

Major broadcasting network affiliates include WANE-TV (CBS), WPTA-TV (ABC/NBC), WISE-TV (CW), WFFT-TV (Fox), and WFWA-TV (PBS), Northeast Indiana&#x27;s PBS member station. Religious broadcasters include WINM. Access Fort Wayne maintains Fort Wayne and Allen County&#x27;s Public Access capabilities serving from the Allen County Public Library. One National Public Radio station is based in the city, WBOI, with the new WELT Community Radio Station transmitting from the Allen County Public Library.

Fort Wayne is served by two primary newspapers, the &quot;Journal Gazette&quot; and Pulitzer Prize-winning &quot;News-Sentinel&quot;. The two dailies have separate editorial departments, but under a joint operating agreement, printing, advertising, and circulation are handled by Fort Wayne Newspapers, Inc. The &quot;News-Sentinel&quot; announced that it would cease printing operations in favor of digital publishing in August 2017.

In the early 1970s, an alternative newspaper called the &quot;Fort Wayne Free Press&quot; was published in the city.

==Infrastructure==

===Transportation===

Fort Wayne includes two municipal airports, both managed by the Fort Wayne–Allen County Airport Authority. Fort Wayne International Airport (FWA) is the city&#x27;s primary commercial airport, with five airlines offering direct service to 13 domestic connections. The airport is Indiana&#x27;s second busiest, with over 350,000 passenger enplanements in 2015. Fort Wayne International is also home to the 122nd Fighter Wing&#x27;s Fort Wayne Air National Guard Station. Smith Field, in northern Fort Wayne, is used primarily for general aviation.

Fort Wayne is served by a single Interstate, (Interstate 69), along with an auxiliary beltway (Interstate 469). Once the State Road 37 expressway between Bloomington and Martinsville is completed in 2018, filling a gap in I-69 that exists south of Indianapolis, the road will run south to Evansville; it currently runs north to the Canada–United States border at Port Huron, Michigan. In the coming years, I-69 will extend to the US–Mexico border in Texas, with branches ending in Laredo, Pharr, and Brownsville. Four U.S. Routes bisect the city, including US 24, US 27, US 30, and US 33.

Five Indiana State Roads also meet in the city, including State Road 1, State Road 3, State Road 14, State Road 37, and State Road 930. Airport Expressway, a four-lane divided highway, links Fort Wayne International Airport directly to I-69. About 85 percent of residents commute alone by personal vehicle, while another eight percent carpool.

Unlike most cities comparable to its size, Fort Wayne does not have an urban freeway system. In 1946, planners proposed a $27 million federally funded freeway, crossing east–west and north–south through downtown. Opponents successfully campaigned against the proposal, objecting to the demolition of nearly 1,500 homes at the time of the post-World War II housing shortage, while playing on fears that the project would force displaced minorities into white neighborhoods. In 1947, Fort Wayne residents voted down the referendum that would have allowed for its construction, dubbed the &#x27;Anthony Wayne Parkway.&#x27; Beginning in 1962, construction commenced for I-69 in suburban Fort Wayne.

The I-469 beltway around the southern and eastern fringes of Fort Wayne and New Haven was constructed between 1988 and 1995 as the largest public works project in Allen County history, at $207 million.
Amtrak&#x27;s &quot;Capitol Limited&quot; (Chicago—Toledo—Cleveland—Pittsburgh—Washington, D.C.) and Amtrak&#x27;s &quot;Lake Shore Limited&quot; (Chicago—Toledo—Cleveland—Buffalo—Albany—split to Boston and to New York City) are the closest passenger rail services to Fort Wayne, located north at Waterloo Station. Service by Amtrak ended in 1990 when the &quot;Broadway Limited&quot; was rerouted away from Fort Wayne&#x27;s Pennsylvania Station. Until 1961 the Pennsylvania Railroad operated the north–south &quot;Northern Arrow&quot; through the station. Other stations in Fort Wayne served the passenger trains of the Chicago, Indianapolis, and Louisville Railway (&#x27;Monon Railroad&#x27;) and the Wabash Railroad (hosting the east–west &quot;Wabash Cannon Ball).&quot;

There has been a movement to bring direct passenger rail service back in the form of Amtrak or high-speed rail service. In 2013, a feasibility study was published outlining the impacts of a proposed Columbus—Fort Wayne—Chicago high-speed rail corridor. At , the route would cost $1.29 billion and generate some $7.1 billion in economic benefits to the region. Freight service is provided by a class I railroad (Norfolk Southern) and two class III railroads. Fort Wayne is headquarters and main operations hub of Norfolk Southern&#x27;s Triple Crown Services subsidiary, the largest truckload shipper in the U.S.

Citilink operates and manages the city&#x27;s public bus system, including paratransit and fixed-route service in the cities of Fort Wayne and New Haven via downtown&#x27;s Central Station. CampusLink debuted in 2009 as a free shuttle service for students, faculty, and general public traveling between Ivy Tech&#x27;s Coliseum and North campuses, IPFW and its student housing on the Waterfield Campus, and shopping and residential areas. MedLink debuted in 2013, connecting Parkview Regional Medical Center with Parkview Health&#x27;s Randallia campus. Despite annual ridership of 2.2 million, less than one percent of residents commute by public transportation. Fort Wayne is served by two intercity bus providers: Greyhound Lines (Indianapolis—Toledo—Detroit) and Lakefront Lines (Chicago—Columbus—Akron).

In 2016, the city introduced its first bike-sharing program, including five stations and 25 bicycles.

===Healthcare===
Healthcare in the Fort Wayne area is primarily provided by two nonprofit healthcare systems headquartered in the city: Parkview Health and Lutheran Health Network. Notable hospitals include Dupont Hospital, Lutheran Hospital of Indiana, Parkview Hospital Randallia, and Parkview Regional Medical Center. Over 1,600 patient beds are available throughout the city&#x27;s healthcare system.

, both healthcare systems were Fort Wayne&#x27;s first and second largest employers, respectively, contributing to a total healthcare workforce in Allen County of 34,000. In 2018, Indiana University Health opened its first facility in the city with plans for future growth. VA Northern Indiana Health Care System&#x27;s Fort Wayne Campus provides medical services through the Department of Veterans Affairs.

===Utilities===
City Utilities is the largest municipally owned water utility in Indiana, supplying residents with of water per day from the St. Joseph River via the Three Rivers Water Filtration Plant. Sanitary sewer treatment is also managed by City Utilities. The city of Fort Wayne offers full curbside recycling and solid waste collection services for residents, currently contracted through GFL Environmental. Electricity is provided by Indiana Michigan Power, a subsidiary of American Electric Power, while natural gas is supplied by Northern Indiana Public Service Company (NIPSCO), a subsidiary of NiSource. All tier 1 networks and several additional telecommunication service providers cover the Fort Wayne rate area.

==Notable people==
==Sister cities==
Fort Wayne has four sister cities as designated by Sister Cities International:

* Takaoka, Toyama, Japan (1977)
* Płock, Masovian, Poland (1990)
* Gera, Thuringia, Germany (1992)
* Taizhou, Zhejiang, China (2012)

Friendship city
* Mawlamyine, Mon State, Burma (Myanmar) (2015)

==See also==
* Fort Wayne (fort)
* Anthony Wayne Institute
* Kekionga
* Fort Miami
* List of public art in Fort Wayne, Indiana
* Northern Indiana
* Siege of Fort Wayne
==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* Brice, Wallace. &quot;History of Fort Wayne&quot; (Applewood Books, 2009) online.
* Brown, Nancy Eileen. &quot;The 1901 Fort Wayne, Indiana City Election: A Political Dialogue of Ethnic Tension&quot; (IUPUI Diss. 2013)
* 
* Griswold, Bert Joseph. &quot;The Pictorial History of Fort Wayne, Indiana: A Review of Two Centuries of Occupation of the Region about the Head of the Maumee River&quot; (1917) online
* online
* Morgan, Iwan. &quot;Fort Wayne and the Great Depression: The Early Years, 1929-1933.&quot; &quot;Indiana Magazine of History&quot; (1984): 122–145. online
* Murphey, Kathleen A. &quot;Schooling, Teaching, and Change in Nineteenth-Century Fort Wayne, Indiana.&quot; &quot; Indiana Magazine of History&quot; (1998): 1-28. online
* Robertson, Nellie A. &quot;John Hays and the Fort Wayne Indian Agency.&quot; &quot;Indiana Magazine of History&quot; (1943): 221–236.
* Scott, Clifford H. &quot;Hoosier Kulturkampf: Anglo-German Cultural Conflicts in Fort Wayne, 1840-1920.&quot; &quot;Journal of German-American Studies&quot; 15.1 (1980): 9–18. online
* Seigel, Peggy. &quot;Pushing the Color Line: Race and Employment in Fort Wayne, Indiana, 1933-1963.&quot; &quot;Indiana Magazine of History&quot; (2008): 241–276. online
* Seigel, Peggy. &quot;Winning the Vote in Fort Wayne, Indiana: The Long, Cautious Journey in a German American City.&quot; &quot;Indiana Magazine of History&quot; (2006): 220–257. online

==External links==

* Visit Fort Wayne</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q49268" start="0" end="10" title="Fort Wayne, Indiana" label="Fort Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="32" end="43" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q493443" start="47" end="68" title="Allen County, Indiana" label="Allen County, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="142" end="146" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="171" end="179" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23766566" start="237" end="248" title="2020 United States census" label="2020 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q278163" start="264" end="289" title="List of cities in Indiana" label="second-most populous city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="293" end="300" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="307" end="319" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131079" start="329" end="352" title="List of United States cities by population" label="83rd-most populous city"/>
<link wikidata="Q368276" start="407" end="435" title="Fort Wayne metropolitan area, Indiana" label="Fort Wayne metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q507399" start="461" end="468" title="Whitley County, Indiana" label="Whitley"/>
<link wikidata="Q527175" start="608" end="618" title="Fort Wayne (fort)" label="Fort Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="644" end="662" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="686" end="712" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q574116" start="721" end="734" title="Anthony Wayne" label="Anthony Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077945" start="760" end="765" title="Fort Miami (Indiana)" label="forts"/>
<link wikidata="Q956264" start="781" end="786" title="Miami tribe" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194816" start="798" end="806" title="Kekionga" label="Kekionga"/>
<link wikidata="Q723748" start="887" end="897" title="confluence" label="confluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138574" start="905" end="915" title="St. Joseph River (Maumee River)" label="St. Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713780" start="917" end="926" title="St. Marys River (Indiana)" label="St. Marys"/>
<link wikidata="Q282052" start="932" end="938" title="Maumee River" label="Maumee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077945" start="967" end="977" title="Fort Miami (Indiana)" label="Fort Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q39463" start="981" end="993" title="trading post" label="trading post"/>
<link wikidata="Q3163886" start="1009" end="1049" title="Jean Baptiste Bissot, Sieur de Vincennes" label="Jean Baptiste Bissot, Sieur de Vincennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q831939" start="1083" end="1090" title="platted" label="platted"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="1138" end="1149" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q15178350" start="1158" end="1163" title="Siege of Fort Wayne" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958669" start="1220" end="1241" title="Wabash and Erie Canal" label="Wabash and Erie Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q781973" start="1341" end="1350" title="Rust Belt" label="Rust Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q392933" start="1582" end="1598" title="defense industry" label="defense industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727773" start="1655" end="1677" title="All-America City Award" label="All-America City Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q10709691" start="1798" end="1823" title="United States Conference of Mayors" label="U.S. Conference of Mayors"/>
<link wikidata="Q723748" start="1999" end="2009" title="confluence" label="confluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="2049" end="2067" title="indigenous peoples" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q956264" start="2101" end="2112" title="Miami tribe" label="Miami tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194816" start="2158" end="2166" title="Kekionga" label="Kekionga"/>
<link wikidata="Q282052" start="2193" end="2199" title="Maumee River" label="Maumee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138574" start="2201" end="2211" title="St. Joseph River (Maumee River)" label="St. Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713780" start="2217" end="2226" title="St. Marys River (Indiana and Ohio)" label="St. Marys"/>
<link wikidata="Q856216" start="2260" end="2271" title="Beaver Wars" label="Beaver Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621197" start="2337" end="2347" title="Algonquian peoples" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q125029" start="2366" end="2384" title="Comte de Frontenac" label="Comte de Frontenac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3163886" start="2395" end="2435" title="Jean Baptiste Bissot, Sieur de Vincennes" label="Jean Baptiste Bissot, Sieur de Vincennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077945" start="2509" end="2519" title="Fort Miami (Indiana)" label="Fort Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143100" start="2547" end="2566" title="pays d&amp;#x27;en Haut" label="pays d&amp;#x27;en Haut"/>
<link wikidata="Q170604" start="2570" end="2580" title="New France" label="New France"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="2694" end="2700" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="2705" end="2714" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="3061" end="3082" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="3125" end="3146" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q179077" start="3349" end="3373" title="Pontiac&amp;#x27;s Rebellion" label="Pontiac&amp;#x27;s Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q574116" start="3493" end="3506" title="Anthony Wayne" label="Anthony Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q527175" start="3519" end="3529" title="Fort Wayne (fort)" label="Fort Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237537" start="3553" end="3577" title="Battle of Fallen Timbers" label="Battle of Fallen Timbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q457369" start="3971" end="3990" title="Sir William Johnson, 1st Baronet" label="Sir William Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q74880" start="4413" end="4425" title="Fort Detroit" label="Fort Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077945" start="4523" end="4533" title="Fort Miami (Indiana)" label="Fort Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="4549" end="4575" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q857880" start="4586" end="4601" title="French Canadians" label="French Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q109406994" start="4722" end="4744" title="La Balme&amp;#x27;s Defeat" label="La Balme&amp;#x27;s Defeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q217450" start="4790" end="4805" title="Treaty of Paris (1783)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548416" start="5022" end="5040" title="Great Lakes region" label="Great Lakes region"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217022" start="5103" end="5125" title="Land Ordinance of 1785" label="Land Ordinance of 1785"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186402" start="5179" end="5198" title="Western Confederacy" label="Western Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915" start="5372" end="5382" title="Ohio River" label="Ohio River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186402" start="5465" end="5484" title="Western Confederacy" label="Western Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q135863" start="5698" end="5714" title="Algonquin people" label="Algonquin tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="5804" end="5825" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656995" start="5962" end="5982" title="Northwest Indian War" label="Northwest Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="6004" end="6021" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="6034" end="6043" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q604642" start="6114" end="6127" title="Josiah Harmar" label="Josiah Harmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q208485" start="6159" end="6173" title="scorched earth" label="scorched earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355169" start="6224" end="6237" title="Little Turtle" label="Little Turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287510" start="6333" end="6344" title="Simon Girty" label="Simon Girty"/>
<link wikidata="Q464245" start="6481" end="6497" title="Arthur St. Clair" label="Arthur St. Clair"/>
<link wikidata="Q962450" start="6569" end="6592" title="St. Clair&amp;#x27;s Defeat" label="St. Clair&amp;#x27;s Defeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861739" start="6607" end="6626" title="Fort Recovery, Ohio" label="Fort Recovery, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="6674" end="6683" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q574116" start="6833" end="6846" title="Anthony Wayne" label="Anthony Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237537" start="6966" end="6980" title="Fallen Timbers" label="Fallen Timbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q49239" start="6998" end="7010" title="Toledo, Ohio" label="Toledo, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q282052" start="7068" end="7080" title="Maumee River" label="Maumee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q527175" start="7366" end="7376" title="Fort Wayne (Fort)" label="Fort Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q767317" start="7583" end="7603" title="Treaty of Greenville" label="Treaty of Greenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="7939" end="7943" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q888614" start="8012" end="8027" title="James Wilkinson" label="James Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q115945973" start="8504" end="8535" title="United States Government Fur Trade Factory System" label="United States fur trade factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="8626" end="8637" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q88556" start="8758" end="8766" title="garrison" label="garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q17035574" start="8898" end="8923" title="Treaty of St. Mary&amp;#x27;s" label="Treaty of St. Mary&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q831939" start="8933" end="8940" title="Platted" label="Platted"/>
<link wikidata="Q39070424" start="8956" end="8968" title="Alexander Ewing (soldier)" label="Ewing Tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958669" start="9105" end="9126" title="Wabash and Erie Canal" label="Wabash and Erie Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="9176" end="9187" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497" start="9192" end="9209" title="Mississippi River" label="Mississippi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545780" start="9396" end="9410" title="George W. Wood" label="George W. Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199207" start="9785" end="9827" title="Pittsburgh, Fort Wayne and Chicago Railway" label="Pittsburgh, Fort Wayne and Chicago Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="9987" end="9993" title="German American" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="9998" end="10003" title="Irish Americans" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="10004" end="10014" title="immigrants" label="immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q147366" start="10310" end="10324" title="fuel dispenser" label="gasoline pumps"/>
<link wikidata="Q37828" start="10337" end="10349" title="refrigerator" label="refrigerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q744987" start="10381" end="10404" title="Magnavox Odyssey" label="home video game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982566" start="10410" end="10429" title="Great Flood of 1913" label="Great Flood of 1913"/>
<link wikidata="Q819117" start="10642" end="10657" title="Lincoln Highway" label="Lincoln Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545148" start="10735" end="10746" title="Smith Field (Indiana)" label="Smith Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472295" start="10838" end="10870" title="Fort Wayne International Airport" label="Fort Wayne International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="10989" end="11005" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q201684" start="11074" end="11092" title="Wall Street Crash of 1929" label="stock market crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474165" start="11213" end="11231" title="Lincoln Bank Tower" label="Lincoln Bank Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="11246" end="11254" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200079" start="11262" end="11265" title="Works Progress Administration" label="WPA"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11458" end="11489" title="economic history of the United States#Post-World War II prosperity: 1945–1973" label="post-World War II economic boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779930" start="11666" end="11672" title="bypass (road)" label="bypass"/>
<link wikidata="Q789012" start="11674" end="11692" title="Indiana State Road 930" label="Coliseum Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144284" start="11773" end="11794" title="War Memorial Coliseum" label="War Memorial Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="11876" end="11879" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11887" end="11905" title="Detroit Pistons#1937–1957: Fort Wayne (Zollner) Pistons" label="Fort Wayne Pistons"/>
<link wikidata="Q788707" start="11988" end="12001" title="Interstate 69 in Indiana" label="Interstate 69"/>
<link wikidata="Q781973" start="12307" end="12316" title="Rust Belt" label="Rust Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909102" start="12318" end="12337" title="deindustrialization" label="deindustrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039238" start="12359" end="12371" title="urban blight" label="urban blight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191714" start="12408" end="12419" title="blue-collar" label="blue-collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="12527" end="12535" title="urban sprawl" label="sprawled"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731600" start="13560" end="13587" title="Allen County Public Library" label="Allen County Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595248" start="13589" end="13618" title="Grand Wayne Convention Center" label="Grand Wayne Convention Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472294" start="13624" end="13648" title="Fort Wayne Museum of Art" label="Fort Wayne Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5665863" start="13676" end="13691" title="Harrison Square" label="Harrison Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138759" start="13727" end="13741" title="Parkview Field" label="Parkview Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824486" start="13814" end="13830" title="lifestyle center (retail)" label="lifestyle center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175567" start="13832" end="13848" title="Jefferson Pointe" label="Jefferson Pointe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13878" end="13910" title="Parkview Health#Parkview Regional Medical Center" label="Parkview Regional Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189467" start="13956" end="13981" title="East North Central States" label="East North Central region"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="13989" end="14013" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058433" start="14018" end="14038" title="Northern Indiana" label="northeastern Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="14048" end="14052" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="14066" end="14074" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207326" start="14226" end="14232" title="summit (topography)" label="summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094246" start="14330" end="14358" title="Wisconsin glaciation" label="Wisconsin glaciation episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="14369" end="14376" title="glacier" label="glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="14457" end="14476" title="last glacial period" label="last glacial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056625" start="14528" end="14546" title="Cedar Creek Canyon (Indiana)" label="Cedar Creek Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166527" start="14583" end="14593" title="Huntertown, Indiana" label="Huntertown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472291" start="14599" end="14617" title="Fort Wayne Moraine" label="Fort Wayne Moraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713780" start="14667" end="14676" title="St. Marys River (Indiana)" label="St. Marys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138574" start="14681" end="14691" title="St. Joseph River (Maumee River)" label="St. Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q282052" start="14729" end="14735" title="Maumee River" label="Maumee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492" start="14767" end="14776" title="Lake Erie" label="Lake Erie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544231" start="14823" end="14840" title="Great Black Swamp" label="Great Black Swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6469154" start="14844" end="14860" title="lacustrine plain" label="lacustrine plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6476837" start="14871" end="14890" title="Glacial Lake Maumee" label="Glacial Lake Maumee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6651633" start="14896" end="14908" title="Little River (Indiana)" label="Little River"/>
<link wikidata="Q196183" start="14959" end="14971" title="Wabash River" label="Wabash River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792495" start="14992" end="15006" title="Maumee Torrent" label="Maumee Torrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q23134377" start="15039" end="15066" title="Saint Lawrence River Divide" label="Saint Lawrence River Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q604673" start="15070" end="15088" title="continental divide" label="continental divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599423" start="15104" end="15121" title="Great Lakes Basin" label="Great Lakes Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12630" start="15131" end="15145" title="Gulf of Mexico" label="Gulf of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960177" start="16239" end="16268" title="emerald ash borer infestation" label="emerald ash borer infestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970405" start="16303" end="16316" title="Tree City USA" label="Tree City USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138574" start="16531" end="16547" title="St. Joseph River (Maumee River)" label="St. Joseph River"/>
<link wikidata="Q282052" start="16599" end="16611" title="Maumee River" label="Maumee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713780" start="16673" end="16688" title="St. Marys River (Indiana)" label="St. Marys River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095411" start="16693" end="16733" title="Chicago, Fort Wayne and Eastern Railroad" label="Chicago, Fort Wayne and Eastern Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755539" start="16854" end="16877" title="City Beautiful movement" label="City Beautiful movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q21015983" start="16896" end="16919" title="Fort Wayne Park and Boulevard System Historic District" label="park and boulevard plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131062" start="16933" end="16946" title="urban planner" label="urban planner"/>
<link wikidata="Q11318340" start="16947" end="16971" title="Charles Mulford Robinson" label="Charles Mulford Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2815948" start="16997" end="17016" title="landscape architect" label="landscape architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541322" start="17017" end="17031" title="George Kessler" label="George Kessler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797845" start="17256" end="17279" title="Arthur Asahel Shurcliff" label="Arthur Asahel Shurcliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="17400" end="17436" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513688" start="17591" end="17604" title="Greek Revival architecture" label="Greek Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="17606" end="17620" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q615196" start="17626" end="17649" title="Italianate architecture" label="Italianate architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330371" start="17729" end="17747" title="Richardville House" label="Richardville House"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="17758" end="17784" title="National Historic Landmark" label="National Historic Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="17786" end="17792" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="17797" end="17811" title="Gothic Revival" label="Gothic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052445" start="17940" end="17978" title="Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception in Fort Wayne" label="Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842746" start="17987" end="18011" title="Trinity Episcopal Church (Fort Wayne, Indiana)" label="Trinity Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402023" start="18024" end="18069" title="Saint Paul&amp;#x27;s Evangelical Lutheran Church" label="Saint Paul&amp;#x27;s Evangelical Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270218" start="18153" end="18163" title="Queen Anne style architecture in the United States" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501297" start="18165" end="18189" title="Richardsonian Romanesque" label="Richardsonian Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="18191" end="18203" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="Neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148367" start="18205" end="18221" title="Colonial Revival" label="Colonial Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5317260" start="18223" end="18245" title="Dutch Colonial Revival" label="Dutch Colonial Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851317" start="18247" end="18260" title="Tudor Revival" label="Tudor Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q616358" start="18262" end="18269" title="Prairie School" label="Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q463382" start="18271" end="18289" title="American Craftsman" label="American Craftsman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743854" start="18291" end="18310" title="American Foursquare" label="American Foursquare"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="18316" end="18324" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472300" start="18369" end="18389" title="Fort Wayne Old City Hall Building" label="Fort Wayne City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6236711" start="18401" end="18421" title="John H. Bass Mansion" label="John H. Bass Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025074" start="18447" end="18465" title="Wing &amp;amp; Mahurin" label="Wing &amp;amp; Mahurin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783722" start="18525" end="18539" title="Masonic Temple (Fort Wayne, Indiana)" label="Masonic Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056747" start="18551" end="18573" title="North Side High School (Fort Wayne, Indiana)" label="North Side High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268134" start="18582" end="18592" title="Beaux-Arts architecture" label="Beaux-Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755539" start="18679" end="18702" title="City Beautiful movement" label="City Beautiful movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181076" start="18759" end="18782" title="Allen County Courthouse (Indiana)" label="Allen County Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q14688733" start="18796" end="18825" title="Pennsylvania Railroad Station (Fort Wayne, Indiana)" label="Pennsylvania Railroad Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474165" start="18936" end="18954" title="Lincoln Bank Tower" label="Lincoln Bank Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322130" start="19052" end="19111" title="E. Ross Adair Federal Building and United States Courthouse" label="E. Ross Adair Federal Building and United States Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020962" start="19164" end="19204" title="Williams–Woodland Park Historic District" label="Williams–Woodland Park Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469050" start="19287" end="19326" title="Forest Park Boulevard Historic District" label="Forest Park Boulevard Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="19358" end="19364" title="Modern architecture" label="Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q595448" start="19369" end="19392" title="Postmodern architecture" label="Postmodern architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6228188" start="19493" end="19513" title="John D. Haynes House" label="John D. Haynes House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604" start="19537" end="19555" title="Frank Lloyd Wright" label="Frank Lloyd Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800537" start="19577" end="19607" title="Concordia Theological Seminary" label="Concordia Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q167073" start="19631" end="19644" title="Eero Saarinen" label="Eero Saarinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q314636" start="19667" end="19681" title="Michael Graves" label="Michael Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548912" start="19768" end="19783" title="Snyderman House" label="Snyderman House"/>
<link wikidata="Q210134" start="19808" end="19818" title="Louis Kahn" label="Louis Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q62007382" start="19841" end="19859" title="Arts United Center" label="Arts United Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637875" start="19938" end="19967" title="Indiana Michigan Power Center" label="Indiana Michigan Power Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091971" start="20198" end="20213" title="suburbanization" label="suburbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="20218" end="20230" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501349" start="20512" end="20538" title="Parking lot" label="surface-level parking lots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513688" start="20728" end="20754" title="Greek Revival architecture" label="Greek Revival architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q361472" start="20912" end="20936" title="combined sewage overflow" label="combined sewage overflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162531" start="21399" end="21410" title="rain garden" label="rain garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="21592" end="21617" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="21624" end="21630" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21709" end="21729" title="Hardiness zone#United States hardiness zones (USDA scale)" label="USDA hardiness zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969483" start="21987" end="22003" title="Lake-effect snow" label="Lake-effect snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066823" start="22096" end="22120" title="National Weather Service" label="National Weather Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312131" start="23173" end="23205" title="June 2012 North American derecho" label="June 2012 North American derecho"/>
<link wikidata="Q368276" start="23356" end="23384" title="Fort Wayne metropolitan area" label="Fort Wayne metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q507399" start="23410" end="23417" title="Whitley County, Indiana" label="Whitley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985090" start="23554" end="23579" title="combined statistical area" label="combined statistical area"/>
<link wikidata="Q351808" start="23589" end="23594" title="Adams County, Indiana" label="Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q498613" start="23596" end="23602" title="DeKalb County, Indiana" label="DeKalb"/>
<link wikidata="Q507472" start="23604" end="23614" title="Huntington County, Indiana" label="Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q506525" start="23616" end="23621" title="Noble County, Indiana" label="Noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q24646" start="23623" end="23630" title="Steuben County, Indiana" label="Steuben"/>
<link wikidata="Q503478" start="23636" end="23641" title="Wells County, Indiana" label="Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="23756" end="23767" title="2010 United States census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q49078" start="23859" end="23864" title="White Americans" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="23873" end="23898" title="African Americans" label="Black or African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="23906" end="23921" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q848624" start="23925" end="23938" title="Alaska Natives" label="Alaska Native"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="23945" end="23950" title="Asian Americans" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999416" start="23957" end="23964" title="Burmese Americans" label="Burmese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643509" start="23971" end="23977" title="Indian Americans" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657969" start="23984" end="23994" title="Vietnamese Americans" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146100" start="24001" end="24008" title="Chinese Americans" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413685" start="24015" end="24023" title="Filipino Americans" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q276879" start="24030" end="24036" title="Korean Americans" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6488006" start="24043" end="24050" title="Laotian Americans" label="Laotian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4450068" start="24057" end="24061" title="Thai Americans" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935055" start="24127" end="24144" title="Multiracial Americans" label="two or more races"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="24174" end="24192" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Hispanic or Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q581921" start="24246" end="24253" title="Mexican Americans" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258666" start="24260" end="24272" title="Puerto Ricans in the United States" label="Puerto Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614258" start="24283" end="24293" title="Guatemalan Americans" label="Guatemalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="24487" end="24502" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999416" start="25170" end="25186" title="Burmese American" label="Burmese American"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="25539" end="25547" title="Catholicism" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="25549" end="25557" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="25563" end="25572" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="25753" end="25760" title="Baptists" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="25776" end="25785" title="Methodism" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="25820" end="25829" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="25868" end="25874" title="Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="25973" end="25981" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="25983" end="25991" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="25997" end="26002" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052445" start="26032" end="26070" title="Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception (Fort Wayne, Indiana)" label="Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402023" start="26072" end="26117" title="Saint Paul&amp;#x27;s Evangelical Lutheran Church" label="Saint Paul&amp;#x27;s Evangelical Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842746" start="26122" end="26146" title="Trinity Episcopal Church (Fort Wayne, Indiana)" label="Trinity Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133485" start="26166" end="26180" title="Reform Judaism" label="Reform Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160576" start="26205" end="26234" title="Congregation Achduth Vesholom" label="Congregation Achduth Vesholom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115171" start="26337" end="26351" title="Islam in Burma" label="Burmese Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="26352" end="26358" title="mosque" label="mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743070" start="26498" end="26539" title="American Association of Lutheran Churches" label="American Association of Lutheran Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508935" start="26545" end="26587" title="Fundamental Baptist Fellowship Association" label="Fundamental Baptist Fellowship Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6878882" start="26593" end="26610" title="Missionary Church" label="Missionary Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442529" start="26619" end="26653" title="Evangelical Mennonite Church" label="Fellowship of Evangelical Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q868925" start="26685" end="26732" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Fort Wayne–South Bend" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Fort Wayne–South Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058433" start="26758" end="26774" title="Northern Indiana" label="Northern Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023160" start="26784" end="26838" title="Indiana District of the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod" label="Indiana District of the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="26886" end="26894" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q368276" start="26922" end="26950" title="Fort Wayne metropolitan area" label="Fort Wayne metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="26957" end="26979" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958669" start="27396" end="27417" title="Wabash and Erie Canal" label="Wabash and Erie Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="27577" end="27584" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="27586" end="27593" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q49239" start="27595" end="27601" title="Toledo, Ohio" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="27607" end="27616" title="Cleveland, Ohio" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214701" start="28027" end="28051" title="Dana Holding Corporation" label="Dana Holding Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432804" start="28053" end="28081" title="Falstaff Brewing Corporation" label="Falstaff Brewing Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470870" start="28083" end="28103" title="Fruehauf Corporation" label="Fruehauf Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="28105" end="28121" title="General Electric" label="General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q263800" start="28123" end="28146" title="International Harvester" label="International Harvester"/>
<link wikidata="Q630670" start="28148" end="28156" title="Magnavox" label="Magnavox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083800" start="28158" end="28187" title="Old Crown Brewing Corporation" label="Old Crown Brewing Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813561" start="28193" end="28200" title="Tokheim" label="Tokheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788730" start="28447" end="28458" title="Magnet wire" label="Magnet wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191714" start="28748" end="28759" title="blue-collar" label="blue-collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q781973" start="28849" end="28858" title="Rust Belt" label="Rust Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326569" start="29021" end="29042" title="early 1980s recession" label="early 1980s recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="29131" end="29145" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472272" start="29266" end="29285" title="Fort Wayne Assembly" label="Fort Wayne Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q871329" start="29390" end="29400" title="GMC Sierra" label="GMC Sierra"/>
<link wikidata="Q871329" start="29405" end="29424" title="Chevrolet Silverado" label="Chevrolet Silverado"/>
<link wikidata="Q392933" start="30060" end="30076" title="defense industry" label="defense industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834524" start="30119" end="30130" title="BAE Systems Inc." label="BAE Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q65053147" start="30140" end="30148" title="L3Harris" label="L3Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q89368734" start="30156" end="30177" title="Raytheon Technologies" label="Raytheon Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472273" start="30193" end="30230" title="Fort Wayne Air National Guard Station" label="Fort Wayne Air National Guard Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="30316" end="30331" title="Great Recession" label="Great Recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="30360" end="30379" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q136208" start="30693" end="30701" title="ZIP code" label="ZIP code"/>
<link wikidata="Q39058788" start="30831" end="30849" title="Brotherhood Mutual Insurance Company" label="Brotherhood Mutual"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286067" start="30851" end="30861" title="Do it Best" label="Do it Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491478" start="30863" end="30880" title="Franklin Electric" label="Franklin Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533601" start="30882" end="30888" title="Genteq" label="Genteq"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570751" start="30890" end="30906" title="Global Van Lines" label="Global Van Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995744" start="30908" end="30920" title="Home Reserve" label="Home Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30922" end="30944" title="American Electric Power#Indiana Michigan Power" label="Indiana Michigan Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q6322397" start="30946" end="30963" title="K&amp;amp;K Insurance" label="K&amp;amp;K Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806406" start="30965" end="30977" title="MedPro Group" label="MedPro Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q17108793" start="30979" end="31003" title="North American Van Lines" label="North American Van Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300144" start="31005" end="31020" title="Rea Magnet Wire" label="Rea Magnet Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605667" start="31022" end="31036" title="Steel Dynamics" label="Steel Dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7655817" start="31038" end="31054" title="Sweetwater Sound" label="Sweetwater Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q7920749" start="31060" end="31072" title="Vera Bradley" label="Vera Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="31101" end="31124" title="Fortune 500" label="&amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138767" start="31209" end="31224" title="Parkview Health" label="Parkview Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="31226" end="31232" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705697" start="31234" end="31257" title="Lutheran Health Network" label="Lutheran Health Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825763" start="31259" end="31282" title="Lincoln Financial Group" label="Lincoln Financial Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q947913" start="31288" end="31298" title="BFGoodrich" label="BFGoodrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="31310" end="31316" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369527" start="31411" end="31426" title="Embassy Theatre (Fort Wayne)" label="Embassy Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472299" start="31543" end="31576" title="Fort Wayne Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Fort Wayne Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472294" start="31892" end="31916" title="Fort Wayne Museum of Art" label="Fort Wayne Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q62007382" start="32004" end="32022" title="Arts United Center" label="Arts United Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="32227" end="32243" title="independent film" label="independent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595248" start="32308" end="32337" title="Grand Wayne Convention Center" label="Grand Wayne Convention Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q54831" start="32494" end="32506" title="amphitheater" label="amphitheater"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="32638" end="32647" title="nonprofit" label="nonprofit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472274" start="32798" end="32828" title="Fort Wayne Children&amp;#x27;s Zoo" label="Fort Wayne Children&amp;#x27;s Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464017" start="33050" end="33092" title="Foellinger-Freimann Botanical Conservatory" label="Foellinger-Freimann Botanical Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q14560" start="33179" end="33184" title="cacti" label="cacti"/>
<link wikidata="Q48976656" start="33186" end="33201" title="Science Central" label="Science Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472294" start="33347" end="33371" title="Fort Wayne Museum of Art" label="Fort Wayne Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842849" start="33401" end="33429" title="American Alliance of Museums" label="American Alliance of Museums"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311158" start="33480" end="33492" title="Visual art of the United States" label="American art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472300" start="33590" end="33603" title="Fort Wayne Old City Hall Building" label="Old City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330371" start="33787" end="33805" title="Richardville House" label="Richardville House"/>
<link wikidata="Q624232" start="33818" end="33845" title="National Historic Landmarks" label="National Historic Landmarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q657069" start="33943" end="33965" title="historical reenactment" label="historical reenactment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731600" start="34174" end="34201" title="Allen County Public Library" label="Allen County Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q47307" start="34280" end="34289" title="genealogy" label="genealogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q830450" start="34388" end="34397" title="microfilm" label="microfilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q830450" start="34402" end="34412" title="microfiche" label="microfiche"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="34715" end="34720" title="LGBTQ" label="LGBTQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q215677" start="34863" end="34876" title="half marathon" label="half marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2913791" start="35131" end="35143" title="Thanksgiving (United States)" label="Thanksgiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138759" start="35306" end="35320" title="Parkview Field" label="Parkview Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q369675" start="35369" end="35394" title="Johnny Appleseed Festival" label="Johnny Appleseed Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797748" start="35435" end="35456" title="Three Rivers Festival" label="Three Rivers Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266247" start="35536" end="35557" title="Johnny Appleseed Park" label="Johnny Appleseed Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q778075" start="35565" end="35582" title="Folklore of the United States" label="American folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q369675" start="35590" end="35602" title="Johnny Appleseed" label="John Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981922" start="35712" end="35728" title="American pioneer" label="American pioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843252" start="35945" end="35951" title="midway (fair)" label="midway"/>
<link wikidata="Q19872927" start="36087" end="36107" title="BAALS Music Festival" label="BAALS Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370066" start="36208" end="36220" title="minor league" label="minor league"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438814" start="36257" end="36274" title="Fort Wayne Komets" label="Fort Wayne Komets"/>
<link wikidata="Q182010" start="36282" end="36286" title="ECHL" label="ECHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472306" start="36295" end="36313" title="Fort Wayne TinCaps" label="Fort Wayne TinCaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135495" start="36321" end="36335" title="High-A Central" label="High-A Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q96378224" start="36375" end="36388" title="Fort Wayne FC" label="Fort Wayne FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q976491" start="36443" end="36447" title="USL League Two" label="USL2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472279" start="36457" end="36479" title="Fort Wayne Derby Girls" label="Fort Wayne Derby Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154345" start="36487" end="36539" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Flat Track Derby Association Division 2" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Flat Track Derby Association Division 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144284" start="36593" end="36627" title="Allen County War Memorial Coliseum" label="Allen County War Memorial Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138759" start="36632" end="36646" title="Parkview Field" label="Parkview Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369650" start="36681" end="36700" title="professional sports" label="professional sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="36727" end="36758" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q169661" start="36766" end="36784" title="Fort Wayne Pistons" label="Fort Wayne Pistons"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="36801" end="36808" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472277" start="36823" end="36841" title="Fort Wayne Daisies" label="Fort Wayne Daisies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052634" start="36849" end="36896" title="All-American Girls Professional Baseball League" label="All-American Girls Professional Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558019" start="36906" end="36926" title="Fort Wayne Kekiongas" label="Fort Wayne Kekiongas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966945" start="36934" end="36988" title="National Association of Professional Base Ball Players" label="National Association of Professional Base Ball Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="37003" end="37024" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973014" start="37075" end="37102" title="Purdue Fort Wayne Mastodons" label="Purdue Fort Wayne Mastodons"/>
<link wikidata="Q55456518" start="37117" end="37145" title="Purdue University Fort Wayne" label="Purdue University Fort Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="37159" end="37163" title="NCAA" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842604" start="37171" end="37181" title="NCAA Division I" label="Division I"/>
<link wikidata="Q945871" start="37182" end="37196" title="Horizon League" label="Horizon League"/>
<link wikidata="Q927765" start="37202" end="37206" title="National Association of Intercollegiate Athletics" label="NAIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q14688450" start="37215" end="37227" title="Indiana Tech" label="Indiana Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030555" start="37229" end="37266" title="Wolverine–Hoosier Athletic Conference" label="Wolverine–Hoosier Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401246" start="37272" end="37299" title="Saint Francis Cougars" label="University of Saint Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188837" start="37301" end="37318" title="Crossroads League" label="Crossroads League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840817" start="37323" end="37354" title="Mid-States Football Association" label="Mid-States Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37502" end="37507" title="#Higher education" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="37923" end="37926" title="National Basketball Association" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039889" start="37951" end="37963" title="Carl Bennett" label="Carl Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q810343" start="37991" end="37994" title="Basketball Association of America" label="BAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429493" start="38003" end="38006" title="National Basketball League (United States)" label="NBL"/>
<link wikidata="Q182455" start="38066" end="38082" title="Wilt Chamberlain" label="Wilt Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266247" start="38400" end="38421" title="Johnny Appleseed Park" label="Johnny Appleseed Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q369675" start="38448" end="38460" title="Johnny Appleseed" label="John Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800758" start="38476" end="38490" title="McCulloch Park" label="McCulloch Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217998" start="38500" end="38513" title="Samuel Bigger" label="Samuel Bigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q121494107" start="38537" end="38550" title="Old Fort Park" label="Old Fort Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q527175" start="38632" end="38636" title="Fort Wayne (fort)" label="fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464017" start="38687" end="38729" title="Foellinger-Freimann Botanical Conservatory" label="Foellinger-Freimann Botanical Conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q13632030" start="38805" end="38831" title="Henry Ware Lawton" label="Major-General Henry Lawton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472274" start="38982" end="39012" title="Fort Wayne Children&amp;#x27;s Zoo" label="Fort Wayne Children&amp;#x27;s Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472303" start="39124" end="39137" title="Fort Wayne Rivergreenway" label="Rivergreenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810722" start="39265" end="39290" title="National Recreation Trail" label="National Recreation Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q53121" start="39497" end="39504" title="cycling" label="cycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378400" start="39597" end="39609" title="bicycle lane" label="bicycle lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508988" start="39762" end="39791" title="League of American Bicyclists" label="League of American Bicyclists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192937" start="39820" end="39827" title="Grabill, Indiana" label="Grabill"/>
<link wikidata="Q61065" start="39894" end="39905" title="watersports" label="watersports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713780" start="40017" end="40032" title="St. Marys River (Indiana and Ohio)" label="St. Marys River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770573" start="40182" end="40203" title="Trust for Public Land" label="Trust for Public Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308596" start="40318" end="40342" title="mayor–council government" label="mayor–council government"/>
<link wikidata="Q109297374" start="40415" end="40430" title="Citizens Square" label="Citizens Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="40504" end="40515" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q493443" start="40519" end="40531" title="Allen County, Indiana" label="Allen County"/>
<link wikidata="Q127513848" start="40675" end="40688" title="Sharon Tucker" label="Sharon Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="40692" end="40700" title="United States Democratic Party" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816167" start="40761" end="40770" title="Tom Henry" label="Tom Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q85761731" start="40968" end="40991" title="Fort Wayne City Council" label="Fort Wayne City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634937" start="41173" end="41197" title="Indiana General Assembly" label="Indiana General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408760" start="41207" end="41223" title="Indiana State Senate" label="Senate Districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392642" start="41234" end="41249" title="Indiana House of Representatives" label="House Districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258613" start="41292" end="41304" title="Dennis Kruse" label="Dennis Kruse"/>
<link wikidata="Q20676113" start="41322" end="41331" title="Liz Brown (politician)" label="Liz Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232032" start="41344" end="41354" title="David C. Long" label="David Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q27861828" start="41387" end="41398" title="Dan Leonard" label="Dan Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181913" start="41435" end="41449" title="Phil GiaQuinta" label="Phil GiaQuinta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022946" start="41582" end="41623" title="Indiana&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district" label="Indiana&amp;#x27;s 3rd congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="41640" end="41650" title="United States Republican Party" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146788" start="41651" end="41660" title="Jim Banks" label="Jim Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885171" start="41704" end="41710" title="Unigov" label="Unigov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301053" start="41773" end="41785" title="Consolidated city-county" label="consolidated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668227" start="42029" end="42044" title="Aboite Township, Allen County, Indiana" label="Aboite Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995845" start="42069" end="42083" title="Wayne Township, Allen County, Indiana" label="Wayne Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322130" start="42338" end="42388" title="E. Ross Adair Federal Building and U.S. Courthouse" label="E. Ross Adair Federal Building and U.S. Courthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889824" start="42400" end="42465" title="United States District Court for the Northern District of Indiana" label="United States District Court for the Northern District of Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="42491" end="42499" title="Congress of the United States" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="43283" end="43287" title="American Civil Liberties Union" label="ACLU"/>
<link wikidata="Q55584763" start="43491" end="43510" title="Damon R. Leichty" label="Judge Damon Leichty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889824" start="43518" end="43583" title="United States District Court for the Northern District of Indiana" label="United States District Court for the Northern District of Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q270938" start="43643" end="43656" title="Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="8th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="43661" end="43675" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="14th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q110899587" start="44460" end="44486" title="Fort Wayne Fire Department" label="Fort Wayne Fire Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151386" start="44665" end="44669" title="K–12" label="K–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472276" start="44722" end="44750" title="Fort Wayne Community Schools" label="Fort Wayne Community Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="44914" end="44931" title="elementary school" label="elementary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q149566" start="44938" end="44951" title="middle school" label="middle school"/>
<link wikidata="Q105038092" start="44963" end="44974" title="High school (North America)" label="high school"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327686" start="45048" end="45073" title="East Allen County Schools" label="East Allen County Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059933" start="45136" end="45166" title="Northwest Allen County Schools" label="Northwest Allen County Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571212" start="45283" end="45313" title="Southwest Allen County Schools" label="Southwest Allen County Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023160" start="45495" end="45522" title="Indiana District (LCMS)" label="Lutheran Schools of Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q868925" start="45531" end="45578" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Fort Wayne–South Bend" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Fort Wayne–South Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819632" start="45732" end="45747" title="satellite campus" label="regional campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075106" start="45795" end="45818" title="state university system" label="state university system"/>
<link wikidata="Q55593285" start="45821" end="45850" title="Indiana University Fort Wayne" label="Indiana University Fort Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q55456518" start="45871" end="45899" title="Purdue University Fort Wayne" label="Purdue University Fort Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023669" start="45991" end="46038" title="Indiana University–Purdue University Fort Wayne" label="Indiana University–Purdue University Fort Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123017" start="46231" end="46268" title="Indiana University School of Medicine" label="Indiana University School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336920" start="46344" end="46361" title="community college" label="community college"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099951" start="46370" end="46378" title="Ivy Tech Community College of Indiana" label="Ivy Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="46456" end="46476" title="private universities" label="private universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800537" start="46502" end="46532" title="Concordia Theological Seminary" label="Concordia Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q233324" start="46538" end="46546" title="seminary" label="seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q693844" start="46567" end="46597" title="Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod" label="Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q14688450" start="46679" end="46691" title="Indiana Institute of Technology" label="Indiana Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450258" start="46775" end="46820" title="Sisters of St. Francis of Perpetual Adoration" label="Sisters of St. Francis of Perpetual Adoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276602" start="46837" end="46864" title="University of Saint Francis (Indiana)" label="University of Saint Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="46887" end="46895" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258657" start="47075" end="47102" title="College of Biblical Studies" label="College of Biblical Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5945524" start="47104" end="47125" title="Huntington University (United States)" label="Huntington University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023698" start="47127" end="47154" title="Indiana Wesleyan University" label="Indiana Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747552" start="47156" end="47177" title="Manchester University (Indiana)" label="Manchester University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842344" start="47183" end="47199" title="Trine University" label="Trine University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731600" start="47287" end="47314" title="Allen County Public Library" label="Allen County Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946611" start="47927" end="47934" title="WANE-TV" label="WANE-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954494" start="47942" end="47949" title="WPTA-TV" label="WPTA-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950902" start="47961" end="47968" title="WISE-TV" label="WISE-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949273" start="47975" end="47982" title="WFFT-TV" label="WFFT-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949576" start="47994" end="48001" title="WFWA-TV" label="WFWA-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="48034" end="48037" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950792" start="48085" end="48089" title="WINM" label="WINM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731600" start="48198" end="48225" title="Allen County Public Library" label="Allen County Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="48231" end="48252" title="National Public Radio" label="National Public Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947341" start="48283" end="48287" title="WBOI" label="WBOI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743551" start="48441" end="48456" title="The Journal Gazette" label="Journal Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="48467" end="48481" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753898" start="48496" end="48509" title="The News-Sentinel" label="News-Sentinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7019734" start="48582" end="48607" title="joint operating agreement" label="joint operating agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753898" start="48701" end="48714" title="The News-Sentinel" label="News-Sentinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736543" start="48842" end="48863" title="alternative newspaper" label="alternative newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q128476331" start="48881" end="48902" title="Fort Wayne Free Press" label="Fort Wayne Free Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472295" start="49086" end="49118" title="Fort Wayne International Airport" label="Fort Wayne International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548245" start="49384" end="49402" title="122nd Fighter Wing" label="122nd Fighter Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472273" start="49410" end="49447" title="Fort Wayne Air National Guard Station" label="Fort Wayne Air National Guard Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545148" start="49449" end="49460" title="Smith Field (Indiana)" label="Smith Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571929" start="49508" end="49524" title="general aviation" label="general aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q788707" start="49573" end="49586" title="Interstate 69 in Indiana" label="Interstate 69"/>
<link wikidata="Q788826" start="49622" end="49636" title="Interstate 469" label="Interstate 469"/>
<link wikidata="Q771093" start="49648" end="49661" title="Indiana State Road 37" label="State Road 37"/>
<link wikidata="Q490385" start="49681" end="49692" title="Bloomington, Indiana" label="Bloomington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077102" start="49697" end="49709" title="Martinsville, Indiana" label="Martinsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="49775" end="49787" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q486459" start="49816" end="49826" title="Evansville, Indiana" label="Evansville"/>
<link wikidata="Q119515" start="49859" end="49886" title="Canada–United States border" label="Canada–United States border"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000222" start="49890" end="49910" title="Port Huron, Michigan" label="Port Huron, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q94624" start="49933" end="49937" title="Interstate 69" label="I-69"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="49957" end="49973" title="Mexico–United States border" label="US–Mexico border"/>
<link wikidata="Q16868" start="50008" end="50014" title="Laredo, Texas" label="Laredo"/>
<link wikidata="Q982364" start="50016" end="50021" title="Pharr, Texas" label="Pharr"/>
<link wikidata="Q51693" start="50027" end="50038" title="Brownsville, Texas" label="Brownsville"/>
<link wikidata="Q408192" start="50045" end="50056" title="United States Numbered Highways" label="U.S. Routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q770727" start="50084" end="50089" title="U.S. Route 24 in Indiana" label="US 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q770783" start="50091" end="50096" title="U.S. Route 27 in Indiana" label="US 27"/>
<link wikidata="Q770836" start="50098" end="50103" title="U.S. Route 30 in Indiana" label="US 30"/>
<link wikidata="Q770903" start="50109" end="50114" title="U.S. Route 33 in Indiana" label="US 33"/>
<link wikidata="Q760011" start="50122" end="50141" title="Indiana State Roads" label="Indiana State Roads"/>
<link wikidata="Q759991" start="50175" end="50187" title="Indiana State Road 1" label="State Road 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q760038" start="50189" end="50201" title="Indiana State Road 3" label="State Road 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q770248" start="50203" end="50216" title="Indiana State Road 14" label="State Road 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q771093" start="50218" end="50231" title="Indiana State Road 37" label="State Road 37"/>
<link wikidata="Q789012" start="50237" end="50251" title="Indiana State Road 930" label="State Road 930"/>
<link wikidata="Q788504" start="50253" end="50271" title="Airport Expressway (Fort Wayne)" label="Airport Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="50539" end="50546" title="Controlled-access highway" label="freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q756629" start="51381" end="51396" title="Capitol Limited (Amtrak train)" label="Capitol Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q608268" start="51482" end="51500" title="Lake Shore Limited" label="Lake Shore Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q301299" start="51658" end="51674" title="Waterloo (Amtrak station)" label="Waterloo Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q14688733" start="51787" end="51807" title="Pennsylvania Railroad Station (Fort Wayne, Indiana)" label="Pennsylvania Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197895" start="51824" end="51845" title="Pennsylvania Railroad" label="Pennsylvania Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058135" start="51877" end="51891" title="Northern Arrow" label="Northern Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321166" start="51983" end="52028" title="Chicago, Indianapolis, and Louisville Railway" label="Chicago, Indianapolis, and Louisville Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124796" start="52066" end="52081" title="Wabash Railroad" label="Wabash Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q61744703" start="52111" end="52129" title="Wabash Cannon Ball (train)" label="Wabash Cannon Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q211382" start="52234" end="52249" title="high-speed rail" label="high-speed rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q755009" start="52270" end="52287" title="feasibility study" label="feasibility study"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428122" start="52532" end="52548" title="class I railroad" label="class I railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321054" start="52550" end="52566" title="Norfolk Southern" label="Norfolk Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428122" start="52576" end="52594" title="class III railroad" label="class III railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727905" start="52721" end="52738" title="truckload shipping" label="truckload shipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472275" start="52752" end="52760" title="Fort Wayne Citilink" label="Citilink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740966" start="52798" end="52815" title="public transport bus service" label="public bus system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564783" start="52827" end="52838" title="paratransit" label="paratransit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099951" start="53055" end="53063" title="Ivy Tech Community College of Indiana" label="Ivy Tech"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023669" start="53100" end="53104" title="Indiana University–Purdue University Fort Wayne" label="IPFW"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138767" start="53265" end="53280" title="Parkview Health" label="Parkview Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q755309" start="53469" end="53484" title="Greyhound Lines" label="Greyhound Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137600" start="53519" end="53534" title="Lakefront Lines" label="Lakefront Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358919" start="53601" end="53613" title="bike-sharing" label="bike-sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138767" start="53801" end="53816" title="Parkview Health" label="Parkview Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705697" start="53821" end="53844" title="Lutheran Health Network" label="Lutheran Health Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5316042" start="53872" end="53887" title="Dupont Hospital" label="Dupont Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705724" start="53889" end="53917" title="Lutheran Hospital of Indiana" label="Lutheran Hospital of Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023587" start="54251" end="54276" title="Indiana University Health" label="Indiana University Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q592576" start="54447" end="54477" title="United States Department of Veterans Affairs" label="Department of Veterans Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138574" start="54621" end="54637" title="St. Joseph River (Maumee River)" label="St. Joseph River"/>
<link wikidata="Q25001278" start="54877" end="54894" title="GFL Environmental" label="GFL Environmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q464092" start="54963" end="54986" title="American Electric Power" label="American Electric Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984481" start="55087" end="55095" title="NiSource" label="NiSource"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193193" start="55101" end="55115" title="tier 1 network" label="tier 1 network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639784" start="55297" end="55324" title="Sister Cities International" label="Sister Cities International"/>
<link wikidata="Q502988" start="55329" end="55336" title="Takaoka, Toyama" label="Takaoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q132929" start="55338" end="55344" title="Toyama Prefecture" label="Toyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q104725" start="55361" end="55366" title="Płock" label="Płock"/>
<link wikidata="Q54169" start="55368" end="55376" title="Masovian Voivodeship" label="Masovian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750" start="55394" end="55398" title="Gera" label="Gera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205" start="55400" end="55409" title="Thuringia" label="Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58273" start="55428" end="55435" title="Taizhou, Zhejiang" label="Taizhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967" start="55437" end="55445" title="Zhejiang" label="Zhejiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q685941" start="55479" end="55489" title="Mawlamyine" label="Mawlamyine"/>
<link wikidata="Q818742" start="55491" end="55500" title="Mon State" label="Mon State"/>
<link wikidata="Q527175" start="55541" end="55558" title="Fort Wayne (fort)" label="Fort Wayne (fort)"/>
<link wikidata="Q126721351" start="55561" end="55584" title="Anthony Wayne Institute" label="Anthony Wayne Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194816" start="55587" end="55595" title="Kekionga" label="Kekionga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077945" start="55598" end="55608" title="Fort Miami (Indiana)" label="Fort Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635595" start="55611" end="55652" title="List of public art in Fort Wayne, Indiana" label="List of public art in Fort Wayne, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058433" start="55655" end="55671" title="Northern Indiana" label="Northern Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q15178350" start="55674" end="55693" title="Siege of Fort Wayne" label="Siege of Fort Wayne"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11236" wikidata="Q5436447" url="?curid=11236" title="Fart (word)">
<text>Fart is a word in the English language most commonly used in reference to flatulence that can be used as a noun or a verb. The immediate roots are in the Middle English words &quot;ferten&quot;, &quot;feortan&quot; and &quot;farten&quot;, kin of the Old High German word &quot;ferzan&quot;. Cognates are found in Old Norse, Slavic and also Greek and Sanskrit. The word &quot;fart&quot; has been incorporated into the colloquial and technical speech of a number of occupations, including computing. It is often considered unsuitable in formal situations as it may be considered vulgar or offensive.

==Etymology==
The English word &quot;fart&quot; is one of the oldest words in the English lexicon. Its Indo-European origins are confirmed by the many cognate words in some other Indo-European languages: It is cognate with Greek verb πέρδομαι (perdomai), as well as the Latin &quot;pēdĕre&quot;, Sanskrit &quot;pardate&quot;, Ashkun &quot;pidiṅ&quot;, Avestan , Italian , French &quot;péter&quot;, Russian пердеть (perdet&#x27;) and Polish &quot;&quot; « PIE * [break wind loudly] or * [the same, softly], all of which mean the same thing. Like most Indo-European roots in the Germanic languages, it was altered under Grimm&#x27;s law, so that Indo-European &quot;/p/&quot; &gt; &quot;/f/&quot;, and &quot;/d/&quot; &gt; &quot;/t/&quot;, as the German cognate &quot;furzen&quot; also manifests.

==Vulgarity and offensiveness==

In certain circles the word is considered merely a common profanity with an often humorous connotation. For example, a person may be referred to as a &#x27;fart&#x27;, or an &#x27;old fart&#x27;, not necessarily depending on the person&#x27;s age. This may convey the sense that a person is boring or unduly fussy and be intended as an insult, mainly when used in the second or third person. For example, &#x27;&quot;he&#x27;s a boring old fart!&quot; However the word may be used as a colloquial term of endearment or in an attempt at humorous self-deprecation (e.g., in such phrases as &quot;I know I&#x27;m just an old fart&quot; or &quot;you do like to fart about!&quot;). &#x27;Fart&#x27; is often only used as a term of endearment when the subject is personally well known to the user.

In both cases though, it tends to refer to personal habits or traits that the user considers to be a negative feature of the subject, even when it is a self-reference. For example, when concerned that a person is being overly methodical they might say &#x27;I know I&#x27;m being an old fart&#x27;, potentially to forestall negative thoughts and opinions in others. When used in an attempt to be offensive, the word is still considered vulgar, but it remains a mild example of such an insult. This usage dates back to the Medieval period, where the phrase &#x27;not worth a fart&#x27; would be applied to an item held to be worthless.

===Historical examples===

The word &quot;fart&quot; in Middle English occurs in &quot;Sumer Is Icumen In&quot;, where one sign of summer is &quot;bucke uerteþ&quot; (the buck farts). It appears in several of Geoffrey Chaucer&#x27;s &quot;Canterbury Tales&quot;. In &quot;The Miller&#x27;s Tale&quot;, Absolon has already been tricked into kissing Alison&#x27;s buttocks when he is expecting to kiss her face. Her boyfriend Nicholas hangs his buttocks out of a window, hoping to trick Absolon into kissing his buttocks in turn and then farts in the face of his rival. In &quot;The Summoner&#x27;s Tale&quot;, the friars in the story are to receive the smell of a fart through a twelve-spoked wheel.

In the early modern period, the word &quot;fart&quot; was not considered especially vulgar; it even surfaced in literary works. For example, Samuel Johnson&#x27;s &quot;A Dictionary of the English Language&quot;, published in 1755, included the word. Johnson defined it with two poems, one by Jonathan Swift, the other by Sir John Suckling.

Benjamin Franklin prepared an essay on the topic for the Royal Academy of Brussels in 1781 urging scientific study. In 1607, a group of Members of Parliament had written a ribald poem entitled &quot;The Parliament Fart&quot;, as a symbolic protest against the conservatism of the House of Lords and the king, James I.

===Modern usage===
While not one of George Carlin&#x27;s original seven dirty words, he noted in a later routine that the word &quot;fart&quot; ought to be added to &quot;the list&quot; of words that were not acceptable (for broadcast) in any context (which have non-offensive meanings), and described television as (then) a &quot;fart-free zone&quot;. Thomas Wolfe had the phrase &quot;a fizzing and sulphuric fart&quot; cut out of his 1929 work &quot;Look Homeward, Angel&quot; by his publisher. Ernest Hemingway, who had the same publisher, accepted the principle that &quot;fart&quot; could be cut, on the grounds that words should not be used purely to shock. The hippie movement in the 1970s saw a new definition develop, with the use of &quot;fart&quot; as a personal noun, to describe a &quot;detestable person, or someone of small stature or limited mental capacity&quot;, gaining wider and more open usage as a result.

Rhyming slang developed the alternative form &quot;raspberry tart&quot;, later shortened to &quot;raspberry&quot;, and occasionally abbreviated further to &quot;razz&quot;. This was associated with the phrase &quot;blowing a raspberry&quot;. The word has become more prevalent, and now features in children&#x27;s literature, such as the &quot;Walter the Farting Dog&quot; series of children&#x27;s books, Robert Munsch&#x27;s &quot;Good Families Don&#x27;t&quot; and &quot;The Gas We Pass&quot; by Shinta Cho.

==See also==
* Flatulence humor
* Le Pétomane
* Queef

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==

*Dictionary of Fart Slang</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5436447" start="0" end="4" title="Fart (word)" label="Fart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="22" end="38" title="English language" label="English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q160184" start="74" end="84" title="flatulence" label="flatulence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="107" end="111" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="117" end="121" title="verb" label="verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="313" end="322" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q901711" start="417" end="427" title="colloquialism" label="colloquial"/>
<link wikidata="Q17951" start="432" end="448" title="jargon" label="technical speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="702" end="715" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="750" end="757" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="778" end="801" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="822" end="827" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="869" end="874" title="Latin obscenity#Pēdere" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="895" end="903" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q29379" start="925" end="931" title="Askunu language" label="Ashkun"/>
<link wikidata="Q29572" start="951" end="958" title="Avestan language" label="Avestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="961" end="968" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="971" end="977" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="997" end="1004" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="1032" end="1038" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="1054" end="1057" title="PIE" label="PIE"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="1176" end="1194" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q193329" start="1217" end="1233" title="Grimm&amp;#x27;s law" label="Grimm&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="1344" end="1350" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q184439" start="1486" end="1495" title="profanity" label="profanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q35874" start="1510" end="1515" title="humor" label="humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q661062" start="1519" end="1530" title="connotation" label="connotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124198" start="1933" end="1943" title="endearment" label="endearment"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="2913" end="2927" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190737" start="2944" end="2962" title="Sumer Is Icumen In" label="Sumer Is Icumen In"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="3028" end="3032" title="deer" label="buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="3066" end="3082" title="Geoffrey Chaucer" label="Geoffrey Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191663" start="3096" end="3112" title="Canterbury Tales" label="Canterbury Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2611119" start="3129" end="3151" title="The Miller&amp;#x27;s Tale" label="The Miller&amp;#x27;s Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q42165" start="3300" end="3308" title="buttocks" label="buttocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767297" start="3434" end="3458" title="The Summoner&amp;#x27;s Tale" label="The Summoner&amp;#x27;s Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="3698" end="3712" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210346" start="3726" end="3762" title="A Dictionary of the English Language" label="A Dictionary of the English Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q41166" start="3850" end="3864" title="Jonathan Swift" label="Jonathan Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339246" start="3879" end="3896" title="John Suckling (poet)" label="Sir John Suckling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436451" start="3926" end="3947" title="Fart Proudly" label="an essay on the topic"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="4035" end="4056" title="Members of Parliament" label="Members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="4179" end="4193" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="4208" end="4215" title="James I of England" label="James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q150651" start="4254" end="4267" title="George Carlin" label="George Carlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353155" start="4284" end="4301" title="seven dirty words" label="seven dirty words"/>
<link wikidata="Q314256" start="4571" end="4583" title="Thomas Wolfe" label="Thomas Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675006" start="4671" end="4691" title="Look Homeward, Angel" label="Look Homeward, Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="4716" end="4732" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q339747" start="4887" end="4893" title="hippie" label="hippie"/>
<link wikidata="Q429083" start="5148" end="5161" title="Rhyming slang" label="Rhyming slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130485" start="5363" end="5382" title="blowing a raspberry" label="blowing a raspberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966551" start="5492" end="5514" title="Walter the Farting Dog" label="Walter the Farting Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4280820" start="5554" end="5567" title="Robert Munsch" label="Robert Munsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735891" start="5622" end="5637" title="The Gas We Pass" label="The Gas We Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457998" start="5675" end="5691" title="Flatulence humor" label="Flatulence humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q318582" start="5694" end="5705" title="Le Pétomane" label="Le Pétomane"/>
<link wikidata="Q558165" start="5708" end="5713" title="Queef" label="Queef"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11237" wikidata="Q11151" url="?curid=11237" title="FA Cup">
<text>The Football Association Challenge Cup, more commonly known as the FA Cup, is an annual knockout football competition in domestic English football. First played during the 1871–72 season, it is the oldest national football competition in the world. It is organised by and named after the Football Association (The FA). A concurrent Women&#x27;s FA Cup has been held since 1970.

The competition is open to all eligible clubs down to level 9 of the English football league system, with level 10 clubs acting as stand-ins in the event of non-entries from above. A record 763 clubs competed in 2011–12. The tournament consists of 12 randomly drawn rounds followed by the semi-finals and the final. Entrants are not seeded, although a system of byes based on league level ensures higher ranked teams enter in later rounds – the minimum number of games needed to win, depending on which round a team enters the competition, ranges from six to fourteen.

The first six rounds are the Qualifying Competition, and are contested by clubs in the National League System, levels 5 to 10 of the English football system, more commonly called &quot;non-League&quot;. 32 of these teams progress to the first round of the Competition Proper, meeting the first of the 48 professional teams from Leagues One and Two. The last entrants are the 20 Premier League and 24 Championship clubs, into the draw for the third round proper. In the modern era, only one non-League team has ever reached the quarter-finals, and teams below Level 2 have never reached the final. As a result, significant focus is given to the smaller teams who progress furthest, especially if they achieve an unlikely &quot;giant-killing&quot; victory.

Winners receive the FA Cup trophy, of which there have been two designs and five actual cups; the latest is a 2014 replica of the second design, introduced in 1911. Winners also qualify for the UEFA Europa League and a place in the upcoming FA Community Shield. Arsenal are the most successful club with fourteen titles, most recently in 2020, and their former manager Arsène Wenger is the competition&#x27;s most successful, having won seven finals with the team. Manchester United are the current holders, having defeated local rivals Manchester City 2–1 in the 2024 final.

==History==
In 1863, the newly founded Football Association (the FA) published the Laws of the Game of Association Football, unifying the various different rules in use before then. On 20 July 1871, in the offices of &quot;The Sportsman&quot; newspaper, the FA Secretary C. W. Alcock proposed to the FA committee that &quot;it is desirable that a Challenge Cup should be established in connection with the Association for which all clubs belonging to the Association should be invited to compete&quot;. The inaugural FA Cup tournament kicked off in November 1871. After thirteen games in all, Wanderers were crowned the winners in the final, on 16 March 1872. Wanderers retained the trophy the following year. The modern cup was beginning to be established by the 1888–89 season, when qualifying rounds were introduced.

Following the 1914–15 edition, the competition was suspended in mid air due to the First World War, and did not resume until 1919–20. The 1923 FA Cup Final, commonly known as the &quot;White Horse Final&quot;, was the first final to be played in the newly opened Wembley Stadium (known at the time as the Empire Stadium). The 1927 final saw &quot;Abide with Me&quot; being sung for the first time at the Cup final, which has become a pre-match tradition. Due to the outbreak of World War II, the competition was not played between the 1938–39 and 1945–46 editions. Due to the wartime breaks, the competition did not celebrate its centenary year until 1980–81.

After some confusion over the rules in its first competition, the FA decided that any drawn match would lead to a replay, with teams competing in further replays until a game was eventually won. Alvechurch and Oxford City contested the most replayed tie in the 1971–72 qualification, in a tie which went to 6 matches. Multiple replays were scrapped for the competition proper in 1991–92, and the qualifying rounds in 1997–98. Replays were removed altogether from the semi-final and final matches in 2000, from the quarter-finals in 2016–17, the fifth round in 2019–20 and the first round onwards from 2024 to 2025.

Redevelopment of Wembley saw the final played outside of England for the first time, the 2001–2006 finals being played at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff. The final returned to Wembley in 2007, followed by the semi-finals from 2008.

==Eligibility==

An application window is open to clubs before entry lists, round byes and scheduling are announced in July. All clubs in the top four levels (the Premier League and the three divisions of the English Football League) are automatically eligible. Clubs from Level 5–9 (non-league football) are also eligible provided they play in either the FA Trophy or FA Vase competitions in the current season. All participating clubs must also have a stadium suitable for the competition and The Association may reject applications at its discretion.

Previously, Level 10 clubs were a prominent feature in early qualifying rounds. The gradual remodelling of the National League System to a &#x27;perfect&#x27; 1–2–4–8–16 system, with a first phase in 2018–19, a final phase in 2021–22 (which included the promotion of 107 clubs), and played to a full quota in 2022–23 has resulted in a larger number of teams playing in Level 7–9. Consequently, for the FA Cup, entries equal the number in tiers 1–9 and is cut off to those below. Though still able to apply, Level 10 clubs are used as alternatives &quot;subject to availability&quot; in the event of a non/rejected applicant (with vacancies filled by Level 10 applicants with the best PPG in the previous league season).

The total number of entries in the FA Cup has changed as Non-League football has gradually been expanded and reorganised over time. In the 2004–05 season, 660 clubs entered the competition, beating the long-standing record of 656 from the 1921–22 season. In 2005–06 this increased to 674 entrants, in 2006–07 to 687, in 2007–08 to 731 clubs, in 2008–09 and 2009–10 to 762.&lt;ref name=&quot;record number of entries for 2008/9&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The total number of entries has also varied naturally from year-to-year as new clubs form and others dissolve at unequal rates. Though most leagues in the National League System maintain the same number of teams via reprieves, inevitably entry-level divisions (typically at tier 10) have to be impacted when a club leaves the pyramid. Therefore, for example, 759 teams entered in 2010–11, a record 763 in 2011–12, 758 in 2012–13, 737 in 2013–14 and 736 in 2014–15. However, since 2021–22, The FA has cut off automatic eligibility to the 10th tier (to appear only subject to availability) and instead set the size of the draw to match the more stable number of teams in Level 1–9. This means that the competition may now see a standardised number of entries from one year to the next. This number is currently 732 but could rise to 748 for 2023–24 with plans for a new SWPL 9th tier division to share the South West with the existing Western League.

It is very rare for top clubs to miss the competition, although it can happen in exceptional circumstances. Manchester United did not defend their title in 1999–2000, as they were already in the inaugural Club World Championship. The club stated that entering both tournaments would overload their fixture schedule and make it more difficult to defend their Champions League and Premier League titles. The club claimed that they did not want to devalue the FA Cup by fielding a weaker side. The move benefited United as they received a two-week break and won the 1999–2000 league title by an 18-point margin, although they did not progress past the group stage of the Club World Championship. The withdrawal from the FA Cup, however, drew considerable criticism as this weakened the tournament&#x27;s prestige and Sir Alex Ferguson later admitted his regret regarding their handling of the situation.

Welsh sides that play in English leagues are eligible, although since the creation of the League of Wales there are only five clubs remaining: Cardiff City (the only non-English team to win the tournament, in 1927), Swansea City, Newport County, Wrexham, and Merthyr Town. In the early years other teams from Wales, Ireland and Scotland also took part in the competition, with Glasgow side Queen&#x27;s Park losing the final to Blackburn Rovers in 1884 and 1885 before being barred from entering by the Scottish Football Association.

Entries from clubs affiliated to &quot;offshore&quot; associations are also eligible subject to consideration on an annual basis, with special provisions that may apply. In the 2013–14 season the first Channel Island club entered the competition when Guernsey F.C. competed. The first game played in the Channel Islands – and thus the southernmost FA Cup tie played – took place on 7 August 2021 between Jersey Bulls and Horsham YMCA. A third club, F.C. Isle of Man, was also eligible to play in 2022–23, but in the end all Crown Dependency teams either did not appear on the entry list or later withdrew.

==Competition format==

===Overview===
Beginning in August, the competition proceeds as a knockout tournament throughout, consisting of twelve rounds, a semi-final and then a final, in May. A system of byes ensures clubs above level 9 enter the competition at later stages. There is no seeding, the fixtures in each round being determined by a random draw. Fixtures ending in a tie are replayed once only (from the 2024–25 campaign, prior to the first round proper). The first six rounds are qualifiers, with the draws organised on a regional basis. The next six rounds are the &quot;proper&quot; rounds where all clubs are in one draw.

===Schedule===
All entrants from Level 9 begin the competition in the extra preliminary round, and any Level 10 team filling in for a vacancy. Teams from Level 8 are ranked on their PPG in the previous season, except newly promoted teams automatically ranked towards the bottom and newly relegated teams ranked to the top; teams are then split between entering at either the Extra-Preliminary or preliminary round so as to ensure the right balance of fixtures throughout the competition. From there, clubs from higher levels are added in later rounds, as per the table below.

The months in which rounds are played are traditional, with exact dates subject to each calendar. The number of new entries, winners from previous rounds, and division of Level 8 teams in the two preliminary rounds are based on an entry list of 732 modelled on the English league system as of 2022–23. From 2023 to 2024, the entry list could rise to 746 in line with sixteen additional clubs at Level 9 meaning that the extra preliminary round will have 444 teams with only 50 Level 8 clubs entering at the preliminary round.

The qualifying rounds are regionalised to reduce the travel costs for smaller non-league sides. The first and second proper rounds were also previously split into Northern and Southern sections, but this practice was ended after the 1997–98 competition. 

The final is normally held the Saturday after the Premier League season finishes in May. The only seasons in recent times when this pattern was not followed were: 1999–2000, when most rounds were played a few weeks earlier than normal as an experiment; 2010–11 and 2012–13 when the FA Cup Final was played before the Premier League season had finished, to allow Wembley Stadium to be ready for the UEFA Champions League final, and in 2011–12 to allow England time to prepare for that summer&#x27;s European Championships; 2019–20 when the final was delayed until August due to the COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom, and the 2021-22 when the final was held a week before the end of the league. The 2025 Final is also scheduled to take place the week before the end of the league.

===Draws===
The draws for the Extra Preliminary, Preliminary, and first qualifying rounds used to all occur at the same time. Thereafter, the draw for each subsequent round is not made until after the scheduled dates for the previous round, meaning that in the case of replays, clubs will often know their future opponents in advance.

The draw for each of the proper rounds is broadcast live on television, usually taking place at the conclusion of live coverage of one of the games of the previous round. Public interest is particularly high during the draw for the third round, which is where the top-ranked teams are added to the draw.

===Tiebreaking===
Until 2024-25, rounds up to and including the fourth round proper, fixtures resulting in a draw (after normal time) went to a replay, played at the venue of the away team, at a later date; if that replay was still tied, the winner was settled by a period of extra time, and if still necessary, a penalty shootout. Since 2016–17, ties have been settled on the day from the quarter-finals onwards, using extra time and penalties. From 2018–19, Fifth round ties have also been settled by extra time and penalties. Beginning with the 2024–25 competition, replays have been scrapped from the first round onwards. The decision to scrap replays received criticism from a number of lower-tier clubs and government officials.

Until 1990–91, further replays would be played until one team was victorious. In 1971–72, a fourth qualifying round game between Alvechurch and Oxford City was played six times until Alvechurch won in the fifth replay. In their 1975 campaign, Fulham played 12 games over six rounds, which remains the most games played by a team to reach a final. Replays were traditionally played three or four days after the original game, but from 1991–92 they were staged at least 10 days later on police advice for the rounds proper. This led to penalty shoot-outs being introduced, the first of which came on 26 November 1991 when Rotherham United eliminated Scunthorpe United.

From 1980–81 to 1998–99, the semi-finals went to extra time on the day if the score after 90 minutes was a draw. If the score was still level after extra time, the match would go to a replay. Replays for the semi-finals were scrapped for 1999–2000; the last semi-final to go into a replay was in 1998–99, when Manchester United beat rivals Arsenal 2–1 after extra time, following a 0–0 draw in the original match.

The first FA Cup Final to go to extra time and a replay was the 1875 final, between the Royal Engineers and the Old Etonians. The initial tie finished 1–1 but the Royal Engineers won the replay 2–0 in normal time. The last replayed final was the 1993 FA Cup Final, when Arsenal and Sheffield Wednesday fought a 1–1 draw. The replay saw Arsenal win the FA Cup, 2–1 after extra time.

The last quarter-final to go to a replay was Manchester United vs West Ham United in the 2015–16 FA Cup. The original game at Old Trafford ended in a 1–1 draw, while Manchester United won the replay at the Boleyn Ground, 2–1. It was also the last FA Cup game ever played at the Boleyn Ground.

The last fifth round replay saw Tottenham Hotspur defeat Rochdale 6–1 at Wembley in the 2017–18 FA Cup after the first match at Spotland Stadium ended in a 2–2 draw.

==Qualification for subsequent competitions==

===European football===
The FA Cup winners qualify for the following season&#x27;s UEFA Europa League (formerly named the UEFA Cup); they previously entered the UEFA Cup Winners&#x27; Cup from its launch in 1960 until its final edition in 1998. This European place applies even if the team is relegated or is not in the English top flight. In the past, if the FA Cup winning team also qualified for the following season&#x27;s Champions League or Europa League through their league or European performance, then the losing FA Cup finalists were given the European berth of the League Cup winners and the League Cup winners would be given the league berth instead. FA Cup winners enter the Europa League at the group stage but losing finalists, if they had not qualified for Europe via the league, began earlier, at the play-off or third qualifying round stage. During the Cup Winners&#x27; Cup era, if a team had already qualified for the UEFA Cup, they&#x27;d be promoted to the Cup Winners&#x27; Cup and their initial UEFA Cup berth would be transferred to the next league team. From the 2015–16 UEFA Europa League season, however, UEFA does not allow the runners-up to qualify for the Europa League through the competition. If the winner of the FA Cup has already qualified for a European Competition through their Premier League position, the Europa League berth is then given to the highest placed team in the Premier League who has not yet qualified for a European Competition.

===FA Community Shield===
The FA Cup winners also qualify for the following season&#x27;s single-match FA Community Shield, the traditional season opener played against the previous season&#x27;s Premier League champions (or the Premier League runners-up if the FA Cup winners also won the league – the double).

==Venues==

Fixtures in the 12 rounds of the competition are usually played at the home ground of one of the two teams. The semi-finals and final are played at a neutral venue – the rebuilt Wembley Stadium.

===Competition rounds===
In the matches for the 12 competition rounds, the team who plays at home is decided when the fixtures are drawn – simply the first team drawn out for each fixture. Occasionally games may have to be moved to other grounds due to other events taking place, security reasons or a ground not being suitable to host popular teams. However, since 2003, clubs cannot move grounds to the away side&#x27;s for capacity or financial reasons. If any move has to be made, it has to be to a neutral venue and any additional monies earned by the move goes into the central pot. In the event of a draw, the replay is played at the ground of the team who originally played away from home.

In the days when multiple replays were possible, the second replay (and any further replays) were played at neutral grounds. The clubs involved could alternatively agree to toss for home advantage in the second replay.

===Semi-finals===

The semi-finals have been played exclusively at the rebuilt Wembley Stadium since 2008, one year after it opened and after it had already hosted a final (in 2007). For the first decade of the competition, the Kennington Oval was used as the semi-final venue. In the period between this first decade and the reopening of Wembley, semi-finals were played at high-capacity neutral venues around England; usually the home grounds of teams not involved in that semi-final, chosen to be roughly equidistant between the two teams for fairness of travel. The top three most used venues in this period were Villa Park in Birmingham (55 times), Hillsborough in Sheffield (34 times) and Old Trafford in Manchester (23 times). The original Wembley Stadium was also used seven times for semi-final, between 1991 and 2000 (the last held there), but not always for fixtures featuring London teams. In 2005, both were held at the Millennium Stadium.

In 2003 the FA decided to permanently use the new Wembley for semi-finals to recoup debts in financing the new stadium. This was controversial, with the move seen as both unfair to fans of teams located far from London, and taking some of the prestige away from a Wembley final. In defending the move, the FA has also cited the extra capacity Wembley offers, although the 2013 fixture between Millwall and Wigan Athletic led to the unprecedented step of placing 6,000 tickets on sale to neutral fans after the game failed to sell out. A fan poll by &quot;The Guardian&quot; in 2013 found 86% opposition to Wembley semi-finals.

===Final===

The final has been played at the rebuilt Wembley Stadium since it opened, in 2007. The rebuilding process meant that between 2001 and 2006 they were hosted at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff in Wales. Prior to rebuilding, the final was hosted by the original Wembley Stadium since it opened in 1923 (being originally named the Empire Stadium). One exception to this 78-year series of Empire Stadium finals (including five replays) was the 1970 replay between Leeds United and Chelsea, held at Old Trafford in Manchester.

In the 51 years prior to the Empire Stadium opening, the final (including 8 replays) was held in a variety of locations, predominantly in London, and mainly at the Kennington Oval and then Crystal Palace. It was played 22 times at The Oval (the inaugural competition in 1872, and then all but two times until 1892). After The Oval, Crystal Palace hosted 21 finals from 1895 to 1914, broken up by four replays elsewhere. The other London venues were Stamford Bridge from 1920 to 1922 (the last three finals before the move to Empire Stadium); and the University of Oxford&#x27;s Lillie Bridge in Fulham for the second ever final, in 1873. The other venues used sparingly in this period were all outside of London, as follows:
* Racecourse Ground, Derby (1886)
* Fallowfield Stadium, Manchester (1893)
* Goodison Park, Liverpool (1894)
* Burnden Park, Bolton (1901 replay)
* Goodison Park (1910 replay)
* Old Trafford, Manchester (1911 replay)
* Bramall Lane, Sheffield (1912 replay)
* Old Trafford (1915)

===Artificial turf===
The FA permitted artificial turf (3G) pitches in all rounds of the competition from the 2014–15 edition and beyond. Under the 2015–16 rules, the pitch must be of FIFA One Star quality, or Two Star for ties if they involve one of the 92 professional clubs. This followed approval two years previously for their use in the qualifying rounds only – if a team with a 3G pitch progressed to the competition proper, they had to switch their tie to the ground of another eligible entrant with a natural grass pitch. Having been strong proponents of the surface, the first match in the proper rounds to be played on a 3G surface was a televised first round replay at Maidstone United&#x27;s Gallagher Stadium on 20 November 2014.

==Trophy==

The winners of the competition receive the FA Cup. It is only loaned to the club by the FA; under the current (2015–16) rules it must be returned by 1 March, or earlier if given seven days&#x27; notice. Traditionally, the holders had the Cup until the following year&#x27;s presentation, although more recently the trophy has been taken on publicity tours by the FA in between finals.

The trophy comes in three parts – the cup itself, plus a lid and a base. There have been two designs of trophy in use, but five physical trophies have been presented. The original trophy, known as the &quot;little tin idol&quot;, was 18 inches high and made by Martin, Hall &amp; Co. It was stolen in 1895 and never recovered, and so was replaced by an exact replica, used until 1910. The FA decided to change the design after the 1909 winners, Manchester United, made their own replica, leading the FA to realise they did not own the copyright. This new, larger design was by Fattorini and Sons, and was used from 1911. In order to preserve this original, from 1992 it was replaced by an exact replica, although this had to be replaced after just over two decades, after showing wear and tear from being handled more than in previous eras. This third replica, first used in 2014, was built heavier to withstand the increased handling. Of the four surviving trophies, only the 1895 replica has entered private ownership.
The name of the winning team is engraved on the silver band around the base as soon as the final has finished, in order to be ready in time for the presentation ceremony. This means the engraver has just five minutes to perform a task which would take 20 under normal conditions, although time is saved by engraving the year on during the match, and sketching the presumed winner. During the final, the trophy is decorated with ribbons in the colours of both finalists, with the loser&#x27;s ribbons being removed at the end of the game. The tradition of tying ribbons started after Tottenham Hotspur won the 1901 FA Cup Final and the wife of a Spurs director decided to tie blue and white ribbons to the handles of the cup. Traditionally, at Wembley finals, the presentation is made at the Royal Box, with players, led by the captain, mounting a staircase to a gangway in front of the box and returning by a second staircase on the other side of the box. At Cardiff the presentation was made on a podium on the pitch.
The tradition of presenting the trophy immediately after the game did not start until the 1882 final; after the first final in 1872 the trophy was not presented to the winners, Wanderers, until a reception held four weeks later in the Pall Mall Restaurant in London. Under the original rules, the trophy was to be permanently presented to any club which won the competition three times, although when inaugural winners Wanderers achieved this feat by the 1876 final, the rules were changed by FA Secretary CW Alcock (who was also captain of Wanderers in their first victory).

Portsmouth have the distinction of being the football club which has held the FA Cup trophy for the longest uninterrupted period - seven years. Portsmouth had defeated Wolverhampton Wanderers 4–1 in the 1939 FA Cup Final and were awarded the trophy as 1938–39 FA Cup winners. But with the outbreak of World War II in September 1939, the regular Football League and FA Cup competitions for the 1939–40 season were cancelled for the duration of the war. Portsmouth&#x27;s manager Jack Tinn was rumoured to have kept the FA Cup trophy &#x27;safe under his bed&#x27; throughout the duration of the war, but this is an urban myth. Because the naval city of Portsmouth was a primary strategic military target for German Luftwaffe bombing, the FA Cup trophy was actually taken ten miles to the north of Portsmouth, to the nearby Hampshire village of Lovedean, and there it resided in a quaint thatched roof country pub called &quot;The Bird in Hand&quot; for the seven years of the war. After the conclusion of World War II, the FA Cup trophy was presented back to the Football Association by the club in time for the 1946 FA Cup Final.

===Original design from 1871===

====1871 original====
The first trophy, the &#x27;little tin idol&#x27;, was made by Martin, Hall &amp; Co at a cost of £20. It was stolen from a Birmingham shoe shop window belonging to William Shillcock while held by Aston Villa on 11 September 1895 and was never seen again. Despite a £10 reward for information, the crime was never solved. As it happened while it was in their care, the FA fined Villa £25 to pay for a replacement.

Just over 60 years later, 80 year old career criminal Henry (Harry) James Burge claimed to have committed the theft, confessing to a newspaper, with the story being published in the &quot;Sunday Pictorial&quot; newspaper on 23 February 1958. He claimed to have carried out the robbery with two other men, although when discrepancies with a contemporaneous report in the &quot;Birmingham Post&quot; newspaper (the crime pre-dated written police reports) in his account of the means of entry and other items stolen, detectives decided there was no realistic possibility of a conviction and the case was closed. Burge claimed the cup had been melted down to make counterfeit half-crown coins, which matched known intelligence of the time, in which stolen silver was being used to forge coins which were then laundered through betting shops at a local racecourse, although Burge had no history of forgery in a record of 42 previous convictions for which he had spent 42 years in prison. He had been further imprisoned in 1957 for seven years for theft from cars. Released in 1961, he died in 1964.

====1895 replica====

After the theft, a replica of the trophy was made, which was used until a redesign of the trophy in 1911. The 1895 replica was then presented to the FA&#x27;s long-serving president Lord Kinnaird. Kinnaird died in 1923, and his family kept it in their possession, out of view, until putting it up for auction in 2005. It was sold at Christie&#x27;s auction house on 19 May 2005 for £420,000 (£478,400 including auction fees and taxes). The sale price set a new world record for a piece of football memorabilia, surpassing the £254,000 paid for the Jules Rimet World Cup Trophy in 1997. The successful bidder was David Gold, the then joint chairman of Birmingham City; claiming the FA and government were doing nothing proactive to ensure the trophy remained in the country, Gold stated his purchase was motivated by wanting to save it for the nation. Accordingly, Gold presented the trophy to the National Football Museum in Preston on 20 April 2006, where it went on immediate public display. It later moved with the museum to its new location in Manchester. In November 2012, it was ceremonially presented to Royal Engineers, after they beat Wanderers 7–1 in a charity replay of the first FA Cup final. In September 2020, Gold sold the replica trophy for £760,000 through the Bonhams auction house. In January 2021, it was revealed that the trophy had been purchased by Sheikh Mansour bin Zayed Al Nahyan, the owner of Manchester City, who stated that it would be returned on loan to the National Football Museum.

===Current design from 1911===

====1911 original====

The redesigned trophy first used in 1911 was larger at 61.5 cm (24.2 inches) high, and was designed and manufactured by Fattorini &amp; Sons of Bradford, coincidentally being won by Bradford City in its first outing.

On the 27 March 2016 episode of the BBC television programme &quot;Antiques Roadshow&quot;, this trophy was valued at £1 million by expert Alastair Dickenson, although he suggested that, due to the design featuring depictions of grapes and vines, it may not have been specifically produced for the FA, but was instead an off-the-shelf design originally meant to be a wine or champagne cooler. This was later disproved when Thomas Fattorini was invited to the Antiques Roadshow to &quot;ambush&quot; Alastair Dickenson with the competition winning design by Fattorini &amp; Sons. The show was filmed at Baddesley Clinton and subsequently aired on 23 October 2016.

A smaller but otherwise identical replica was also made by the company Thomas Fattorini for the North Wales Coast FA Cup trophy which is contested annually by members of that regional Association.

====1992 replica====
The 1992 replica was made by Toye, Kenning and Spencer. A copy of this trophy was also produced, in case anything happened to the primary trophy.

====2014 replica====
The 2014 replica was made by Thomas Lyte, handcrafted in sterling 925 silver over 250 hours. A weight increase for greater durability has taken it to .

==Medals==
Each club in the final receives 40 winners or runners-up medals to be distributed among players, staff and officials. The traditional styles of gold-cased medals – the winners&#x27; medal, which had remained largely unchanged since the 1890s, and runners-up medals, which were last updated in 1946 – were replaced for the 2021 final by new designs of gold winners&#x27; medals and silver runners-up medals suspended on a ribbon.

==Sponsorship==
Since the start of the 1994–95 season, the FA Cup has been sponsored. However, to protect the identity of the competition, the sponsored name has always included &#x27;The FA Cup&#x27; in addition to the sponsor&#x27;s name, unlike sponsorship deals for the League Cup where the word &#x27;cup&#x27; is preceded by only the sponsor&#x27;s name. Sponsorship deals run for four years, though – as in the case of E.ON – one-year extensions may be agreed. Emirates Airline has been the sponsor since 2015, initially renaming the competition as &#x27;The Emirates FA Cup&#x27;, unlike previous editions, which included &#x27;The FA Cup in association with E.ON&#x27; and &#x27;The FA Cup with Budweiser&#x27;. The Emirates sponsorship deal, originally scheduled to terminate in 2018, was later extended three times until 2021, 2024, 2028.

From 2006 to 2013, Umbro supplied match balls for all FA Cup matches. They were replaced at the start of the 2013–14 season by Nike, who produced the competition&#x27;s official match ball for five seasons. Mitre took over for the 2018–19 season, beginning a three-year partnership with the FA.

==Records and statistics==
===Final===

====Team====
*Most wins: 14, Arsenal (1930, 1936, 1950, 1971, 1979, 1993, 1998, 2002, 2003, 2005, 2014, 2015, 2017, 2020)
*Most consecutive wins: 3, joint record:
**Wanderers (1876, 1877, 1878)
**Blackburn Rovers (1884, 1885, 1886)
*Most appearances in a final: 22
**Manchester United (1909, 1948, 1957, 1958, 1963, 1976, 1977, 1979, 1983, 1985, 1990, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1999, 2004, 2005, 2007, 2016, 2018, 2023, 2024)
*Most consecutive finals losses: 3
**Chelsea (2020, 2021, 2022)
*Most final appearances without ever winning: 2, joint record: 
**&quot;Queen&#x27;s Park&quot; (1884, 1885)
**Birmingham City (1931, 1956)
**Crystal Palace (1990, 2016)
**Watford (1984, 2019)
*Most final appearances without ever losing: 5, &quot;Wanderers&quot; (1872, 1873, 1876, 1877, 1878)
*Most final appearances without losing (streak): 7, joint record:
**Tottenham Hotspur (1901, 1921, 1961, 1962, 1967, 1981, 1982)
**Arsenal (2002, 2003, 2005, 2014, 2015, 2017, 2020)
* Longest gap between wins: 69 years, Portsmouth (1939–2008)
*Biggest win in a final: 6 goals, joint record: 
**Bury 6–0 Derby County (1903)
**Manchester City 6–0 Watford (2019)
*Most goals in a final: 7:
**Blackburn Rovers 6–1 Sheffield Wednesday (1890)
**Blackpool 4–3 Bolton Wanderers (1953)
*Most goals by a losing side: 3:
**Bolton Wanderers: Lost 3–4 against Blackpool (1953)
**West Ham United: Drew 3–3 but lost in a penalty shootout against Liverpool (2006)
*Most defeats in a final: 9:
**Manchester United (1957, 1958, 1976, 1979, 1995, 2005, 2007, 2018, 2023)

====Individual====
*Most wins by player: 7: Ashley Cole (Arsenal) (2002, 2003, 2005) &amp; (Chelsea) (2007, 2009, 2010, 2012)
*Most wins by manager: 7, Arsène Wenger (Arsenal) (1998, 2002, 2003, 2005, 2014, 2015, 2017)
*Most appearances in a final: 9, Arthur Kinnaird (Wanderers) (1872–73, 1875–76, 1876–77, 1877–78) &amp; (Old Etonians) (1874–75, 1878–79, 1880–81, 1881–82, 1882–83)
*Most goals (one final): 3:
**Billy Townley (Blackburn Rovers) (1890)
**James Logan (Notts County) (1894)
**Stan Mortensen (Blackpool) (1953)
*Most goals (all finals): 5, Ian Rush (Liverpool) (2 in 1986, 2 in 1989, 1 in 1992)
*Most finals scored in: 4, Didier Drogba (Chelsea) (1 each in 2007, 2009, 2010, 2012)
*Youngest FA Cup finalist: Curtis Weston (Millwall), 17 years and 119 days (2004)
*Youngest player to score in an FA Cup final: Norman Whiteside (Manchester United), 18 years and 19 days (1983)
*Oldest player: Billy Hampson (Newcastle United), 41 years and 257 days (1924)

===All rounds===
*Biggest win: Preston North End 26–0 Hyde (First round, 15 October 1887)
*Biggest away win: Clapton 0–14 Nottingham Forest (First round, 17 January 1891)
*Highest attendance at Wembley: 126,047 (official) up to 300,000 (estimate) at the &quot;White Horse Final&quot; (Bolton Wanderers &quot;v.&quot; West Ham United, 28 April 1923)
*Most clubs competing for trophy in a season: 763 (2011–12)
*Longest tie: 660 minutes (6 matches in total), Oxford City &quot;v.&quot; Alvechurch (Fourth qualifying round, 6/9/15/17/20/22 November 1971; Alvechurch won the sixth match 1–0)
*Longest penalty shoot-out: 20 penalties each, Tunbridge Wells &quot;v.&quot; Littlehampton Town (Preliminary round replay, 31 August 2005; Tunbridge Wells won 16–15)
*Most rounds played in a season: 9, for:
**Brighton &amp; Hove Albion (1932–33: 1st–4th qualifying rounds, 1st–5th rounds)
**New Brighton (1956–57: Preliminary, 1st–4th qualifying rounds, 1st–4th rounds)
**Blyth Spartans (1977–78: 1st–4th qualifying rounds, 1st–5th rounds)
**Harlow Town (1979–80: Preliminary, 1st–4th qualifying rounds, 1st–4th rounds)
*Most games played in a season: 13, Bideford (1973–74: one First Qualifying, two Second Qualifying, five Third Qualifying, four Fourth Qualifying and one first round)
*Fastest goal: 4 seconds, Gareth Morris (for Ashton United &quot;v.&quot; Skelmersdale United, 1st qualifying round, 17 September 2001)
*Most consecutive games without defeat: 22, Blackburn Rovers (First round, 1884 through Second round, replay, 1886. Won three FA Cups.) 
*Fastest hat-trick: 2 min 20 sec, Andy Locke (for Nantwich Town &quot;v.&quot; Droylsden, Preliminary round, August 1995)
*Most career goals: 49 Harry Cursham (for Notts County in 12 tournaments from 1877–78 to 1888–89).
*Most goals by a player in a single FA Cup season: 19, Jimmy Ross (for Preston North End, 1887–88.) (Preston outscored opponents 50–5 over 7 matches, including &quot;Biggest win&quot; shown above.)
*Most goals by a player in a single FA Cup game: 9, Ted MacDougall (for AFC Bournemouth in 11–0 defeat of Margate, First round proper, 20 November 1971)
*Most goals without winning: 7, joint record 
**Dulwich Hamlet 8–7 St Albans City (Fourth qualifying round replay, 22 November 1922)
**Dulwich Hamlet 7–7 Wealdstone (Fourth qualifying round, 16 November 1929).
*Youngest player: Andy Awford, 15 years and 88 days (for Worcester City &quot;v.&quot; Boreham Wood, 3rd qualifying round, 10 October 1987).
*Youngest goalscorer: Finn Smith, 16 years and 1 day (for Newport (IOW) F.C. &quot;v.&quot; Fleet Town, Extra preliminary round, 2 August 2022).
*Youngest goalscorer (proper rounds): George Williams, 16 years and 66 days (for Milton Keynes Dons &quot;v.&quot; Nantwich Town, First round proper, 12 November 2011).
* Biggest gap between two teams in an FA Cup match: 161 difference in rank between 8th-tier Marine and Premier League Tottenham Hotspur, Third round proper, 10 January 2021.

==Cup runs and giant killings==
The possibility of unlikely victories in the earlier rounds of the competition, where lower ranked teams beat higher placed opposition in what is known as a &quot;giant killing&quot;, is much anticipated by the public. Such upsets are considered an integral part of the tradition and prestige of the competition, and the attention gained by giant-killing teams can be as great as that for winners of the cup. Almost every club in the League Pyramid has a fondly remembered giant-killing act in its history. It is considered particularly newsworthy when a top Premier League team suffers an upset defeat, or where the giant-killer is a non-league club, i.e. from outside The Football League.

One analysis of four years of FA Cup results showed that it was 99.85 per cent likely that at least one team would beat one from its next higher division in a given year. The probability drops to 48.8 per cent for a two-division gap, and 39.28 per cent for a three-division gap.

===Early years===
The Football League was founded in 1888, 16 years after the first FA Cup competition. Before its establishment as the dominant football competition in England, teams from rival leagues did make the final of the FA Cup. The Wednesday (later Sheffield Wednesday) in 1890 reached the final as a member of the Football Alliance, two years before that competition merged with the Football League. Later, with the Football League predominantly in the North and Midlands of England, leading clubs of the Southern Football League were of a level with Football League teams, and in 1901 Southern League members Tottenham Hotspur became the only non-League side to win the Cup, while fellow Southern League team Southampton were losing finalists in 1900 and 1902. In 1920–21, the Football League expanded to incorporate teams from the Southern League&#x27;s first division, and the following year it added a further division consisting of leading northern and midlands clubs. This consolidated the Football League&#x27;s position as the leading competition in English football, and established the hierarchy in which non-League clubs in the English football league system competing in the FA Cup would face Football League teams as clear underdogs.

===Non-League giant killings===
Since the expansion of the Football League in 1921, the best performance of a team from outside the Football League was National League side Lincoln City&#x27;s run to the quarter-finals of the 2016–17 FA Cup, during which they defeated Championship side Brighton 3–1 in the fourth round and Premier League side Burnley 1–0 in the fifth, before falling to ultimate Cup champions Arsenal 5–0 at the Emirates. Lincoln&#x27;s defeat of Burnley was only the third (and most recent) FA Cup victory for a non-league team over a top-flight side since 1989. Giant-killings can also be applied where the defeated team is from lower down the Football League, particularly where the defeated club is very notable or the winning team particularly obscure. Liverpool, having already won five league titles in their history, were in the Second Division in 1959 when they lost 2–1 to Worcester City of the Southern League.

The best-known non-league giant-killing came in the 1971–72 FA Cup, when non-league Hereford United defeated First Division Newcastle United. Hereford were trailing 1–0 with less than seven minutes left in the Third round proper replay, when Hereford&#x27;s Ronnie Radford scored the equaliser – a goal still shown regularly when FA Cup fixtures are broadcast. Hereford finished the shocking comeback by defeating Newcastle 2–1 in the match. They finished that season as runners-up of the Southern League, behind Chelmsford City, and were voted into the Football League at the expense of Barrow.

Some small clubs gain a reputation for being &quot;cup specialists&quot; after two or more giant killing feats within a few years. Yeovil Town hold the record for the most victories over league opposition as a non-league team, having recorded 20 wins through the years before they achieved promotion into The Football League in 2003. The record for a club which has never entered the Football League is held by Altrincham, with 17 wins against league teams.

===Non-League cup runs===

For non-League teams, reaching the third round proper – where all Level 1 sides now enter – is considered a major achievement. In the 2008–09 FA Cup, a record eight non-League teams achieved this feat. As of the 2023–24 season, only eleven non-League teams have reached the fifth round proper (last 16) since 1925, and only Lincoln City have progressed to the quarter-finals (last 8), during the 2016–17 edition of the tournament.

Chasetown, while playing at Level 8 of English football during the 2007–08 competition, were the lowest-ranked team to ever play in the third round proper (final 64, of 731 teams entered that season). Chasetown was then a member of the Southern League Division One Midlands (a lower level within the Southern Football League), when they lost to Football League Championship (Level 2) team Cardiff City, the eventual FA Cup runners-up that year. Their success earned the lowly organisation over £60,000 in prize money. Marine matched this in the 2020–21 competition as a member of the Northern Premier League Division One North West, and were drawn against Premier League (Level 1) team Tottenham Hotspur, to whom they lost 5–0.

During the 2023–24 season, Maidstone United in the National League South (Level 6) had an 8–game cup run, reaching the fifth round when they won 2–1 away at EFL Championship (Level 2) side Ipswich Town. Their run ended at the fifth round after losing 5–0 away to another EFL Championship side Coventry City. They became the eleventh non–League team to reach the fifth round, and the lowest-ranked team to do so since Blyth Spartans (Level 7) in 1977–78. Maidstone&#x27;s co–owner Oliver Ash stated that their cup run had earned the club &#x27;something like £700,000 before tax&#x27;.

===Giant killings between League clubs===
Giant-killings can apply to matches between league clubs, particularly where teams from tier 4 have defeated tier 1 sides. In games between League sides, one of the most notable results was the 1992 victory by Wrexham, bottom of the previous season&#x27;s League (avoiding relegation due to expansion of The Football League), over reigning champions Arsenal. Another similar shock was when Shrewsbury Town beat Everton 2–1 in 2003. Everton finished seventh in the Premier League and Shrewsbury Town were relegated to the Football Conference that same season.

==Winners and finalists==
===Results by team===
Since its establishment, the FA Cup has been won by 44 clubs. Teams shown in &quot;italics&quot; are no longer in existence. Additionally, Queen&#x27;s Park ceased to be eligible to enter the FA Cup after a Scottish Football Association ruling in 1887.

===Consecutive winners===
Four clubs have won consecutive FA Cups on more than one occasion: Wanderers (1872, 1873 and 1876, 1877, 1878), Blackburn Rovers (1884, 1885, 1886 and 1890, 1891), Tottenham Hotspur (1961, 1962 and 1981, 1982) and Arsenal (2002, 2003 and 2014, 2015).

===Winning managers===

The record for most titles for a manager is held by Arsène Wenger, who won the FA Cup with Arsenal seven times (1998, 2002, 2003, 2005, 2014, 2015, 2017). Wenger is also the only manager to have won the Cup at the old Wembley Stadium, the Millennium Stadium, and the new Wembley Stadium.

===Doubles/Trebles===
Manchester City (2019) are the only club to have achieved a domestic treble of league, FA Cup and League Cup, having beaten Chelsea 4–3 on penalties in the League Cup Final, finished at the top of the Premier League, and beaten Watford 6–0 in the FA Cup Final.

Manchester United (1999) and Manchester City (2023) are the only two English teams to have won the continental treble of league, FA Cup, and Champions League. They are two of only nine European sides to do so. Liverpool won the FA Cup, League Cup and UEFA Cup in (2001) to complete a cup treble.

Eight clubs have won the FA Cup as part of a league and cup double, namely Preston North End (1889), Aston Villa (1897), Tottenham Hotspur (1961), Arsenal (1971, 1998, 2002), Liverpool (1986), Manchester United (1994, 1996, 1999), Chelsea (2010) and Manchester City (2019, 2023). In 1993, Arsenal became the first side to win both the FA Cup and the League Cup in the same season when they beat Sheffield Wednesday in both finals. Liverpool (2001, 2022), Chelsea (2007) and Manchester City (2019) have since repeated this feat. In 2012, Chelsea won both the FA Cup and the Champions League.

===Outside England===
The FA Cup has only been won by a non-English team once. Cardiff City achieved this in 1927 when they beat Arsenal in the final at Wembley. They had previously made it to the final only to lose to Sheffield United in 1925 and lost another final to Portsmouth in 2008. Cardiff City are also the only team to win the national cups of two countries in the same season, having also won the Welsh Cup in 1927. The Scottish team Queen&#x27;s Park reached and lost the final in both 1884 and 1885.

===Outside the top division===
Since the creation of the Football League in 1888, the final has never been contested by two teams from outside the top division, and there have only been eight winners who were not in the top flight: Notts County (1894); Tottenham Hotspur (1901); Wolverhampton Wanderers (1908); Barnsley (1912); West Bromwich Albion (1931); Sunderland (1973), Southampton (1976) and West Ham United (1980). With the exception of Tottenham, these clubs were all playing in the second tier (the old Second Division) – Tottenham were playing in the Southern League and were only elected to the Football League in 1908, meaning they are the only non-League winners of the FA Cup since the League&#x27;s creation. Other than Tottenham&#x27;s victory, only 24 finalists have come from outside English football&#x27;s top tier, with a record of 7 wins and 17 runners-up: and none at all from the third tier or lower, Southampton (1902, then in the Southern League) being the last finalist from outside the top two tiers.

Sunderland&#x27;s win in 1973 was considered a major upset, having beaten Leeds United who finished third in the top flight that season, as was West Ham&#x27;s victory over Arsenal in 1980 as the Gunners were in their third successive FA Cup Final and were the cup holders and just having finished 4th in the First Division, whereas West Ham had ended the season 7th in Division 2. This also marked the last time (as of 2023–24) a team from outside the top division won the FA Cup. Uniquely, in 2008 three of the four semi-finalists (Barnsley, Cardiff City and West Bromwich) were from outside the top division, although the eventual winner was the last remaining top-flight team, Portsmouth. West Bromwich (1931) are the only team to have won the FA Cup and earned promotion to the top flight in the same season; whereas Wigan Athletic (2013) are the only team to have won the Cup and been relegated from the top flight in the same season.

==Media coverage==

===Domestic broadcasters===
The FA Cup Final is one of 10 events reserved for live broadcast on UK terrestrial television under the Ofcom Code on Sports and Other Listed and Designated Events.

In the early years of coverage the BBC had exclusive radio coverage with a picture of the pitch marked in the &quot;Radio Times&quot; with numbered squares to help the listener follow the match on the radio. The first FA Cup Final on Radio was in 1926 between Bolton Wanderers and Manchester City but this was only broadcast in Manchester, the first national final on BBC Radio was between Arsenal and Cardiff City in 1927. The first final on BBC Television was in 1937 in a match which featured Sunderland and Preston North End but this was not televised in full. The following season&#x27;s final between Preston and Huddersfield Town was covered in full by the BBC. When ITV was formed in 1955 they shared final coverage with the BBC in one of the only club matches shown live on television, during the 1970s and 1980s coverage became more elaborate with BBC and ITV trying to steal viewers from the others by starting coverage earlier and earlier some starting as early as 9 a.m. which was six hours before kick off. The sharing of rights between BBC and ITV continued from 1955 to 1988, when ITV lost coverage to the BBC. From 1988 to 1997, the BBC was the exclusive broadcaster of the competition on terrestrial television and covered the competition from the third round onwards, showing one live match per round alongside highlights.

In 1990, British Satellite Broadcasting (BSB) obtained rights to the competition, and showed a live match from rounds 1 and 2. This continued to be the case after Sky took over BSB in 1991.

====1997 to 2001====
From 1997 to 2001, Sky owned the coverage showing one match per round, with the free-to-air rights sublicensed to ITV who showed an additional match from the third round onwards. The BBC continued with highlights on &quot;Match of the Day&quot;.

====2001 to 2008====
From 2001 to 2008, BBC and Sky again shared coverage with BBC having two or three matches per round and Sky having one or two.

Until the 2008–09 season, the BBC and Sky Sports shared television coverage, with the BBC showing three matches in the earlier rounds. Some analysts argued the decision to move away from the Sky and, in particular, the BBC undermined the FA Cup in the eyes of the public.

====2008 to 2009====
From 2008–09 to 2013–14, FA Cup matches were shown live by ITV across England and Wales, with UTV broadcasting to Northern Ireland. Scottish member STV refused to show them, and instead the regularly advertised programming that otherwise would mostly have been shown across the UK (new and repeated network entertainment and drama content, films, local productions etc.) would continue as normal in a delayed or exclusive fashion while the rest of the ITV network aired the football. ITV showed 16 FA Cup games per season, including the first pick of live matches from each of the first to sixth rounds of the competition, plus one semi-final exclusively live. The final was also shown live on ITV. Under the same 2008 contract, Setanta Sports showed three games and one replay in each round from round three to five, two quarter-finals, one semi-final and the final. The channel also broadcast ITV&#x27;s matches, albeit with their own commentary teams, exclusively to Scotland, after STV&#x27;s decision to replace the games with regular programming. Setanta entered administration in June 2009 and as a result the FA terminated Setanta&#x27;s deal to broadcast FA-sanctioned competitions and England internationals.

The early rounds of the 2008–09 competition were covered for the first time by ITV&#x27;s online service, ITV Local. The first match of the competition, between Wantage Town and Brading Town, was broadcast live online. Highlights of eight games of each round were broadcast as catch up on ITV Local. Since ITV Local closed, this coverage did not continue.

====2009 to 2010====
As a result of Setanta going out of business ITV showed the competition exclusively in the 2009–10 season with between three and four matches per round, all quarter finals, semi-finals and final live as the FA could not find a pay TV broadcaster in time. Many expected BSkyB to make a bid to show some of the remaining FA Cup games for the remainder of the 2009–10 season which would include a semi-final and shared rights to the final.

In October 2009, The FA announced that ITV would show an additional match in the First and second rounds on ITV, with one replay match shown on ITV4. One match and one replay match from the first two rounds will broadcast on The FA website for free, in a similar situation to the 2010 World Cup Qualifier between Ukraine and England. The 2009–10 first-round match between Oldham Athletic and Leeds United was the first FA Cup match to be streamed online live.

====2010 to 2014====
ESPN bought the competition for the 2010–11 to 2012–13 season and during this time Rebecca Lowe became the first woman to host the FA Cup Final in the UK.

ESPN took over the package Setanta held for the FA Cup from the 2010–11 season. The 2011 final was also shown live on Sky 3D in addition to ESPN (who provided the 3D coverage for Sky 3D) and ITV. Following the sale of ESPN&#x27;s UK and Ireland channels to BT, ESPN&#x27;s rights package transferred to BT Sport from the 2013–14 season.
STV would continue to broadcast regular programming in place of FA Cup games, live draws and highlights shows throughout this period, although it did the broadcast the 2014 final live.

====2014 to 2019====
ITV lost the rights to the FA Cup beginning with the 2014–15 FA Cup, terrestrial rights returned to BBC Sport, with the final being shown on BBC One while BT Sport hold the pay TV rights. Under this deal, the BBC will show around the same number of games as ITV and still having the first pick for each round.

Matches involving Welsh clubs are sometimes exclusively broadcast on Welsh language channel S4C, which is also available to view across the rest of the United Kingdom on satellite and cable television, and through the channel&#x27;s website. A similar arrangement is shared with BBC Cymru Wales when the corporation obtained the rights from 2014 to 2015, potentially giving the BBC an extra match per round.

====2019 onwards====
On 23 May 2019, it was announced that ITV would replace BT Sport in broadcasting the FA Cup from the 2021–22 season, this new deal will see BBC and ITV become joint broadcasters of the tournament for the first time since 1988, this will mean for the first time that all FA Cup matches would all be exclusively broadcast on free-to-air television.

In addition, full coverage of the tournament returned to STV in Scotland, after the broadcaster replaced content from the competition with regular network programmes (and local content made in Scotland, plus films and specials) during the 2008 to 2014 period that ITV last held the rights.

BBC Radio 5 Live and Talksport provides radio coverage including several full live commentaries per round, with additional commentaries broadcast on BBC Local Radio.

===Overseas broadcasters===

==References==
===Notes===
==External links==
* Thomas Fattorini Ltd. makers of the 1911 FA Cup – manufacturers of the 1911 FA Cup and other sporting trophies
*FA Cup statistics (archived 16 June 2009)
* FA Cup going under the hammer – BBC News story on the sale of the second trophy
* FA Supporters – Independent FA Cup Supporters Club (archived 6 October 2014)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="0" end="38" title="FA Cup" label="The Football Association Challenge Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11151" start="67" end="73" title="FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q864897" start="88" end="96" title="Single-elimination tournament" label="knockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="97" end="105" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478144" start="130" end="146" title="Football in England" label="English football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386595" start="172" end="186" title="1871–72 FA Cup" label="1871–72 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085583" start="198" end="234" title="list of oldest football competitions" label="oldest national football competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="284" end="308" title="the Football Association" label="the Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386684" start="332" end="351" title="Women&amp;#x27;s FA Cup" label="Women&amp;#x27;s FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q476028" start="419" end="424" title="football club (association football)" label="clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559" start="448" end="478" title="English football league system" label="English football league system"/>
<link wikidata="Q258300" start="591" end="598" title="2011–12 FA Cup" label="2011–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424533" start="664" end="679" title="FA Cup semi-finals" label="the semi-finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484477" start="688" end="693" title="FA Cup Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499911" start="712" end="718" title="seed (sports)" label="seeded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268659" start="741" end="745" title="Bye (sports)" label="byes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366579" start="1036" end="1058" title="National League System" label="National League System"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111944" start="1134" end="1144" title="Non-League football" label="non-League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19565" start="1277" end="1288" title="EFL League One" label="Leagues One"/>
<link wikidata="Q48837" start="1293" end="1296" title="EFL League Two" label="Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="1349" end="1361" title="EFL Championship" label="Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="1899" end="1917" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q189188" start="1946" end="1965" title="FA Community Shield" label="FA Community Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="1967" end="1974" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q65044305" start="2043" end="2047" title="2020 FA Cup final" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q47576" start="2074" end="2087" title="Arsène Wenger" label="Arsène Wenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="2170" end="2187" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q670390" start="2229" end="2241" title="Manchester derby" label="local rivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="2242" end="2257" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q125108378" start="2269" end="2279" title="2024 FA Cup final" label="2024 final"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="2321" end="2341" title="The Football Association" label="Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q506630" start="2365" end="2381" title="Laws of the Game (association football)" label="Laws of the Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766044" start="2499" end="2534" title="The Sportsman (1865 newspaper)" label="&amp;quot;The Sportsman&amp;quot; newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q967572" start="2553" end="2565" title="C. W. Alcock" label="C. W. Alcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386595" start="2789" end="2816" title="1871–72 FA Cup" label="inaugural FA Cup tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q841201" start="2875" end="2884" title="Wanderers F.C." label="Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q428518" start="2913" end="2922" title="1872 FA Cup Final" label="the final"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085092" start="2976" end="2990" title="1872–73 FA Cup" label="following year"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610338" start="3046" end="3060" title="1888–89 FA Cup" label="1888–89 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123393" start="3117" end="3124" title="1914–15 FA Cup" label="1914–15"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3186" end="3201" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3190379" start="3228" end="3235" title="1919–20 FA Cup" label="1919–20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345035" start="3241" end="3258" title="1923 FA Cup Final" label="1923 FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="3366" end="3381" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484483" start="3429" end="3439" title="1927 FA Cup Final" label="1927 final"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476190" start="3450" end="3463" title="Abide with Me" label="Abide with Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3581" end="3593" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443878" start="3638" end="3645" title="1938–39 FA Cup" label="1938–39"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438611" start="3650" end="3657" title="1945–46 FA Cup" label="1945–46"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736720" start="3754" end="3761" title="1980–81 FA Cup" label="1980–81"/>
<link wikidata="Q794589" start="3878" end="3884" title="replay (sports)" label="replay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737928" start="3959" end="3969" title="Alvechurch F.C." label="Alvechurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213276" start="3974" end="3985" title="Oxford City F.C." label="Oxford City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574830" start="4025" end="4046" title="1971–72 FA Cup qualifying rounds" label="1971–72 qualification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424533" start="4231" end="4241" title="FA Cup semi-finals" label="semi-final"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110441" start="4469" end="4473" title="2001 FA Cup Final" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584385" start="4474" end="4478" title="2006 FA Cup Final" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q204496" start="4506" end="4524" title="Millennium Stadium" label="Millennium Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="4528" end="4535" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574490" start="4570" end="4574" title="2007 FA Cup Final" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="4779" end="4793" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="4825" end="4848" title="English Football League" label="English Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111944" start="4900" end="4919" title="non-league football" label="non-league football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046509" start="4972" end="4981" title="FA Trophy" label="FA Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q185580" start="4985" end="4992" title="FA Vase" label="FA Vase"/>
<link wikidata="Q9500" start="5111" end="5126" title="The Football Association" label="The Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366579" start="5282" end="5304" title="National League System" label="National League System"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208402" start="5855" end="5858" title="Points per game" label="PPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111944" start="5949" end="5968" title="Non-League football" label="Non-League football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386656" start="6031" end="6038" title="2004–05 FA Cup" label="2004–05"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443886" start="6131" end="6145" title="1921–22 FA Cup" label="1921–22 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386660" start="6150" end="6157" title="2005–06 FA Cup" label="2005–06"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386662" start="6193" end="6200" title="2006–07 FA Cup" label="2006–07"/>
<link wikidata="Q925056" start="6212" end="6219" title="2007–08 FA Cup" label="2007–08"/>
<link wikidata="Q615034" start="6237" end="6244" title="2008–09 FA Cup" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071320" start="6249" end="6256" title="2009–10 FA Cup" label="2009–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366579" start="6496" end="6518" title="National League System" label="National League System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190245" start="6721" end="6728" title="2010–11 FA Cup" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q258300" start="6746" end="6753" title="2011–12 FA Cup" label="2011–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q808791" start="6762" end="6769" title="2012–13 FA Cup" label="2012–13"/>
<link wikidata="Q13502290" start="6778" end="6785" title="2013–14 FA Cup" label="2013–14"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987294" start="6797" end="6804" title="2014–15 FA Cup" label="2014–15"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568871" start="7209" end="7213" title="South West Peninsula League" label="SWPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q48026" start="7245" end="7255" title="South West England" label="South West"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422930" start="7274" end="7288" title="Western Football League" label="Western League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="7399" end="7416" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321334" start="7447" end="7456" title="1999–2000 FA Cup" label="1999–2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q500565" start="7486" end="7495" title="2000 FIFA Club World Championship" label="inaugural"/>
<link wikidata="Q223366" start="7496" end="7519" title="FIFA Club World Cup" label="Club World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q18991" start="7854" end="7876" title="1999–2000 Premier League" label="1999–2000 league title"/>
<link wikidata="Q44980" start="8105" end="8122" title="Alex Ferguson" label="Sir Alex Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q218555" start="8283" end="8298" title="Welsh Premier League" label="League of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q18662" start="8336" end="8348" title="Cardiff City F.C." label="Cardiff City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605850" start="8402" end="8406" title="1926–27 FA Cup" label="1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q18659" start="8409" end="8421" title="Swansea City A.F.C." label="Swansea City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18523" start="8423" end="8437" title="Newport County A.F.C." label="Newport County"/>
<link wikidata="Q18529" start="8439" end="8446" title="Wrexham F.C." label="Wrexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264440" start="8452" end="8464" title="Merthyr Town F.C. (2010)" label="Merthyr Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q852753" start="8583" end="8600" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Park F.C." label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446" start="8621" end="8637" title="Blackburn Rovers F.C." label="Blackburn Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556000" start="8641" end="8645" title="1884 FA Cup Final" label="1884"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556071" start="8650" end="8654" title="1885 FA Cup Final" label="1885"/>
<link wikidata="Q478320" start="8696" end="8725" title="Scottish Football Association" label="Scottish Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q13502290" start="8905" end="8919" title="2013–14 FA Cup" label="2013–14 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="8930" end="8944" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327751" start="8979" end="8992" title="Guernsey F.C." label="Guernsey F.C."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9110" end="9123" title="2021–22 FA Cup qualifying rounds#Extra preliminary round" label="7 August 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q61719585" start="9132" end="9144" title="Jersey Bulls F.C." label="Jersey Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5906333" start="9149" end="9161" title="Horsham YMCA F.C." label="Horsham YMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q86752579" start="9177" end="9193" title="F.C. Isle of Man" label="F.C. Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q113331653" start="9224" end="9231" title="2022–23 FA Cup qualifying rounds" label="2022–23"/>
<link wikidata="Q864897" start="9425" end="9444" title="knockout tournament" label="knockout tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q864897" start="9621" end="9628" title="Seed (tennis)" label="seeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559" start="10815" end="10836" title="English football league system" label="English league system"/>
<link wikidata="Q773914" start="11310" end="11329" title="1997–98 FA Cup" label="1997–98 competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="11383" end="11397" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139783" start="11496" end="11505" title="1999–2000 in English football" label="1999–2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620110" start="11586" end="11593" title="2010–11 in English football" label="2010–11"/>
<link wikidata="Q15100304" start="11598" end="11605" title="2012–13 in English football" label="2012–13"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="11695" end="11710" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="11731" end="11752" title="UEFA Champions League" label="UEFA Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4624457" start="11767" end="11774" title="2011–12 in English football" label="2011–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="11784" end="11791" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q22669" start="11831" end="11853" title="UEFA Euro 2012" label="European Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q65121220" start="11855" end="11862" title="2019–20 in English football" label="2019–20"/>
<link wikidata="Q84167106" start="11914" end="11953" title="COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom" label="COVID-19 pandemic in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q106129375" start="11963" end="11970" title="2021–22 in English football" label="2021-22"/>
<link wikidata="Q125498618" start="12036" end="12046" title="2024-25 in English football" label="2025 Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q794589" start="12904" end="12910" title="replay (sports)" label="replay"/>
<link wikidata="Q186982" start="13036" end="13046" title="overtime (sports)" label="extra time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691960" start="13074" end="13090" title="Penalty shoot-out (association football)" label="penalty shootout"/>
<link wikidata="Q24266695" start="13098" end="13105" title="2016–17 FA Cup" label="2016–17"/>
<link wikidata="Q54866623" start="13211" end="13218" title="2018–19 FA Cup" label="2018–19"/>
<link wikidata="Q126101397" start="13308" end="13315" title="2024–25 FA Cup" label="2024–25"/>
<link wikidata="Q730226" start="13502" end="13509" title="1990–91 FA Cup" label="1990–91"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316358" start="13577" end="13584" title="1971–72 FA Cup" label="1971–72"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13588" end="13611" title="1971–72 FA Cup qualifying rounds#Fourth qualifying round" label="fourth qualifying round"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737928" start="13625" end="13635" title="Alvechurch F.C." label="Alvechurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213276" start="13640" end="13651" title="Oxford City F.C." label="Oxford City"/>
<link wikidata="Q946014" start="13724" end="13737" title="1974–75 FA Cup" label="1975 campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q18708" start="13739" end="13745" title="Fulham F.C." label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386612" start="13930" end="13937" title="1991–92 FA Cup" label="1991–92"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691960" start="14030" end="14048" title="penalty shoot-out (association football)" label="penalty shoot-outs"/>
<link wikidata="Q48950" start="14116" end="14132" title="Rotherham United F.C." label="Rotherham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q19615" start="14144" end="14161" title="Scunthorpe United F.C." label="Scunthorpe United"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736720" start="14169" end="14176" title="1980–81 FA Cup" label="1980–81"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386633" start="14180" end="14187" title="1998–99 FA Cup" label="1998–99"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321334" start="14402" end="14411" title="1999–2000 FA Cup" label="1999–2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614681" start="14497" end="14503" title="Arsenal F.C.–Manchester United F.C. rivalry" label="rivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484477" start="14589" end="14601" title="FA Cup Final" label="FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555493" start="14643" end="14653" title="1875 FA Cup Final" label="1875 final"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418905" start="14667" end="14682" title="Royal Engineers A.F.C." label="Royal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430983" start="14691" end="14703" title="Old Etonians F.C." label="Old Etonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484522" start="14825" end="14842" title="1993 FA Cup Final" label="1993 FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q19498" start="14861" end="14880" title="Sheffield Wednesday F.C." label="Sheffield Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="15028" end="15043" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q20119002" start="15051" end="15065" title="2015–16 FA Cup" label="2015–16 FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q330731" start="15168" end="15181" title="Boleyn Ground" label="Boleyn Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="15288" end="15305" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q48949" start="15313" end="15321" title="Rochdale A.F.C." label="Rochdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q30646023" start="15344" end="15358" title="2017–18 FA Cup" label="2017–18 FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q619466" start="15384" end="15400" title="Spotland Stadium" label="Spotland Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q18760" start="15553" end="15571" title="UEFA Europa League" label="UEFA Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q40241" start="15631" end="15657" title="UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q280005" start="15677" end="15681" title="1960–61 European Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="1960"/>
<link wikidata="Q833932" start="15709" end="15713" title="1998–99 UEFA Cup Winners&amp;#x27; Cup" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q778665" start="15763" end="15772" title="promotion and relegation" label="relegated"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="15897" end="15913" title="UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q15699191" start="16560" end="16586" title="2015–16 UEFA Europa League" label="2015–16 UEFA Europa League"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="16604" end="16608" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q189188" start="17058" end="17077" title="FA Community Shield" label="FA Community Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="17151" end="17165" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17258" end="17264" title="double (association football)#England" label="double"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424533" start="17392" end="17403" title="FA Cup semi-finals" label="semi-finals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484477" start="17408" end="17413" title="FA Cup Final" label="final"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="17458" end="17473" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386647" start="17842" end="17846" title="2003–04 FA Cup" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164849" start="18083" end="18087" title="draw (tie)" label="draw"/>
<link wikidata="Q794589" start="18093" end="18099" title="replay (sports)" label="replay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595894" start="18158" end="18172" title="home advantage" label="away from home"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="18474" end="18489" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q925056" start="18496" end="18500" title="2007–08 FA Cup" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155836" start="18623" end="18638" title="The Oval" label="Kennington Oval"/>
<link wikidata="Q175339" start="19012" end="19022" title="Villa Park" label="Villa Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q642557" start="19049" end="19061" title="Hillsborough Stadium" label="Hillsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q83457" start="19090" end="19102" title="Old Trafford" label="Old Trafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="19133" end="19157" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="original Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466283" start="19283" end="19295" title="Football in London" label="London teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q19487" start="19742" end="19750" title="Millwall F.C." label="Millwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q18750" start="19755" end="19769" title="Wigan Athletic F.C." label="Wigan Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="19904" end="19916" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="20031" end="20046" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386662" start="20067" end="20072" title="2006–07 FA Cup" label="2007."/>
<link wikidata="Q204496" start="20153" end="20171" title="Millennium Stadium" label="Millennium Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="20175" end="20182" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q43279" start="20242" end="20266" title="Wembley Stadium (1923)" label="original Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q377348" start="20286" end="20290" title="1922–23 FA Cup" label="1923"/>
<link wikidata="Q777237" start="20431" end="20442" title="1970 FA Cup Final" label="1970 replay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="20451" end="20463" title="Leeds United F.C." label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="20468" end="20475" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q83457" start="20485" end="20497" title="Old Trafford" label="Old Trafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155836" start="20678" end="20693" title="The Oval" label="Kennington Oval"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20703" end="20717" title="Crystal Palace National Sports Centre#FA Cup Finals (1895–1914)" label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556623" start="20823" end="20827" title="1892 FA Cup Final" label="1892"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556928" start="20883" end="20887" title="1895 FA Cup Final" label="1895"/>
<link wikidata="Q258074" start="20891" end="20895" title="1914 FA Cup Final" label="1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q171458" start="20963" end="20978" title="Stamford Bridge (stadium)" label="Stamford Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560837" start="20984" end="20988" title="1920 FA Cup Final" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561185" start="20992" end="20996" title="1922 FA Cup Final" label="1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q936731" start="21092" end="21105" title="Lillie Bridge Grounds" label="Lillie Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3367868" start="21109" end="21115" title="Fulham" label="Fulham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977491" start="21146" end="21150" title="1873 FA Cup Final" label="1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137282" start="21241" end="21258" title="County Cricket Ground, Derby" label="Racecourse Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556139" start="21267" end="21271" title="1886 FA Cup Final" label="1886"/>
<link wikidata="Q743828" start="21275" end="21294" title="Fallowfield Stadium" label="Fallowfield Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556721" start="21308" end="21312" title="1893 FA Cup Final" label="1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q968420" start="21316" end="21329" title="Goodison Park" label="Goodison Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556816" start="21342" end="21346" title="1894 FA Cup Final" label="1894"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016749" start="21350" end="21362" title="Burnden Park" label="Burnden Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q184579" start="21364" end="21370" title="Bolton" label="Bolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413320" start="21372" end="21376" title="1901 FA Cup Final" label="1901"/>
<link wikidata="Q4559167" start="21402" end="21406" title="1910 FA Cup Final" label="1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q83457" start="21417" end="21429" title="Old Trafford" label="Old Trafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4559327" start="21443" end="21447" title="1911 FA Cup Final" label="1911"/>
<link wikidata="Q897533" start="21458" end="21470" title="Bramall Lane" label="Bramall Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4559484" start="21483" end="21487" title="1912 FA Cup Final" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484479" start="21512" end="21516" title="1915 FA Cup Final" label="1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q311935" start="21558" end="21573" title="artificial turf" label="artificial turf"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987294" start="21629" end="21644" title="2014–15 FA Cup" label="2014–15 edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764590" start="22200" end="22216" title="Maidstone United F.C." label="Maidstone United"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518835" start="22224" end="22241" title="Gallagher Stadium" label="Gallagher Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773530" start="23093" end="23105" title="1908–09 FA Cup" label="1909 winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437971" start="23239" end="23257" title="Fattorini and Sons" label="Fattorini and Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="24266" end="24283" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413320" start="24292" end="24309" title="1901 FA Cup Final" label="1901 FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q715772" start="24510" end="24517" title="captain (association football)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555872" start="24792" end="24802" title="1882 FA Cup Final" label="1882 final"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555547" start="25157" end="25167" title="1876 FA Cup Final" label="1876 final"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604" start="25279" end="25289" title="Portsmouth F.C." label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q19500" start="25447" end="25470" title="Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C." label="Wolverhampton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484489" start="25482" end="25499" title="1939 FA Cup Final" label="1939 FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="25580" end="25592" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839586" start="25624" end="25639" title="1939–40 Football League" label="Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q97275004" start="25644" end="25650" title="1939–40 FA Cup" label="FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553377" start="25672" end="25686" title="1939–40 in English football" label="1939–40 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6115489" start="25757" end="25766" title="Jack Tinn" label="Jack Tinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q189349" start="25893" end="25903" title="urban myth" label="urban myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="25986" end="26010" title="The Blitz" label="German Luftwaffe bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898639" start="26122" end="26130" title="Lovedean" label="Lovedean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4565733" start="26390" end="26407" title="1946 FA Cup Final" label="1946 FA Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="26589" end="26599" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="26662" end="26673" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7639452" start="27068" end="27084" title="Sunday Pictorial" label="Sunday Pictorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916779" start="27256" end="27271" title="Birmingham Post" label="Birmingham Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551154" start="27552" end="27562" title="Half crown (British coin)" label="half-crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719063" start="27703" end="27716" title="betting shops" label="betting shops"/>
<link wikidata="Q930953" start="28179" end="28192" title="Arthur Fitzgerald Kinnaird, 11th Lord Kinnaird" label="Lord Kinnaird"/>
<link wikidata="Q503176" start="28330" end="28345" title="Christie&amp;#x27;s" label="Christie&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="28379" end="28380" title="Pound sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q212469" start="28495" end="28506" title="Souvenir" label="memorabilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q517621" start="28545" end="28573" title="FIFA World Cup Trophy" label="Jules Rimet World Cup Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q860329" start="28609" end="28619" title="David Gold (businessman)" label="David Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q19444" start="28648" end="28663" title="Birmingham City F.C." label="Birmingham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265733" start="28894" end="28918" title="National Football Museum" label="National Football Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418905" start="29108" end="29123" title="Royal Engineers A.F.C." label="Royal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q841201" start="29141" end="29150" title="Wanderers F.C." label="Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q428518" start="29182" end="29200" title="1872 FA Cup Final" label="first FA Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q892447" start="29275" end="29282" title="Bonhams" label="Bonhams"/>
<link wikidata="Q556607" start="29369" end="29403" title="Mansour bin Zayed Al Nahyan" label="Sheikh Mansour bin Zayed Al Nahyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="29418" end="29433" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437971" start="29689" end="29709" title="Messers Fattorini and Sons" label="Fattorini &amp;amp; Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q48879" start="29751" end="29764" title="Bradford City A.F.C." label="Bradford City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052933" start="29854" end="29871" title="Antiques Roadshow" label="Antiques Roadshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708702" start="29926" end="29944" title="Alastair Dickenson" label="Alastair Dickenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386885" start="30389" end="30406" title="Baddesley Clinton" label="Baddesley Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q104843182" start="30522" end="30538" title="Thomas Fattorini Ltd" label="Thomas Fattorini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830599" start="30699" end="30724" title="Toye, Kenning and Spencer" label="Toye, Kenning and Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q48995874" start="30867" end="30878" title="Thomas Lyte" label="Thomas Lyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386625" start="31471" end="31485" title="1994–95 FA Cup" label="1994–95 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="31706" end="31716" title="EFL Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q270223" start="31858" end="31862" title="E.ON" label="E.ON"/>
<link wikidata="Q180432" start="31900" end="31916" title="Emirates (airline)" label="Emirates Airline"/>
<link wikidata="Q610672" start="32136" end="32145" title="Budweiser" label="Budweiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q652047" start="32302" end="32307" title="Umbro" label="Umbro"/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="32410" end="32414" title="Nike Inc." label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976003" start="32490" end="32495" title="Mitre Sports International" label="Mitre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="32648" end="32655" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484485" start="32657" end="32661" title="1930 FA Cup final" label="1930"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484487" start="32663" end="32667" title="1936 FA Cup final" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484491" start="32669" end="32673" title="1950 FA Cup final" label="1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484500" start="32675" end="32679" title="1971 FA Cup final" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484510" start="32681" end="32685" title="1979 FA Cup final" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484522" start="32687" end="32691" title="1993 FA Cup final" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484526" start="32693" end="32697" title="1998 FA Cup final" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q648465" start="32699" end="32703" title="2002 FA Cup final" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616571" start="32705" end="32709" title="2003 FA Cup final" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584412" start="32711" end="32715" title="2005 FA Cup final" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q16323089" start="32717" end="32721" title="2014 FA Cup final" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q19817594" start="32723" end="32727" title="2015 FA Cup final" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q29551985" start="32729" end="32733" title="2017 FA Cup final" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q65044305" start="32735" end="32739" title="2020 FA Cup final" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q841201" start="32784" end="32793" title="Wanderers F.C." label="Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555547" start="32795" end="32799" title="1876 FA Cup final" label="1876"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555595" start="32801" end="32805" title="1877 FA Cup final" label="1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555641" start="32807" end="32811" title="1878 FA Cup final" label="1878"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446" start="32815" end="32831" title="Blackburn Rovers F.C." label="Blackburn Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556000" start="32833" end="32837" title="1884 FA Cup final" label="1884"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556071" start="32839" end="32843" title="1885 FA Cup final" label="1885"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556139" start="32845" end="32849" title="1886 FA Cup final" label="1886"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="32886" end="32903" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484478" start="32905" end="32909" title="1909 FA Cup final" label="1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484490" start="32911" end="32915" title="1948 FA Cup final" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045615" start="32917" end="32921" title="1957 FA Cup final" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484494" start="32923" end="32927" title="1958 FA Cup final" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484495" start="32929" end="32933" title="1963 FA Cup final" label="1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484507" start="32935" end="32939" title="1976 FA Cup final" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484508" start="32941" end="32945" title="1977 FA Cup final" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484510" start="32947" end="32951" title="1979 FA Cup final" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581017" start="32953" end="32957" title="1983 FA Cup final" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484514" start="32959" end="32963" title="1985 FA Cup final" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484517" start="32965" end="32969" title="1990 FA Cup final" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484521" start="32971" end="32975" title="1994 FA Cup final" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484523" start="32977" end="32981" title="1995 FA Cup final" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484524" start="32983" end="32987" title="1996 FA Cup final" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484528" start="32989" end="32993" title="1999 FA Cup final" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661161" start="32995" end="32999" title="2004 FA Cup final" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584412" start="33001" end="33005" title="2005 FA Cup final" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574490" start="33007" end="33011" title="2007 FA Cup final" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q20807520" start="33013" end="33017" title="2016 FA Cup final" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q30973820" start="33019" end="33023" title="2018 FA Cup final" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q117705635" start="33025" end="33029" title="2023 FA Cup final" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q125108378" start="33031" end="33035" title="2024 FA Cup final" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="33074" end="33081" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q65044305" start="33083" end="33087" title="2020 FA Cup final" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q105686379" start="33089" end="33093" title="2021 FA Cup final" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q111648597" start="33095" end="33099" title="2022 FA Cup final" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q852753" start="33173" end="33190" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Park F.C." label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556000" start="33198" end="33202" title="1884 FA Cup final" label="1884"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556071" start="33204" end="33208" title="1885 FA Cup final" label="1885"/>
<link wikidata="Q19444" start="33212" end="33227" title="Birmingham City F.C." label="Birmingham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4562832" start="33229" end="33233" title="1931 FA Cup final" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072401" start="33235" end="33239" title="1956 FA Cup final" label="1956"/>
<link wikidata="Q19467" start="33243" end="33257" title="Crystal Palace F.C." label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484517" start="33259" end="33263" title="1990 FA Cup final" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q20807520" start="33265" end="33269" title="2016 FA Cup final" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714" start="33273" end="33280" title="Watford F.C." label="Watford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581669" start="33282" end="33286" title="1984 FA Cup final" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q62997323" start="33288" end="33292" title="2019 FA Cup final" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q841201" start="33348" end="33357" title="Wanderers F.C." label="Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q428518" start="33365" end="33369" title="1872 FA Cup final" label="1872"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977491" start="33371" end="33375" title="1873 FA Cup final" label="1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555547" start="33377" end="33381" title="1876 FA Cup final" label="1876"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555595" start="33383" end="33387" title="1877 FA Cup final" label="1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555641" start="33389" end="33393" title="1878 FA Cup final" label="1878"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="33463" end="33480" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413320" start="33482" end="33486" title="1901 FA Cup final" label="1901"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415502" start="33488" end="33492" title="1921 FA Cup final" label="1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q977680" start="33494" end="33498" title="1961 FA Cup final" label="1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415494" start="33500" end="33504" title="1962 FA Cup final" label="1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q285096" start="33506" end="33510" title="1967 FA Cup final" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413332" start="33512" end="33516" title="1981 FA Cup final" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q4580443" start="33518" end="33522" title="1982 FA Cup final" label="1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="33526" end="33533" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q648465" start="33535" end="33539" title="2002 FA Cup final" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616571" start="33541" end="33545" title="2003 FA Cup final" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584412" start="33547" end="33551" title="2005 FA Cup final" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q16323089" start="33553" end="33557" title="2014 FA Cup final" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q19817594" start="33559" end="33563" title="2015 FA Cup final" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q29551985" start="33565" end="33569" title="2017 FA Cup final" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q65044305" start="33571" end="33575" title="2020 FA Cup final" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604" start="33615" end="33625" title="Portsmouth F.C." label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484489" start="33627" end="33631" title="1939 FA Cup final" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349402" start="33632" end="33636" title="2008 FA Cup final" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q19573" start="33689" end="33693" title="Bury F.C." label="Bury"/>
<link wikidata="Q19470" start="33698" end="33710" title="Derby County F.C." label="Derby County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558100" start="33712" end="33716" title="1903 FA Cup final" label="1903"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="33720" end="33735" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714" start="33740" end="33747" title="Watford F.C." label="Watford"/>
<link wikidata="Q62997323" start="33749" end="33753" title="2019 FA Cup final" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446" start="33784" end="33800" title="Blackburn Rovers F.C." label="Blackburn Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19498" start="33805" end="33824" title="Sheffield Wednesday F.C." label="Sheffield Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q796678" start="33826" end="33830" title="1890 FA Cup final" label="1890"/>
<link wikidata="Q19449" start="33834" end="33843" title="Blackpool F.C." label="Blackpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q19451" start="33848" end="33864" title="Bolton Wanderers F.C." label="Bolton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484493" start="33866" end="33870" title="1953 FA Cup final" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q19451" start="33907" end="33923" title="Bolton Wanderers F.C." label="Bolton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19449" start="33942" end="33951" title="Blackpool F.C." label="Blackpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484493" start="33953" end="33957" title="1953 FA Cup final" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="33961" end="33976" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="34026" end="34035" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584385" start="34037" end="34041" title="2006 FA Cup final" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="34074" end="34091" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045615" start="34093" end="34097" title="1957 FA Cup final" label="1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484494" start="34099" end="34103" title="1958 FA Cup final" label="1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484507" start="34105" end="34109" title="1976 FA Cup final" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484510" start="34111" end="34115" title="1979 FA Cup final" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484523" start="34117" end="34121" title="1995 FA Cup final" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584412" start="34123" end="34127" title="2005 FA Cup final" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574490" start="34129" end="34133" title="2007 FA Cup final" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q30973820" start="34135" end="34139" title="2018 FA Cup final" label="2018"/>
<link wikidata="Q117705635" start="34141" end="34145" title="2023 FA Cup final" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q133556" start="34192" end="34203" title="Ashley Cole" label="Ashley Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="34205" end="34212" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q648465" start="34215" end="34219" title="2002 FA Cup final" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616571" start="34221" end="34225" title="2003 FA Cup final" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584412" start="34227" end="34231" title="2005 FA Cup final" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="34240" end="34247" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574490" start="34250" end="34254" title="2007 FA Cup final" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083726" start="34256" end="34260" title="2009 FA Cup final" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665418" start="34262" end="34266" title="2010 FA Cup final" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634414" start="34268" end="34272" title="2012 FA Cup final" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q47576" start="34300" end="34313" title="Arsène Wenger" label="Arsène Wenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="34315" end="34322" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484526" start="34325" end="34329" title="1998 FA Cup final" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q648465" start="34331" end="34335" title="2002 FA Cup final" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616571" start="34337" end="34341" title="2003 FA Cup final" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584412" start="34343" end="34347" title="2005 FA Cup final" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q16323089" start="34349" end="34353" title="2014 FA Cup final" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q19817594" start="34355" end="34359" title="2015 FA Cup final" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q29551985" start="34361" end="34365" title="2017 FA Cup final" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q930953" start="34400" end="34415" title="Arthur Kinnaird, 11th Lord Kinnaird" label="Arthur Kinnaird"/>
<link wikidata="Q841201" start="34417" end="34426" title="Wanderers F.C." label="Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977491" start="34429" end="34436" title="1873 FA Cup final" label="1872–73"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555547" start="34438" end="34445" title="1876 FA Cup final" label="1875–76"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555595" start="34447" end="34454" title="1877 FA Cup final" label="1876–77"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555641" start="34456" end="34463" title="1878 FA Cup final" label="1877–78"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430983" start="34472" end="34484" title="Old Etonians F.C." label="Old Etonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555493" start="34487" end="34494" title="1875 FA Cup final" label="1874–75"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555692" start="34496" end="34503" title="1879 FA Cup final" label="1878–79"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555813" start="34505" end="34512" title="1881 FA Cup final" label="1880–81"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555872" start="34514" end="34521" title="1882 FA Cup final" label="1881–82"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555930" start="34523" end="34530" title="1883 FA Cup final" label="1882–83"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364003" start="34562" end="34575" title="Billy Townley" label="Billy Townley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446" start="34577" end="34593" title="Blackburn Rovers F.C." label="Blackburn Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q796678" start="34596" end="34600" title="1890 FA Cup final" label="1890"/>
<link wikidata="Q16059887" start="34604" end="34615" title="James Logan (footballer, born 1870)" label="James Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19598" start="34617" end="34629" title="Notts County F.C." label="Notts County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556816" start="34632" end="34636" title="1894 FA Cup final" label="1894"/>
<link wikidata="Q783688" start="34640" end="34654" title="Stan Mortensen" label="Stan Mortensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19449" start="34656" end="34665" title="Blackpool F.C." label="Blackpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484493" start="34668" end="34672" title="1953 FA Cup final" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q219354" start="34703" end="34711" title="Ian Rush" label="Ian Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="34713" end="34722" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484515" start="34730" end="34734" title="1986 FA Cup final" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151884" start="34741" end="34745" title="1989 FA Cup final" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484518" start="34752" end="34756" title="1992 FA Cup final" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q48892" start="34785" end="34798" title="Didier Drogba" label="Didier Drogba"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="34800" end="34807" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574490" start="34820" end="34824" title="2007 FA Cup final" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083726" start="34826" end="34830" title="2009 FA Cup final" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665418" start="34832" end="34836" title="2010 FA Cup final" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634414" start="34838" end="34842" title="2012 FA Cup final" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q994026" start="34871" end="34884" title="Curtis Weston" label="Curtis Weston"/>
<link wikidata="Q19487" start="34886" end="34894" title="Millwall F.C." label="Millwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661161" start="34920" end="34924" title="2004 FA Cup final" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q380223" start="34972" end="34988" title="Norman Whiteside" label="Norman Whiteside"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="34990" end="35007" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581017" start="35032" end="35036" title="1983 FA Cup final" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912663" start="35054" end="35067" title="Billy Hampson" label="Billy Hampson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="35069" end="35085" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561532" start="35111" end="35115" title="1924 FA Cup final" label="1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q19612" start="35149" end="35166" title="Preston North End F.C." label="Preston North End"/>
<link wikidata="Q18517" start="35172" end="35176" title="Hyde F.C." label="Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35178" end="35206" title="1887–88 FA Cup#First round" label="First round, 15 October 1887"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125914" start="35227" end="35234" title="Clapton F.C." label="Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q19490" start="35240" end="35257" title="Nottingham Forest F.C." label="Nottingham Forest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35259" end="35287" title="1890–91 FA Cup#First round proper" label="First round, 17 January 1891"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345035" start="35378" end="35395" title="1923 FA Cup final" label="White Horse Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q19451" start="35403" end="35419" title="Bolton Wanderers F.C." label="Bolton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="35435" end="35450" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q258300" start="35518" end="35525" title="2011–12 FA Cup" label="2011–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213276" start="35575" end="35586" title="Oxford City F.C." label="Oxford City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737928" start="35602" end="35612" title="Alvechurch F.C." label="Alvechurch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35614" end="35668" title="1971–72 FA Cup qualifying rounds#4th qualifying round" label="Fourth qualifying round, 6/9/15/17/20/22 November 1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291139" start="35753" end="35768" title="Tunbridge Wells F.C." label="Tunbridge Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652995" start="35784" end="35802" title="Littlehampton Town F.C." label="Littlehampton Town"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35804" end="35844" title="2005–06 FA Cup#FA Cup qualifying rounds#Replays" label="Preliminary round replay, 31 August 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q19453" start="35916" end="35942" title="Brighton &amp;amp; Hove Albion F.C." label="Brighton &amp;amp; Hove Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443904" start="35944" end="35951" title="1932–33 FA Cup" label="1932–33"/>
<link wikidata="Q291833" start="35998" end="36010" title="New Brighton A.F.C." label="New Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2315779" start="36012" end="36019" title="1956–57 FA Cup" label="1956–57"/>
<link wikidata="Q18284" start="36079" end="36093" title="Blyth Spartans F.C." label="Blyth Spartans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736716" start="36095" end="36102" title="1977–78 FA Cup" label="1977–78"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212694" start="36149" end="36160" title="Harlow Town F.C." label="Harlow Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736718" start="36162" end="36169" title="1979–80 FA Cup" label="1979–80"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904095" start="36263" end="36271" title="Bideford F.C." label="Bideford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736711" start="36273" end="36280" title="1973–74 FA Cup" label="1973–74"/>
<link wikidata="Q18283" start="36439" end="36452" title="Ashton United" label="Ashton United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18462" start="36468" end="36487" title="Skelmersdale United" label="Skelmersdale United"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36489" end="36528" title="2001–02 FA Cup qualifying rounds#1st qualifying round" label="1st qualifying round, 17 September 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446" start="36574" end="36590" title="Blackburn Rovers F.C." label="Blackburn Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36592" end="36609" title="1884–85 FA Cup#First round" label="First round, 1884"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36618" end="36644" title="1886–87 FA Cup#Second round" label="Second round, replay, 1886"/>
<link wikidata="Q18300" start="36701" end="36711" title="Nantwich Town F.C." label="Andy Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q18300" start="36717" end="36730" title="Nantwich Town F.C." label="Nantwich Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q661543" start="36746" end="36755" title="Droylsden F.C." label="Droylsden"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36757" end="36787" title="1995–96 FA Cup qualifying rounds#Preliminary round" label="Preliminary round, August 1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035030" start="36812" end="36825" title="Harry Cursham" label="Harry Cursham"/>
<link wikidata="Q19598" start="36831" end="36843" title="Notts County F.C." label="Notts County"/>
<link wikidata="Q592489" start="36867" end="36874" title="1877–78 FA Cup" label="1877–78"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556324" start="36878" end="36885" title="1888–89 FA Cup qualifying rounds" label="1888–89"/>
<link wikidata="Q579684" start="36943" end="36953" title="Jimmy Ross (footballer, born 1866)" label="Jimmy Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q19612" start="36959" end="36976" title="Preston North End F.C." label="Preston North End"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412351" start="36978" end="36985" title="1887–88 FA Cup" label="1887–88"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517038" start="37138" end="37152" title="Ted MacDougall" label="Ted MacDougall"/>
<link wikidata="Q19568" start="37158" end="37173" title="AFC Bournemouth" label="AFC Bournemouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q891692" start="37192" end="37199" title="Margate F.C." label="Margate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37201" end="37237" title="1971–72 FA Cup#First round proper" label="First round proper, 20 November 1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313546" start="37287" end="37301" title="Dulwich Hamlet F.C." label="Dulwich Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585894" start="37306" end="37320" title="St Albans City F.C." label="St Albans City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37322" end="37370" title="1922–23 FA Cup#Calendar" label="Fourth qualifying round replay, 22 November 1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313546" start="37374" end="37388" title="Dulwich Hamlet F.C." label="Dulwich Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9437" start="37393" end="37403" title="Wealdstone F.C." label="Wealdstone"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37405" end="37446" title="1929–30 FA Cup#Calendar" label="Fourth qualifying round, 16 November 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760386" start="37467" end="37478" title="Andy Awford" label="Andy Awford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882874" start="37506" end="37520" title="Worcester City F.C." label="Worcester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4094837" start="37536" end="37548" title="Boreham Wood F.C." label="Boreham Wood"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37550" end="37587" title="1987–88 FA Cup qualifying rounds#3rd qualifying round" label="3rd qualifying round, 10 October 1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417384" start="37648" end="37666" title="Newport (IOW) F.C." label="Newport (IOW) F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q5212771" start="37682" end="37692" title="Fleet Town F.C." label="Fleet Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q113331653" start="37694" end="37732" title="2022–23 FA Cup qualifying rounds" label="Extra preliminary round, 2 August 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546374" start="37773" end="37788" title="George Williams (footballer, born 1995)" label="George Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q248188" start="37816" end="37834" title="Milton Keynes Dons F.C." label="Milton Keynes Dons"/>
<link wikidata="Q18300" start="37850" end="37863" title="Nantwich Town F.C." label="Nantwich Town"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37865" end="37901" title="2011–12 FA Cup#First round proper" label="First round proper, 12 November 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q18297" start="37996" end="38002" title="Marine A.F.C." label="Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="38022" end="38039" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38041" end="38076" title="2020–21 FA Cup#Third round proper" label="Third round proper, 10 January 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559" start="38545" end="38559" title="English football league system" label="League Pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="38670" end="38684" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="38781" end="38800" title="The Football League" label="The Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="39101" end="39120" title="The Football League" label="The Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q905398" start="39407" end="39424" title="Football Alliance" label="Football Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788657" start="39542" end="39551" title="Northern England" label="the North"/>
<link wikidata="Q850235" start="39556" end="39564" title="Midlands" label="Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q18573" start="39598" end="39622" title="Southern Football League" label="Southern Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="39703" end="39720" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q18732" start="39803" end="39814" title="Southampton F.C." label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061422" start="39858" end="39865" title="1920–21 Football League" label="1920–21"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436448" start="39887" end="39895" title="Football League Third Division" label="expanded"/>
<link wikidata="Q516075" start="39999" end="40015" title="Football League Third Division North" label="further division"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559" start="40232" end="40262" title="English football league system" label="English football league system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975393" start="40329" end="40338" title="underdogs" label="underdogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q58916" start="40493" end="40508" title="National League (division)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18519" start="40514" end="40526" title="Lincoln City F.C." label="Lincoln City"/>
<link wikidata="Q24266695" start="40567" end="40581" title="2016–17 FA Cup" label="2016–17 FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q24909572" start="40628" end="40636" title="2016–17 Brighton &amp;amp; Hove Albion F.C. season" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q24083712" start="40685" end="40692" title="2016–17 Burnley F.C. season" label="Burnley"/>
<link wikidata="Q28864611" start="40693" end="40709" title="Burnley 0–1 Lincoln City (2017)" label="1–0 in the fifth"/>
<link wikidata="Q24039373" start="40752" end="40759" title="2016–17 Arsenal F.C. season" label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="41117" end="41126" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q769744" start="41196" end="41211" title="Football League Second Division" label="Second Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41215" end="41219" title="1958–59 Football League#Second Division" label="1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753228" start="41230" end="41238" title="1958–59 FA Cup" label="lost 2–1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882874" start="41242" end="41256" title="Worcester City F.C." label="Worcester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569547" start="41264" end="41279" title="1958–59 Southern Football League" label="Southern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316358" start="41334" end="41348" title="1971–72 FA Cup" label="1971–72 FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q18516" start="41366" end="41381" title="Hereford United F.C." label="Hereford United"/>
<link wikidata="Q18716" start="41406" end="41422" title="Newcastle United F.C." label="Newcastle United"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41492" end="41517" title="1971–72 FA Cup#Third round proper" label="Third round proper replay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365962" start="41540" end="41554" title="Ronnie Radford" label="Ronnie Radford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574889" start="41771" end="41786" title="1971–72 Southern Football League" label="Southern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305609" start="41795" end="41810" title="Chelmsford City F.C." label="Chelmsford City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7299952" start="41821" end="41851" title="re-election (Football League)" label="voted into the Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18507" start="41870" end="41876" title="Barrow A.F.C." label="Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q19651" start="42010" end="42021" title="Yeovil Town F.C." label="Yeovil Town"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42169" end="42178" title="Promotion and relegation#English example" label="promotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493660" start="42207" end="42211" title="2002–03 Football Conference" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q18660" start="42290" end="42300" title="Altrincham F.C." label="Altrincham"/>
<link wikidata="Q615034" start="42499" end="42513" title="2008–09 FA Cup" label="2008–09 FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q120290091" start="42577" end="42584" title="2023–24 FA Cup" label="2023–24"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630729" start="42598" end="42621" title="List of non-League clubs in the Fifth Round of the FA Cup since 1925–26" label="eleven non-League teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q18519" start="42689" end="42701" title="Lincoln City F.C." label="Lincoln City"/>
<link wikidata="Q24266695" start="42761" end="42768" title="2016–17 FA Cup" label="2016–17"/>
<link wikidata="Q18470" start="42797" end="42806" title="Chasetown F.C." label="Chasetown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42825" end="42832" title="English football league system#The system" label="Level 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q925056" start="42864" end="42883" title="2007–08 FA Cup" label="2007–08 competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4610226" start="43033" end="43070" title="2007–08 Southern Football League" label="Southern League Division One Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q18573" start="43097" end="43121" title="Southern Football League" label="Southern Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="43142" end="43170" title="Football League Championship" label="Football League Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q18662" start="43186" end="43198" title="Cardiff City F.C." label="Cardiff City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18297" start="43315" end="43321" title="Marine F.C." label="Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q98381281" start="43342" end="43361" title="2020–21 FA Cup" label="2020–21 competition"/>
<link wikidata="Q18502" start="43381" end="43404" title="Northern Premier League" label="Northern Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="43453" end="43467" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="43483" end="43500" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q120290091" start="43537" end="43544" title="2023–24 FA Cup" label="2023–24"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764590" start="43553" end="43569" title="Maidstone United F.C." label="Maidstone United"/>
<link wikidata="Q58915" start="43577" end="43598" title="National League South" label="National League South"/>
<link wikidata="Q19510" start="43683" end="43699" title="EFL Championship" label="EFL Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q9653" start="43715" end="43727" title="Ipswich Town F.C." label="Ipswich Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q19580" start="43819" end="43832" title="Coventry City F.C." label="Coventry City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630729" start="43850" end="43874" title="List of non-League clubs in the Fifth Round of the FA Cup since 1925–26" label="eleventh non–League team"/>
<link wikidata="Q18284" start="43943" end="43957" title="Blyth Spartans A.F.C." label="Blyth Spartans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736716" start="43971" end="43978" title="1977–78 FA Cup" label="1977–78"/>
<link wikidata="Q17022621" start="44348" end="44360" title="Wrexham A.F.C. 2–1 Arsenal F.C." label="1992 victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q18529" start="44364" end="44371" title="Wrexham F.C." label="Wrexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q11253708" start="44373" end="44379" title="1990–91 Football League Fourth Division" label="bottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="44458" end="44477" title="English Football League" label="The Football League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44485" end="44493" title="1990–91 Football League#First Division" label="reigning"/>
<link wikidata="Q19626" start="44544" end="44559" title="Shrewsbury Town F.C." label="Shrewsbury Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q5794" start="44565" end="44572" title="Everton F.C." label="Everton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386642" start="44580" end="44584" title="2002–03 FA Cup" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q817255" start="44618" end="44632" title="2002–03 Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44658" end="44667" title="2002–03 Football League#Third Division" label="relegated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493661" start="44675" end="44694" title="2003–04 Football Conference" label="Football Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181967" start="44700" end="44711" title="2002–03 in English football" label="same season"/>
<link wikidata="Q852753" start="44901" end="44918" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Park F.C." label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q478320" start="44969" end="44998" title="Scottish Football Association" label="Scottish Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q841201" start="45109" end="45118" title="Wanderers F.C." label="Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19446" start="45154" end="45170" title="Blackburn Rovers F.C." label="Blackburn Rovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="45206" end="45223" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="45256" end="45263" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q648465" start="45265" end="45269" title="2002 FA Cup Final" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616571" start="45271" end="45275" title="2003 FA Cup Final" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q16323089" start="45280" end="45284" title="2014 FA Cup Final" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q19817594" start="45286" end="45290" title="2015 FA Cup Final" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q47576" start="45370" end="45383" title="Arsène Wenger" label="Arsène Wenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484526" start="45430" end="45434" title="1998 FA Cup Final" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q648465" start="45436" end="45440" title="2002 FA Cup Final" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616571" start="45442" end="45446" title="2003 FA Cup Final" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584412" start="45448" end="45452" title="2005 FA Cup Final" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q16323089" start="45454" end="45458" title="2014 FA Cup Final" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q19817594" start="45460" end="45464" title="2015 FA Cup Final" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q29551985" start="45466" end="45470" title="2017 FA Cup Final" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="45629" end="45644" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q845101" start="45698" end="45704" title="Treble (association football)" label="treble"/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="45727" end="45737" title="EFL Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="45753" end="45760" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q60973701" start="45785" end="45801" title="2019 EFL Cup Final" label="League Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q39052816" start="45830" end="45844" title="2018–19 Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714" start="45857" end="45864" title="Watford F.C." label="Watford"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="45891" end="45908" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556033" start="45910" end="45914" title="1998–99 in English football" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="45920" end="45935" title="Manchester City F.C." label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q111982593" start="45937" end="45941" title="2022-23 Manchester City F.C. season" label="2023"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="46012" end="46018" title="FA Premier League" label="league"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756" start="46032" end="46048" title="UEFA Champions League" label="Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3747833" start="46127" end="46137" title="2000–01 Football League Cup" label="League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q656410" start="46142" end="46150" title="2000–01 UEFA Cup" label="UEFA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930669" start="46155" end="46159" title="2000–01 in English football" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46175" end="46185" title="Treble (association football)#Other trebles" label="cup treble"/>
<link wikidata="Q876065" start="46233" end="46254" title="Double (association football)" label="league and cup double"/>
<link wikidata="Q19612" start="46263" end="46280" title="Preston North End F.C." label="Preston North End"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="46289" end="46300" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="46309" end="46326" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q9617" start="46335" end="46342" title="Arsenal F.C." label="Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="46363" end="46372" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q18656" start="46381" end="46398" title="Manchester United F.C." label="Manchester United"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616" start="46419" end="46426" title="Chelsea F.C." label="Chelsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q50602" start="46438" end="46453" title="Manchester City F.C" label="Manchester City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19498" start="46583" end="46602" title="Sheffield Wednesday F.C." label="Sheffield Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q18662" start="46859" end="46871" title="Cardiff City F.C." label="Cardiff City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19607" start="46999" end="47015" title="Sheffield United F.C." label="Sheffield United"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604" start="47050" end="47060" title="Portsmouth F.C." label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q511040" start="47188" end="47197" title="Welsh Cup" label="Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q852753" start="47225" end="47242" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Park F.C." label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q19598" start="47526" end="47538" title="Notts County F.C." label="Notts County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4556816" start="47540" end="47544" title="1894 FA Cup Final" label="1894"/>
<link wikidata="Q18741" start="47547" end="47564" title="Tottenham Hotspur F.C." label="Tottenham Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413320" start="47566" end="47570" title="1901 FA Cup Final" label="1901"/>
<link wikidata="Q19500" start="47573" end="47596" title="Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C." label="Wolverhampton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558845" start="47598" end="47602" title="1908 FA Cup Final" label="1908"/>
<link wikidata="Q19442" start="47605" end="47613" title="Barnsley F.C." label="Barnsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4559484" start="47615" end="47619" title="1912 FA Cup Final" label="1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q18744" start="47622" end="47642" title="West Bromwich Albion F.C." label="West Bromwich Albion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4562832" start="47644" end="47648" title="1931 FA Cup Final" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q18739" start="47651" end="47661" title="Sunderland A.F.C." label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575554" start="47663" end="47667" title="1973 FA Cup Final" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q18732" start="47670" end="47681" title="Southampton F.C." label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484507" start="47683" end="47687" title="1976 FA Cup Final" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q18747" start="47693" end="47708" title="West Ham United F.C." label="West Ham United"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484511" start="47710" end="47714" title="1980 FA Cup Final" label="1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q18573" start="47856" end="47871" title="Southern Football League" label="Southern League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48061" end="48073" title="#Winners and finalists" label="24 finalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4557981" start="48233" end="48237" title="1902 FA Cup Final" label="1902"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="48399" end="48411" title="Leeds United F.C." label="Leeds United"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48434" end="48448" title="1972–73 Football League#First Division" label="the top flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q11252526" start="48623" end="48648" title="1979–80 Football League" label="4th in the First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q925056" start="48820" end="48824" title="2007–08 FA Cup" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q18662" start="48869" end="48881" title="Cardiff City F.C." label="Cardiff City"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604" start="49006" end="49016" title="Portsmouth F.C." label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q18750" start="49147" end="49161" title="Wigan Athletic F.C." label="Wigan Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11054919" start="49163" end="49167" title="2013 FA Cup Final" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q7078849" start="49419" end="49478" title="Ofcom Code on Sports and Other Listed and Designated Events" label="Ofcom Code on Sports and Other Listed and Designated Events"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461827" start="49597" end="49608" title="Radio Times" label="Radio Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561885" start="49728" end="49732" title="1926 FA Cup Final" label="1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q19451" start="49741" end="49757" title="Bolton Wanderers F.C." label="Bolton Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19473" start="50100" end="50117" title="Huddersfield Town F.C." label="Huddersfield Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q920046" start="50833" end="50863" title="British Satellite Broadcasting" label="British Satellite Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475898" start="50987" end="50990" title="Sky Television (1984–1990)" label="Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1908130" start="51258" end="51274" title="Match of the Day" label="Match of the Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="51462" end="51465" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340204" start="51470" end="51480" title="Sky Sports" label="Sky Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q615034" start="51731" end="51738" title="2008–09 FA Cup" label="2008–09"/>
<link wikidata="Q13502290" start="51742" end="51749" title="2013–14 FA Cup" label="2013–14"/>
<link wikidata="Q674608" start="51785" end="51788" title="ITV (TV channel)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="51808" end="51813" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406307" start="51820" end="51823" title="UTV (TV channel)" label="UTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="51840" end="51856" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198146" start="51874" end="51877" title="STV (TV network)" label="STV"/>
<link wikidata="Q133890" start="52455" end="52469" title="Setanta Sports" label="Setanta Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="52696" end="52704" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="52921" end="52943" title="England national football team" label="England internationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975068" start="53052" end="53061" title="ITV Local" label="ITV Local"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53067" end="53078" title="2008–09 FA Cup qualifying rounds#Extra preliminary round" label="first match"/>
<link wikidata="Q6417660" start="53107" end="53119" title="Wantage Town F.C." label="Wantage Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954817" start="53124" end="53136" title="Brading Town F.C." label="Brading Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033167" start="53593" end="53598" title="BSkyB" label="BSkyB"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735419" start="53906" end="53910" title="ITV4" label="ITV4"/>
<link wikidata="Q211814" start="54042" end="54066" title="2010 FIFA World Cup qualification (UEFA)" label="2010 World Cup Qualifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q170403" start="54075" end="54082" title="Ukraine national football team" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q47762" start="54087" end="54094" title="England national football team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q19601" start="54134" end="54149" title="Oldham Athletic A.F.C." label="Oldham Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301815" start="54327" end="54339" title="Rebecca Lowe" label="Rebecca Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046167" start="54400" end="54404" title="ESPN (UK)" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111305" start="54518" end="54524" title="Sky 3D" label="Sky 3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="54657" end="54659" title="BT Group" label="BT"/>
<link wikidata="Q13577460" start="54703" end="54711" title="BT Sport" label="BT Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987294" start="54997" end="55011" title="2014–15 FA Cup" label="2014–15 FA Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q552359" start="55044" end="55053" title="BBC Sport" label="BBC Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="55085" end="55092" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="55324" end="55338" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh language"/>
<link wikidata="Q426637" start="55347" end="55350" title="S4C" label="S4C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000845" start="55534" end="55549" title="BBC Cymru Wales" label="BBC Cymru Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q13577460" start="55741" end="55749" title="BT Sport" label="BT Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="55825" end="55828" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q848981" start="56008" end="56019" title="free-to-air" label="free-to-air"/>
<link wikidata="Q795588" start="56324" end="56340" title="BBC Radio 5 Live" label="BBC Radio 5 Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679885" start="56345" end="56354" title="Talksport" label="Talksport"/>
<link wikidata="Q795546" start="56473" end="56488" title="BBC Local Radio" label="BBC Local Radio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11238" wikidata="Q49136" url="?curid=11238" title="Fenway Park">
<text>Fenway Park is a ballpark located in Boston, Massachusetts, less than one mile from Kenmore Square. Since 1912, it has been the home field of Major League Baseball&#x27;s (MLB) Boston Red Sox. While the stadium was built in 1912, it was substantially rebuilt in 1934, and underwent major renovations and modifications in the 21st century.
It is the oldest active ballpark in MLB. Because of its age and constrained location in Boston&#x27;s dense Fenway–Kenmore neighborhood, the park has many quirky features, including &quot;The Triangle&quot;, Pesky&#x27;s Pole, and the Green Monster in left field. It is the fifth-smallest among MLB ballparks by seating capacity, second-smallest by total capacity, and one of nine that cannot accommodate at least 40,000 spectators.

Fenway has hosted the World Series eleven times, with the Red Sox winning six of them and the Boston Braves winning one. Besides baseball games, it has also been the site of many other sporting and cultural events including professional football games for the Boston Redskins, Boston Yanks, and the Boston Patriots; concerts; soccer and hockey games (such as the 2010 NHL Winter Classic); and political and religious campaigns.

On March 7, 2012 (Fenway&#x27;s centennial year), the park was added to the National Register of Historic Places. It is a landmark at the end of the Boston Irish heritage trail. Former pitcher Bill Lee has called Fenway Park &quot;a shrine&quot;. It is a pending Boston Landmark, which will regulate any further changes to the park. The ballpark is considered to be one of the most well-known sports venues in the world and a symbol of Boston.

==History==
In 1911, while the Red Sox were still playing on Huntington Avenue Grounds, owner John I. Taylor purchased the land bordered by Brookline Avenue, Jersey Street, Van Ness Street and Lansdowne Street and developed it into a larger baseball stadium known as Fenway Park. Taylor claimed the name Fenway Park came from its location in the Fenway neighborhood of Boston, which was partially created late in the nineteenth century by filling in marshland or &quot;fens&quot;, to create the Back Bay Fens urban park. However, given that Taylor&#x27;s family also owned the Fenway Realty Company, the promotional value of the naming at the time has been cited as well.

Like many classic ballparks, Fenway Park was constructed on an asymmetrical block, with consequent asymmetry in its field dimensions. The park was designed by architect James E. McLaughlin, and the General Contractor was the Charles Logue Building Company.

The first game was played April 20, 1912, with mayor John F. Fitzgerald throwing out the first pitch and Boston defeating the New York Highlanders, 7–6 in 11 innings. Newspaper coverage of the opening was overshadowed by continuing coverage of the &quot;Titanic&quot; sinking five days earlier.

In June 1919, a rally supporting Irish Independence turned out nearly 50,000 supporters to see the President of the Irish Republic, Éamon de Valera, and was allegedly the largest crowd ever in the ballpark.

The park&#x27;s address was originally 24 Jersey Street. In 1977, the section of Jersey Street nearest the park was renamed Yawkey Way in honor of longtime Red Sox owner Tom Yawkey, and the park&#x27;s address was 4 Yawkey Way until 2018, when the street&#x27;s name was reverted to Jersey Street in light of current Red Sox ownership distancing itself from Yawkey due to his history of racism (the Red Sox were the last team in Major League Baseball to integrate). The address is now 4 Jersey Street.


===Changes to Fenway Park===
Some of the changes include:
* In 1926, a fire burned down Fenway Park&#x27;s left field bleachers, which were left in their empty &amp; burned state until 1933.
* In 1933, a significant reconstruction of Fenway Park began after Tom Yawkey purchased the Red Sox and Fenway Park.
** Duffy&#x27;s Cliff was leveled and no longer existed, with work started on what eventually became known as the Green Monster.
** Two wooden bleacher sections were reconstructed.
** Multiple areas of the park were renovated or were new additions, including concessions, employee rooms, the press box, and the entrance to the team offices on Jersey Street.
* By Opening Day 1934, the newly renovated Fenway Park had assumed the basic appearance, color (Dartmouth Green), and layout that exists to present day:
** A large fire caused significant damage to new seating areas in left field and center field bleachers. These areas were reconstructed before opening day 1934.
** 7,000 new seats were added
** The Green Monster was completed at 37-feet high, replacing the 10 foot tall Duffy&#x27;s Cliff and the original 25 foot wall.
** A hand-operated scoreboard was added, with (what was then considered cutting-edge technology) lights to indicate balls and strikes. The scoreboard is still updated by hand today from behind the wall. The National League scores were removed in 1976, but restored in 2003 and still require manual updates from on the field.
** Home run and foul distances were significantly altered:
*** From 320 feet to 312 in left
*** 468 feet to 420 in center
*** 358 feet to 334 in right
*** distance to the backstop was shortened from 68 feet to 60 feet
* In 1946, the first upper deck seats were installed.
* In 1947, arc lights were installed at Fenway Park. The Boston Red Sox were the third-to-last team out of 16 major league teams to have lights in their home park.
* In 1976, metric distances were added to the conventionally stated distances because it was thought at the time that the United States would adopt the metric system. As of 2022, only Miami&#x27;s LoanDepot Park and Toronto&#x27;s Rogers Centre list metric distances. Fenway Park retained the metric measurements until mid-season 2002, when they were painted over. Also, Fenway&#x27;s first electronic message board was added over the center field bleachers.
* In 1988, a glass-protected seating area behind home plate named &quot;The 600 Club&quot; was built. After Ted Williams&#x27; death in 2002, it was renamed the &quot;.406 Club&quot; in honor of his 1941 season in which he produced a .406 batting average. The section was renamed again in 2006 to the &quot;EMC Club&quot;.
* In 1993 the public restrooms were renovated and the original trough urinals were removed from the men&#x27;s rooms. 
* In 1999 the auxiliary press boxes were added on top of the roof boxes along the first and third base sides of the field.
* In 2000, a new video display from Daktronics, measuring high by wide, was added in center field.
* Before the 2003 season, seats were added to the Green Monster.
* Before the 2004 season, seats were added to the right field roof, above the grandstand, called the Budweiser Right Field Roof. In December 2017 Samuel Adams renamed the deck the &quot;Sam Deck.&quot;
* Before the 2008 season, the Coke bottles, installed in 1997, were removed to return the light towers to their original state. The temporary luxury boxes installed for the 1999 All-Star Game were removed and permanent ones were added to the State Street Pavilion level. Seats were also added down the left field line called the Coca-Cola Party-Deck.
* Before the 2011 season, three new scoreboards beyond right-center field were installed: a scoreboard in right-center field, a video screen in center field, a video board in right field, along with a new video control room. The Gate D concourse has undergone a complete remodel with new concession stands and improved pedestrian flow. The wooden grandstand seats were all removed to allow the completion of the waterproofing of the seating bowl and completely refurbished upon re-installation.

===New Fenway Park===
On May 15, 1999, then-Red Sox CEO John Harrington announced plans for a new Fenway Park to be built near the existing structure. It was to have seated 44,130 and would have been a modernized replica of the current Fenway Park, with the same field dimensions except for a shorter right field and reduced foul territory. Some sections of the existing ballpark were to be preserved (mainly the original Green Monster and the third base side of the park) as part of the overall new layout. Most of the current stadium was to be demolished to make room for new development, with one section remaining to house a baseball museum and public park. The proposal was highly controversial; it projected that the park had less than 15 years of usable life, would require hundreds of millions of dollars of public investment, and was later revealed to be part of a scheme by current ownership to increase the marketable value of the team as they were ready to sell. Several groups (such as &quot;Save Fenway Park&quot;) formed in an attempt to block the move.

A significant renovation of Fenway Park stretched over a 10-year period beginning around 2002 headed by Janet Marie Smith, then Vice President of Planning and Development for the Sox. The Boston Globe has described Smith as &quot;the architect credited with saving Fenway Park.&quot; At completion of the renovations, it was reported that Fenway Park remains usable until as late as 2062.

==Capacity and sellout streak==
Fenway&#x27;s capacity differs between day and night games because, during day games, the seats in center field (Section 35) are covered with a black tarp in order to provide a batter&#x27;s eye.

Fenway&#x27;s lowest attendance was recorded on October 1, 1964, when a game against the Cleveland Indians drew only 306 paid spectators.

On May 15, 2003, the Red Sox game against the Texas Rangers sold out, beginning a sellout streak that lasted until 2013. On September 8, 2008, when the Red Sox hosted the Tampa Bay Rays, Fenway Park broke the all-time Major League record for consecutive sellouts with 456, surpassing the record previously held by Jacobs Field in Cleveland. On June 17, 2009, the park celebrated its 500th consecutive Red Sox sellout. According to WBZ-TV, the team joined three NBA teams which achieved 500 consecutive home sellouts. The sellout streak ended on April 10, 2013 (with an attendance of 30,862) after the Red Sox sold out 794 regular season games and an additional 26 postseason games.



==Features==
The park is located along Lansdowne Street and Jersey Street in the Kenmore Square area of Boston. The area includes many buildings of similar height and architecture and thus it blends in with its surroundings. When pitcher Roger Clemens arrived in Boston for the first time in 1984, he took a taxi from Logan Airport and was sure the driver had misunderstood his directions when he announced their arrival at the park. Clemens recalled telling the driver &quot;No, Fenway Park, it&#x27;s a baseball stadium ... this is a warehouse.&quot; Only when the driver told Clemens to look up and he saw the light towers did he realize he was in the right place.

Fenway Park is one of the two remaining jewel box ballparks still in use in Major League Baseball, the other being Wrigley Field; both have a significant number of obstructed view seats, due to pillars supporting the upper deck. These are sold as such, and are a reminder of the architectural limitations of older ballparks.

George Will asserts in his book &quot;Men at Work&quot; that Fenway Park is a &quot;hitters&#x27; ballpark&quot;, with its short right-field fence (302 feet), narrow foul ground (the smallest of any current major league park), and generally closer-than-normal outfield fences. By Rule 1.04, Note(a), all parks built after 1958 have been required to have foul lines at least long and a center-field fence at least from home plate. (This rule had the unintended consequence of leading to the &quot;Cookie-Cutter Stadium&quot; era, which ended when Camden Yards opened in 1992.) Regarding the narrow foul territory, Will writes:

Will states that some observers might feel that these unique aspects of Fenway give the Red Sox an advantage over their opponents, given that the Red Sox hitters play 81 games at the home stadium while each opponent plays no more than seven games as visiting teams but Will does not share this view.

Fenway Park&#x27;s bullpen wall is much lower than most other outfield walls; outfielders are known to end up flying over this wall when chasing balls hit that direction, such as with Torii Hunter when chasing a David Ortiz game-tying grand slam that direction in game 2 of the 2013 ALCS.

===The Green Monster===
The Green Monster is the nickname of the left field wall in the park. It is located from home plate; this short distance often benefits right-handed hitters.

Part of the original ballpark construction of 1912, the wall is made of wood, but was covered in tin and concrete in 1934, when the scoreboard was added. The wall was covered in hard plastic in 1976. The scoreboard is manually updated throughout the game. If a ball in play goes through a hole in the scoreboard while the scorers are replacing numbers, the batter is awarded a ground rule double. Similarly, if a batter hits a ball into the balls, strikes, and out lights, it is also ruled a ground rule double.

The inside walls of the Green Monster are covered with players&#x27; signatures from over the years. Despite the name, the Green Monster was not painted green until 1947; before that, it was covered with advertisements. The &quot;Monster&quot; designation is relatively new; for most of its history, it was simply called &quot;the wall.&quot; In 2003, terrace-style seating was added on top of the wall.

===&quot;The Triangle&quot;===

&quot;The Triangle&quot; is a region of center field where the walls form a triangle whose far corner is from home plate. That deep right-center point is conventionally given as the center field distance. The true center is unmarked, from home plate, to the left of &quot;the Triangle&quot; when viewed from home plate.

There was once a smaller &quot;Triangle&quot; at the left end of the bleachers in center field, posted as . The end of the bleachers form a right angle with the Green Monster and the flagpole stands within that little triangle. That is not the true power alley, but deep left-center. The true power alley distance is not posted. The foul line intersects with the Green Monster at nearly a right angle, so the power alley could be estimated at , assuming the power alley is 22.5° away from the foul line as measured from home plate.

===&quot;Williamsburg&quot;===
&quot;Williamsburg&quot; was the name, invented by sportswriters, for the bullpen area built in front of the right-center field bleachers in 1940. It was built there primarily for the benefit of Ted Williams, to enable him and other left-handed batters to hit more home runs, since it was closer than the bleacher wall.

===The Lone Red Seat===
The lone red seat in the right field bleachers (Section 42, Row 37, Seat 21) signifies the longest home run ever hit at Fenway. The home run, hit by Ted Williams on June 9, 1946, was officially measured at , well beyond &quot;Williamsburg&quot;. According to Hit Tracker Online, the ball, if unobstructed, would have flown .

The ball landed on Joseph A. Boucher, penetrating his large straw hat and hitting him in the head. A confounded Boucher was later quoted as saying:


There have been other home runs hit at Fenway that have contended for the distance title. In the 2007 book &quot;The Year Babe Ruth Hit 104 Home Runs&quot;, researcher Bill Jenkinson found evidence that on May 25, 1926, Babe Ruth hit one in the pre-1934 bleacher configuration which landed five rows from the top in right field. This would have placed it at an estimated from home plate. On June 23, 2001, Manny Ramirez hit one that struck a light tower above the Green Monster, which would have cleared the park had it missed. The park&#x27;s official estimate placed the home run one foot short of Williams&#x27; record at . An April 2019 home run by Rowdy Tellez of the Toronto Blue Jays was initially reported as , but later found to be significantly shorter, approximately .
===Foul poles===


Pesky&#x27;s Pole is the name for the pole on the right field foul line, which stands from home plate, the shortest outfield distance (left or right field) in Major League Baseball. Like the measurement of the left-field line at Fenway Park, this has been disputed. Aerial shots show it to be noticeably shorter than the (actual) 302 foot line in right field, and Pesky has been quoted as estimating it to be &quot;around 295 feet&quot;. There is no distance posted on the wall.

Despite the short wall, home runs in this area are relatively rare, as the fence curves away from the foul pole sharply. The pole was named after Johnny Pesky, a non-power-hitting shortstop and long-time coach for the Red Sox, who hit some of his six home runs at Fenway Park around the pole but never off the pole. Pesky (playing 1942 to 1952, except for 1943 to 1945) was a contact hitter who hit just 17 home runs in his career (6 at Fenway Park). It&#x27;s not known how many of these six actually landed near the pole. The Red Sox give credit to pitcher (and later, Sox broadcaster) Mel Parnell for coining the name. The most notable for Pesky is a two-run homer in the eighth inning of the 1946 Opening Day game to win the game. According to Pesky, Mel Parnell named the pole after Pesky won a game for Parnell in with a home run down the short right field line, just around the pole. However, Pesky hit just one home run in a game pitched by Parnell, a two-run shot in the first inning of a game against Detroit played on June 11, 1950. The game was eventually won by the visiting Tigers in the 14th inning on a three-run shot by Tigers right fielder Vic Wertz and Parnell earned a no-decision that day.

The term, though it had been in use since the 1950s, became far more common when Parnell became a Red Sox broadcaster in 1965. Mark Bellhorn hit what proved to be the game-winning home run off of Julián Tavárez in game 1 of the 2004 World Series off that pole&#x27;s screen.

On September 27, 2006, Pesky&#x27;s 87th birthday, the Red Sox officially dedicated the right field foul pole as &quot;Pesky&#x27;s Pole&quot;, with a commemorative plaque placed at its base.

The seat directly on the foul side of Pesky&#x27;s Pole in the front row is Section 94, Row E, Seat 5 and is usually sold as a lone ticket.

In a ceremony before the Red Sox&#x27; 2005 game against the Cincinnati Reds, the pole on the left field foul line atop the Green Monster was named the Fisk Foul Pole, or &quot;Pudge&#x27;s Pole&quot;, in honor of Carlton Fisk. Fisk provided one of baseball&#x27;s most enduring moments in Game 6 of the 1975 World Series against the Reds. Facing Reds right-hander Pat Darcy in the 12th inning with the score tied at 6, Fisk hit a long fly ball down the left field line. It appeared to be heading foul, but Fisk, after initially appearing unsure of whether or not to continue running to first base, famously jumped and waved his arms to the right as if to somehow direct the ball fair. It ricocheted off the foul pole, winning the game for the Red Sox and sending the series to a seventh and deciding game the next night, which Cincinnati won. Like Johnny Pesky&#x27;s No. 6, Carlton had his No. 27 player number retired by the team.

===&quot;Duffy&#x27;s Cliff&quot;===

From 1912 to 1933, there was a high incline in front of the then -high left field wall at Fenway Park, extending from the left-field foul pole to the center field flag pole (and thus under &quot;The Triangle&quot; of today). As a result, a left fielder had to play part of the territory running uphill (and back down). Boston&#x27;s first star left fielder, Duffy Lewis, mastered the skill so well that the area became known as &quot;Duffy&#x27;s Cliff&quot;.

The incline served two purposes: it was a support for a high wall and it was built to compensate for the difference in grades between the field and Lansdowne Street on the other side of that wall. The wall also served as a spectator-friendly seating area during the dead ball era when overflow crowds, in &quot;front&quot; of the later Green Monster, would sit on the incline behind ropes.

As part of the 1934 remodeling of the ballpark, the bleachers, and the wall itself, Red Sox owner Tom Yawkey arranged to flatten the ground along the base of the wall, so that Duffy&#x27;s Cliff no longer existed. The base of the left field wall is several feet below the grade level of Lansdowne Street, accounting for the occasional rat that might spook the scoreboard operators.

There has been debate as to the true left field distance, which was once posted as . A reporter from &quot;The Boston Globe&quot; was able to sneak into Fenway Park and measure the distance. When the paper&#x27;s evidence was presented to the club in 1995, the distance was remeasured by the Red Sox and restated at . The companion sign remained unchanged until 1998, when it was corrected to .

===Dell EMC Club===
In 1983, private suites were added to the roof behind home plate. In 1988, 610 stadium club seats enclosed in glass and named the &quot;600 Club&quot;, were added above the home plate grandstand replacing the existing press box. The press box was then added to the top of the 600 Club. The 1988 addition has been thought to have changed the air currents in the park to the detriment of hitters. In 2002, the organization renamed the club seats the &quot;.406 Club&quot; (in honor of Ted Williams&#x27; batting average in 1941).

Between the 2005 and 2006 seasons the existing .406 club was rebuilt as part of the continuing ballpark expansion efforts. The second deck now features two open-air levels: the bottom level is the new &quot;Dell EMC Club&quot; featuring 406 seats and concierge services and the upper level, the State Street Pavilion, has 374 seats and a dedicated standing room area. The added seats are wider than the previous seats.
===Statues===
Outside Gate 5 is &quot;The Teammates&quot; statue, by Antonio Tobias Mendez, which depicts Red Sox players Bobby Doerr, Dom DiMaggio, Ted Williams, and Johnny Pesky. It was unveiled in 2010.

There is also a solo statue of Williams, unveiled in 2004, depicting him placing his cap on the head of a young boy.

===Program hawkers===
In 1990, Mike Rutstein started handing out the first issue of &quot;Boston Baseball Magazine&quot; (originally called &quot;Baseball Underground&quot;) outside of the park. He was frustrated with the quality of the program being sold inside the park, which also came out once every two months. The program was sold for $1, half the cost of the programs inside the park. To sell the program, Rutstein&#x27;s employees would stand outside the park wearing bright red shirts and greet fans by holding a program up and shouting &quot;Program, Scorecard, One Dollar!&quot;. By 1992, the Red Sox organization filed complaints with the city code enforcement arguing that the scorecard inside the magazine was not covered under the First Amendment protecting magazines and that Rutstein&#x27;s employees were operating on the streets without a permit. Despite a lot of attention in the news, Rutstein said the charges were not pursued and no further legal action was taken. In 2012, one of Rutstein&#x27;s long time employees Sly Egidio quit Boston Baseball to start &quot;The Yawkey Way Report&quot; named after Yawkey Way. By that time, Boston Baseball was selling for $3 per program, $2 cheaper than the in-park programs selling for $5. The Yawkey Way Report cost $1 and Egidio stationed his hawkers close to Boston Baseball&#x27;s hawkers, starting a &quot;hawker war.&quot; The Yawkey Way Report also came with baseball cards, ponchos and tote bags, which caused Rutstein to file his own complaints with Boston city code enforcement. Despite the rivalry, both programs continue to be hawked outside of Fenway Park and are often the first thing fans see when they approach the stadium on game-day.

==Use==
===Baseball===

The Red Sox&#x27; one-time cross-town rivals, the Boston Braves, used Fenway Park for the 1914 World Series and the 1915 season until Braves Field was completed; ironically, the Red Sox would then use Braves Field – which had a much higher seating capacity – for their own World Series games in 1915 and 1916.

Since 1990 (except in 2005 when, because of field work, it was held in a minor league ballpark, and 2020, as the tournament was cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic), Fenway Park has also hosted the final round of a Boston-area intercollegiate baseball tournament called the Baseball Beanpot, an equivalent to the more well-known hockey Beanpot tourney. The teams play the first rounds in minor league stadiums before moving on to Fenway for the final and a consolation game. Boston College, Harvard University, Northeastern University, and the University of Massachusetts Amherst compete in the four-team tournament.

Since at least 1997 Neil Diamond&#x27;s &quot;Sweet Caroline&quot; has been played at Fenway Park during Red Sox games, in the middle of the eighth inning since 2002. On opening night of the 2010 season at Fenway Park, the song was performed by Diamond himself in the middle of the eighth inning.

Beginning in 2006, the Red Sox have hosted the &quot;Futures at Fenway&quot; event, where two of their minor-league affiliates play a regular-season doubleheader as the &quot;home&quot; teams. Before the Futures day started, the most recent minor-league game held at Fenway had been the Eastern League All-Star Game in 1977.

From 1970 to 1987, the Cape Cod Baseball League (CCBL) played its annual all-star game at various major league stadiums. The games were interleague contests between the CCBL and the Atlantic Collegiate Baseball League (ACBL). The 1975, 1977, 1979, 1981, 1983, 1985 and 1987 games were played at Fenway. The MVP of the 1977 contest was future major league slugger Steve Balboni, who clobbered two home runs over the Green Monster that day. The CCBL returned to Fenway in 2009, 2010 and 2011 for its intraleague all-star game matching the league&#x27;s East and West divisions. The 2009 game starred East division MVP and future Boston Red Sox Chris Sale of Florida Gulf Coast University. The CCBL also holds an annual workout day at Fenway where CCBL players are evaluated by major league scouts.

==== Baseball Records and Events of Note ====

* Red Sox First Baseman Hugh Bradley hit the first home run at Fenway Park on April 26, 1912.
* The first Grand slam hit at Fenway Park was by Rabbit Maranville of the Boston Braves in a 6–2 victory over the Chicago Cubs on September 26, 1914.
* On June 21, 1916, Rube Foster pitches the first no-hitter at Fenway in a 2–0 victory over the Yankees.
* On August 4, 1959, Elijah &quot;Pumpsie&quot; Green became the first African-American player in the Red Sox lineup to play at Fenway.
* On August 19, 1967, Red Sox switch-hitter Reggie Smith became the first player in Fenway Park to hit a home run from both sides of the plate.

===Boxing===
On October 9, 1920, Fenway Park was the site of the first open-air boxing show in Boston. The card featured four bouts. Although Eddie Shevlin and Paul Doyle fought in the feature bout, Daniel J. Saunders of the &quot;Boston Daily Globe&quot; described heavyweights Battling McCreery and John Lester Johnson as &quot;the only boxers who caused any excitement&quot;. McCreery, who according to Saunders, &quot;was to take a flop in five rounds&quot;, won by judge&#x27;s decision in ten rounds. After the fight, Johnson punched McCreery while McCreery was trying to shake his hand. McCreery then knocked Johnson out of the ring and hit him over the head with his chair. The card drew 5,000 spectators (half of what was expected) and brought in $6,100 (several thousand less than what was promised to the fighters).

In 1928, New England Welterweight Champion Al Mello headlined three cards at Fenway. He defeated Billy Murphy in front of a crowd of 12,000 on June 26, Charlie Donovan on August 31, and Murphy again on September 13.

On July 2, 1930, future World Heavyweight Champion James J. Braddock made his debut in that weight class. He defeated Joe Monte in ten rounds.

On September 2, 1930, Babe Hunt defeated Ernie Schaaf in what &quot;The Boston Daily Globe&quot; described as a &quot;dull bout&quot; and a &quot;big disappointment&quot;. The undercard included future light heavyweight champion George Nichols, who defeated Harry Allen of Brockton, Massachusetts in ten rounds.

In 1932, Eddie Mack promoted ten cards at Fenway Park. The August 2 card featured World Light Heavyweight Champion Maxie Rosenbloom defeating Joe Barlow of Roxbury and Taunton&#x27; Henry Emond defeating The Cocoa Kid. On August 23, Dave Shade defeated Norman Conrad of Wilton, New Hampshire in front of 3,500 attendees. The September 6 card was headlined by World junior lightweight champion Kid Chocolate, who defeated Steve Smith.

On June 25, 1936, former world heavyweight champion Jack Sharkey defeated Phil Brubaker in what would be his final career victory.

In 1937, Rip Valenti and the Goodwin Athletic Club promoted five cards at Fenway. Three of these were headlined by New England Heavyweight Champion Al McCoy. On June 16 McCoy defeated Natie Brown in front of a crowd of 4,516. On July 29 he knocked out Jack McCarthy in the third round. On August 24 he and Tony Shucco fought to a draw. Future WBA featherweight champion Sal Bartolo fought one of his first professional fights on the May 24 undercard.

On June 25, 1945, Tami Mauriello knocked out Lou Nova in 2:47. An estimated crowd of 8,000 was in attendance.

On July 12, 1954, Tony DeMarco knocked out George Araujo 58 seconds into the fifth round in front of 12,000 spectators.

The most recent boxing event at Fenway took place on June 16, 1956. The undercard consisted of Eddie Andrews vs. George Chimenti, Bobby Courchesne vs. George Monroe for the New England Lightweight Championship, and Barry Allison vs. Don Williams for the New England Middleweight Championship. In the main event, Tony DeMarco defeated Vince Martinez by decision. An estimated 15,000 were in attendance - far below promoter Sam Silverman&#x27;s expectations.

===Soccer===
On October 17, 1925, the Boston Soccer Club and the Fall River F.C. of the American Soccer League played a scoreless tie before 4,000 fans. Boston also hosted the Providence Clamdiggers and Indiana Flooring at Fenway later that season. On June 18, 1928, Boston played Rangers F.C. to a 2–2 tie in front of a crowd of 10,000. In 1929, Boston hosted two more matches at Fenway Park; a 3–2 victory over the New Bedford Whalers on August 10 and a 3–2 loss to Fall River on August 17.

On May 30, 1931, 8,000 fans were on hand to see the American Soccer League champion New York Yankees defeat Celtic 4–3. The Yankees goalkeeper, Johnny Reder, would later return to play for the Boston Red Sox.

On May 5, 1967, the park hosted an exhibition between the Atlanta Chiefs and Toronto Falcons of the National Professional Soccer League. The game was a benefit for the Jimmy Fund. The following year, Fenway Park was home to the Boston Beacons of the now-defunct North American Soccer League.

On July 21, 2010, Fenway hosted an exhibition game between European soccer clubs Celtic F.C. and Sporting C.P. in an event called &quot;Football at Fenway&quot;. A crowd of 32,162 watched the two teams play to a 1–1 draw. Celtic won 6–5 on penalty shoot out, winning the first &quot;Fenway football challenge Trophy&quot;. Recent matches have taken place between Liverpool, an English Premier League club owned by Fenway Sports Group, and A.S. Roma, an Italian Serie A club owned by FSG partner Thomas R. DiBenedetto. The July 25, 2012 match ended in a 2–1 win for AS Roma before a crowd of 37,169. AS Roma also won the rematch on July 23, 2014, by a score of 1–0. On July 21, 2019, Liverpool returned to Fenway for a preseason match against Sevilla, the Spanish team won 2–1 at the end of full-time.

===American football===

Football has been played at Fenway since 1912, the year the venue opened. In 1926, the Boston Bulldogs of the first American Football League played at both Fenway and Braves Field; the Boston Shamrocks of the second American Football League did the same in 1936 and 1937. The Boston Redskins of the National Football League (NFL) played at Fenway for four seasons (1933–1936) after playing their inaugural season in 1932 at Braves Field as the Boston Braves. The Boston Yanks played there in the 1940s; and the Boston Patriots of the 1960s American Football League called Fenway Park home from 1963 to 1968 after moving there from Nickerson Field. At various times in the past, Dartmouth College, Boston College, Brown University, and Boston University teams have also played football games at Fenway Park. Boston College and Notre Dame played a game at Fenway in 2015 as part of Notre Dame&#x27;s Shamrock Series. The annual Harvard–Yale game in November 2018 was played at Fenway.

In September 2019, it was announced that the Fenway Bowl, a postseason bowl game, would be played at Fenway Park beginning in 2020, pitting a team from the Atlantic Coast Conference against a team from the American Athletic Conference. However, both the 2020 and 2021 games were canceled, due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The bowl was finally played for the first time in December 2022, as Louisville defeated Cincinnati.

====Team records at Fenway====

===Professional wrestling===
On July 9, 1929, World Heavyweight Champion Gus Sonnenberg defeated Ed &quot;Strangler&quot; Lewis in front of a crowd of 25,000 at Fenway Park.

In 1932, Charlie Gordon promoted shows at Fenway Park. On June 16, 1932, a card headlined by &quot;The Georgia Leech&quot; Paul Adams and George Myerson drew 8,000 spectators. 10,000 people turned out on July 6, 1932, to see a show main evented by Ted Germaine and Stewart Spears. The following week, Steve Passas handed German wrestler Mephisto his first loss in the United States at Fenway. The next week&#x27;s card was headlined by Myerson and Germaine. Myerson was knocked unconscious, but was declared the winner after referee Joe Beston disqualified Germaine for using a choke hold. The card scheduled for July 27 was postponed until August 3 due to rain. It rained again on August 3 and the card was pushed back another week. However, due to a schedule conflict, Steve Passas, was forced to withdraw from his main event bout with Fred Bruno. On August 10, 1932, Adams defeated Louis Poplin in front of 8,000 fans in the substitute main event.

On August 18, 1934, a crowd of 30,000 turned out for a card headlined by AWA World Heavyweight Champion Ed Don George and NWA World Heavyweight Champion Jim Londos. The fight ended in a draw after 3:14:13.

On June 27, 1935, Danno O&#x27;Mahony captured the NWA World Heavyweight Championship from Londos in front of 30,000 fans.

On July 18, 1935, Ed Don George defeated Frank Sexton in an exhibition bout during a musical and athletic carnival benefiting Boston&#x27;s department of public welfare that also featured a five-mile race, firearms exhibition drill, a boxing exhibition, tug of war contest, and a baseball game. Due to rain, only 5,000 attended the event and the ball game was called off after three innings.

On September 10, 1935, O&#x27;Mahony successfully defeated his title against George in front of an estimated crowd of 25,000. The bout, the second between O&#x27;Mahony and George, was refereed by world heavyweight boxing champion James J. Braddock. The Paul Bowser-promoted card also featured Ed &quot;Strangler&quot; Lewis, Frank Sexton, Jack Spellman, and Karl Pojello. During the main event, a spectator suffered a heart attack and died. It was the eighth such death at a Boston wrestling bout in the past two years.

On June 29, 1937, around 7,000 spectators saw Steve Casey defeat Ed Don George in a card that also featured Danno O&#x27;Mahony, Tor Johnson, and William &quot;Wee Willie&quot; Davis. On July 20, 1937, Casey defeated another former world heavyweight champion, Danno O&#x27;Mahony, in front of 8,000. On July 26, 1938, Casey successfully defended his AWA World Heavyweight Championship against Dick Shikat before a crowd of 5,000.

The WWE (then the World Wide Wrestling Federation), hosted its only event at Fenway Park on June 28, 1969. 17,000 turned out to see WWWF World Heavyweight Champion Bruno Sammartino defeat Killer Kowalski in a stretcher match and an undercard that featured a steel cage match between The Sheik and Bulldog Brower, a ten-man battle royal won by Mitsu Arakawa, a six-man midget wrestling tag match, a best three out of five falls six woman tag team match
between The Fabulous Moolah, Donna Christanello, and Toni Rose and Vivian Vachon and Rita and Bette Boucher, and singles matches between George Steele and Victor Rivera, Antonio Pugliese and Baron Mikel Scicluna, Dominic DeNucci and Lou Albano, and Ricky Sexton and Duke Savage.

===Hockey===

Fenway Park has hosted ice hockey games on five separate occasions, beginning in 2010 when the third annual NHL Winter Classic was held at the stadium on New Year&#x27;s Day. The Boston Bruins beat the Philadelphia Flyers 2–1 in sudden-death overtime, securing the first home-team victory in the relatively short history of the annual series. The 2010 Winter Classic paved the way for further use of the stadium for ice hockey, as the &quot;Frozen Fenway&quot; series was introduced. Frozen Fenway is a semi-annual series of collegiate and amateur games featuring ice hockey teams from local and regional high schools, colleges, and universities. Division I matches between Hockey East rivals have been a staple of the Frozen Fenway series, which has seen games played in 2012, 2014, 2017, and 2023 at the ballpark. When not in use for games, the rink is also opened to the public for free ice skating. Fenway Park became the first stadium to host two Winter Classic games in January 2023, as the Boston Bruins once again secured a 2–1 victory, this time defeating the Pittsburgh Penguins.

===Hurling and Gaelic football===
Fenway has hosted Gaelic games over the years. On June 6, 1937, Mayo, the All-Ireland Football champions, defeated a Massachusetts team, 17–8, and on November 8, 1954, Cork, the All-Ireland Hurling champions, defeated an American line-up, 37–28. In more recent times, the Fenway Hurling Classic for the Players Champions Cup has been staged, first in November 2015 when Galway defeated Dublin, and subsequently in November 2017 and November 2018.

===Concerts===
Fenway has been home to various concerts beginning in 1973 when Stevie Wonder and Ray Charles first played there. No further concerts were played there until 2003 when Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band played a leg of their The Rising Tour. Since 2003, there has been at least one concert every year at Fenway by such artists as Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band, Jimmy Buffett, Billy Joel, Shakira, Journey, Def Leppard, The Rolling Stones, Neil Diamond, The Police, Jason Aldean, Mötley Crüe, Dave Matthews Band, Tom Petty &amp; The Heartbreakers, Aerosmith, Phish, Roger Waters, Paul McCartney, James Taylor (2015–2017 consecutively: 2015 &amp; 2017 with Bonnie Raitt, 2016 with Jackson Browne), Pearl Jam, Foo Fighters, Dead &amp; Company and New Kids On The Block 2011 (with Backstreet Boys), 2017 and 2021.

In 2017, Lady Gaga brought her Joanne World Tour to the stadium, making her the first woman to headline a concert there. In 2022, she returned with The Chromatica Ball. In 2019, The Who played their first ever show at the stadium with the Boston Symphony Orchestra. On August 3, 2021, Guns N&#x27; Roses played a show as a part of their 2020 Tour, where they revealed a new song &quot;Absurd&quot;. Aerosmith returned for their 50th-anniversary celebrations on September 8, 2022, and the show labeled the venue&#x27;s highest ticket sales to date.

On July 31 and August 1, 2023, Pink performed at the stadium as part of her Summer Carnival tour, and broke the record for biggest two-day attendance.

===Ski and snowboard===

Polartec Big Air At Fenway is the first big air snowboarding and skiing competition that was held on February 11–12, 2016. This event was part of the U.S. Grand Prix Tour and the International Ski Federation&#x27;s World Tour. Notable winter athletes that competed are Ty Walker, Sage Kotsenburg, and Joss Christensen. The big air jump was constructed to be about tall, standing above the lights of the stadium. 

==Public address announcers==

Frank Fallon was the first public address (PA) announcer for the Red Sox, and held the job from 1953 to 1957. Fred Cusick, better known for his career of announcing Boston Bruins hockey games, joined him in 1956 and also left after 1957. Jay McMaster took over in 1958, until his replacement by Sherm Feller in 1967. Feller served as the announcer for 26 years until his death after the 1993 season. He was known for beginning his games by welcoming the fans with &quot;Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen, boys and girls. Welcome to Fenway Park&quot;, and ending them by saying &quot;Thank you.&quot; Leslie Sterling took the job for the 1994 season, becoming the second female PA announcer in the history of Major League Baseball. Ed Brickley took over in 1997, and was replaced by Carl Beane in 2003. Beane was regarded as an &quot;iconic&quot; announcer, and served until his death in 2012, which was caused by a heart attack suffered while driving. Fenway used a series of guest announcers to finish the 2012 season before hiring Henry Mahegan, Bob Lobel, and Dick Flavin for 2013. Flavin died after the 2022 season.

==Retired numbers==
There are eleven retired numbers above the right field grandstand. The numbers retired by the Red Sox are red on a white circle. Jackie Robinson&#x27;s 42, which was retired by Major League Baseball, is blue on a white circle. The two are further delineated through the font difference; Boston numbers are in the same style as the Red Sox jerseys, while Robinson&#x27;s number is in the more traditional &quot;block&quot; numbering found on the Dodgers jerseys.

The numbers originally hung on the right-field facade in the order in which they were retired: 9-4-1-8. Dan Shaughnessy pointed out that the numbers, when read as a date (9/4/18), marked the eve of the first game of the 1918 World Series, the last championship that the Red Sox won before 2004. After the facade was repainted, the numbers were rearranged in numerical order. The numbers remained in numerical order until the 2012 season, when the numbers were rearranged back into the order in which they were retired by the Red Sox.
The Red Sox policy on retiring uniform numbers was once one of the most stringent in baseball—the player had to be elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame, play at least 10 years with the team, and retire as a member of the Red Sox. The final requirement was waived for Carlton Fisk as he had finished his playing career with the Chicago White Sox. However, Fisk was assigned a Red Sox front office job and effectively &quot;finished&quot; his baseball career with the Red Sox in this manner. In 2008, the ownership relaxed the requirements further with the retirement of Johnny Pesky&#x27;s number 6. Pesky has not been inducted into the Hall of Fame, but in light of his over 50 years of service to the club, the management made an exception. Pesky would have had 10 seasons, but he was credited with the three seasons he served as an Operations Officer in the U.S. Navy during World War II. The most recent number retired was 34, worn by 2013 World Series Most Valuable Player David Ortiz.
==Ground rules==

* A ball going through the scoreboard, either on the bounce or fly, is a ground rule double.
* A fly ball striking left-center field wall to right of or on the line behind the flag pole is a home run.
* A fly ball striking wall or flag pole and bouncing into bleachers is a home run.
* A fly ball striking line or right of same on wall in center is a home run.
* A fly ball striking wall left of line and bouncing into bullpen is a home run.
* A ball sticking in the bullpen screen or bouncing into the bullpen is a ground rule double.
* A batted or thrown ball remaining behind or under canvas or in tarp cylinder is a ground rule double.
* A ball striking the top of the scoreboard in left field in the ladder below top of wall and bouncing out of the park is a ground rule double.
* A fly ball that lands above the red line on top of the Green Monster and bounces onto the field of play is ruled a home run.
* A fly ball that hits the rail in the right-center triangle is a home run.
It is a misconception among fans that a fly ball that gets stuck in the ladder above the scoreboard on the left field wall is ruled a ground rule triple. There is no mention of it in the Red Sox ground rules list.

==Access and transportation==
* Fenway Park can be reached by the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority (MBTA) Green Line subway&#x27;s Kenmore station on the &quot;B&quot;, &quot;C&quot; and &quot;D&quot; branches, as well as Fenway station on the &quot;D&quot; branch.
* Lansdowne station is served by all MBTA Framingham/Worcester Line commuter rail trains. This line provides service from South Station or Back Bay and points west of Boston. In 2014, the new station was completed with full-length platforms, elevators, and access to Brookline Avenue and Beacon Street.
* Another option is taking the Orange Line or commuter rail to Back Bay or Ruggles. The stations are a 30-minute walk to Fenway.
* Although the Massachusetts Turnpike passes close to Fenway Park, there is no direct connection. Motorists are directed to use Storrow Drive to access the park.

==See also==

* List of Major League Baseball stadiums
* National Register of Historic Places listings in southern Boston, Massachusetts
* Cask&#x27;n Flagon
* Lists of stadiums

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

* Stadium site on MLB.com
* Fenway Park Seating Chart at Precise Seating
* Fenway Park info, including information on visiting
* Fenway Park facts, photos, statistics and trivia
* Boston Ballpark History . &quot;MLB.com&quot;.
* Fenway Park dynamic diagram at Clem&#x27;s Baseball
* Google Maps Aerial view
* VisitingFan.com: Reviews of Fenway Park
* Fenway Park Seating Chart
* Fenway Park 100th Anniversary page &quot;MLB.com&quot;
* Fenway Park at Stadium Journey
* Fenway Park at Sportlistings directory
* Sanborn map showing Fenway Park, 1914</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q49136" start="0" end="11" title="Fenway Park" label="Fenway Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q595452" start="17" end="25" title="ballpark" label="ballpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="37" end="43" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738779" start="84" end="98" title="Kenmore Square" label="Kenmore Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="142" end="163" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="177" end="191" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589053" start="349" end="371" title="List of current Major League Baseball stadiums" label="oldest active ballpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404928" start="447" end="474" title="Fenway–Kenmore" label="Fenway–Kenmore neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306592" start="574" end="587" title="Green Monster" label="Green Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="795" end="807" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="831" end="838" title="Red Sox" label="Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q461595" start="867" end="880" title="Atlanta Braves" label="Boston Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q15615101" start="1033" end="1048" title="Boston Redskins" label="Boston Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q894603" start="1050" end="1062" title="Boston Yanks" label="Boston Yanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q193390" start="1072" end="1087" title="New England Patriots" label="Boston Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q923177" start="1136" end="1159" title="2010 NHL Winter Classic" label="2010 NHL Winter Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48995876" start="1234" end="1244" title="centennial" label="centennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="1278" end="1314" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q120775899" start="1351" end="1378" title="Boston Irish heritage trail" label="Boston Irish heritage trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903272" start="1395" end="1403" title="Bill Lee (left-handed pitcher)" label="Bill Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q697295" start="1435" end="1441" title="shrine" label="shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228264" start="1465" end="1480" title="Boston Landmark" label="Boston Landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056422" start="1708" end="1733" title="Huntington Avenue Grounds" label="Huntington Avenue Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6240619" start="1741" end="1755" title="John I. Taylor" label="John I. Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050471" start="1805" end="1818" title="Jersey Street (Boston)" label="Jersey Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404928" start="1993" end="2012" title="Fenway-Kenmore" label="Fenway neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q514050" start="2116" end="2119" title="fen" label="fen"/>
<link wikidata="Q798303" start="2142" end="2155" title="Back Bay Fens" label="Back Bay Fens"/>
<link wikidata="Q107859054" start="2489" end="2508" title="James E. McLaughlin" label="James E. McLaughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20708209" start="2545" end="2575" title="Charles Logue Building Company" label="Charles Logue Building Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q966182" start="2631" end="2649" title="John F. Fitzgerald" label="John F. Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064159" start="2650" end="2678" title="Ceremonial first pitch" label="throwing out the first pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870090" start="2704" end="2724" title="History of the New York Yankees" label="New York Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577588" start="2826" end="2853" title="Sinking of the RMS Titanic" label="&amp;quot;Titanic&amp;quot; sinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q173347" start="3006" end="3021" title="Éamon de Valera" label="Éamon de Valera"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050471" start="3124" end="3137" title="Jersey Street (Boston)" label="Jersey Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050471" start="3206" end="3216" title="Yawkey Way" label="Yawkey Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q7818123" start="3252" end="3262" title="Tom Yawkey" label="Tom Yawkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7818123" start="3844" end="3854" title="Tom Yawkey" label="Tom Yawkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306592" start="4008" end="4021" title="Green Monster" label="Green Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q841282" start="5333" end="5343" title="Arc lamp" label="arc lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824349" start="5608" end="5651" title="Metrication in the United States" label="United States would adopt the metric system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368138" start="5683" end="5697" title="LoanDepot Park" label="LoanDepot Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q76318" start="5717" end="5730" title="Rogers Centre" label="Rogers Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q172478" start="6053" end="6065" title="Ted Williams" label="Ted Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="6184" end="6199" title="batting average (baseball)" label="batting average"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157767" start="6546" end="6556" title="Daktronics" label="Daktronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306592" start="6659" end="6672" title="Green Monster" label="Green Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q610672" start="6775" end="6784" title="Budweiser" label="Budweiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q894558" start="6820" end="6832" title="Boston Beer Company" label="Samuel Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="7205" end="7214" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q6237901" start="7779" end="7794" title="John Harrington (baseball)" label="John Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q107548707" start="8897" end="8914" title="Janet Marie Smith" label="Janet Marie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="8981" end="8993" title="The Boston Globe" label="Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869718" start="9392" end="9409" title="batter&amp;#x27;s eye" label="batter&amp;#x27;s eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571456" start="9471" end="9475" title="1964 Boston Red Sox season" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="9501" end="9518" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q329816" start="9597" end="9610" title="Texas Rangers (baseball)" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q650865" start="9722" end="9736" title="Tampa Bay Rays" label="Tampa Bay Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154053" start="9865" end="9877" title="Jacobs Field" label="Jacobs Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="9881" end="9890" title="Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q473208" start="10474" end="10487" title="Roger Clemens" label="Roger Clemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q671475" start="10554" end="10567" title="Logan Airport" label="Logan Airport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10945" end="10954" title="Baseball park#Jewel box ballparks" label="jewel box"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052807" start="11020" end="11033" title="Wrigley Field" label="Wrigley Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270178" start="11231" end="11242" title="George Will" label="George Will"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11269" end="11280" title="Men at Work: The Craft of Baseball" label="Men at Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q770084" start="12343" end="12355" title="Torii Hunter" label="Torii Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q448005" start="12371" end="12382" title="David Ortiz" label="David Ortiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074753" start="12394" end="12404" title="grand slam (baseball)" label="grand slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q14870260" start="12437" end="12446" title="2013 American League Championship Series" label="2013 ALCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306592" start="12477" end="12490" title="Green Monster" label="Green Monster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12760" end="12774" title="Green Monster#Scoreboard" label="the scoreboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q614379" start="12836" end="12846" title="scoreboard" label="scoreboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371324" start="13009" end="13027" title="ground rule double" label="ground rule double"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="13349" end="13363" title="advertising" label="advertisements"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306592" start="14064" end="14077" title="Green Monster" label="Green Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q172478" start="14662" end="14674" title="Ted Williams" label="Ted Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="14732" end="14740" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q172478" start="14961" end="14973" title="Ted Williams" label="Ted Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q160066" start="15198" end="15203" title="straw" label="straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776572" start="15401" end="15437" title="The Year Babe Ruth Hit 104 Home Runs" label="The Year Babe Ruth Hit 104 Home Runs"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="15508" end="15517" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q375648" start="15694" end="15707" title="Manny Ramirez" label="Manny Ramirez"/>
<link wikidata="Q29446153" start="15941" end="15953" title="Rowdy Tellez" label="Rowdy Tellez"/>
<link wikidata="Q650829" start="15961" end="15978" title="Toronto Blue Jays" label="Toronto Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q809889" start="16125" end="16129" title="foul pole" label="pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320754" start="16713" end="16725" title="Johnny Pesky" label="Johnny Pesky"/>
<link wikidata="Q865935" start="16771" end="16776" title="Coach (baseball)" label="coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164832" start="16943" end="16957" title="contact hitter" label="contact hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6810805" start="17155" end="17166" title="Mel Parnell" label="Mel Parnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="17394" end="17402" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766707" start="17906" end="17919" title="Mark Bellhorn" label="Mark Bellhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296945" start="17975" end="17989" title="Julián Tavárez" label="Julián Tavárez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341797" start="18007" end="18024" title="2004 World Series" label="2004 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q826751" start="18450" end="18465" title="Cincinnati Reds" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306592" start="18513" end="18526" title="Green Monster" label="Green Monster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18541" end="18555" title="Carlton Fisk#The Fisk Foul Pole" label="Fisk Foul Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043433" start="18603" end="18615" title="Carlton Fisk" label="Carlton Fisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4295899" start="18693" end="18710" title="1975 World Series" label="1975 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312404" start="19720" end="19731" title="Duffy Lewis" label="Duffy Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180894" start="20089" end="20102" title="dead ball era" label="dead ball era"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306592" start="20159" end="20172" title="Green Monster" label="Green Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7818123" start="20312" end="20322" title="Tom Yawkey" label="Tom Yawkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="20704" end="20720" title="The Boston Globe" label="The Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q172478" start="21496" end="21508" title="Ted Williams" label="Ted Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q877536" start="21749" end="21757" title="Dell EMC" label="Dell EMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664461" start="21793" end="21811" title="Concierge" label="concierge services"/>
<link wikidata="Q130467176" start="21999" end="22012" title="The Teammates (statue)" label="The Teammates"/>
<link wikidata="Q888518" start="22083" end="22094" title="Bobby Doerr" label="Bobby Doerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288297" start="22096" end="22108" title="Dom DiMaggio" label="Dom DiMaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q172478" start="22110" end="22122" title="Ted Williams" label="Ted Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320754" start="22128" end="22140" title="Johnny Pesky" label="Johnny Pesky"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="23032" end="23047" title="First Amendment" label="First Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050471" start="23413" end="23423" title="Yawkey Way" label="Yawkey Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869139" start="24077" end="24090" title="Boston Braves (baseball)" label="Boston Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4559915" start="24117" end="24134" title="1914 World Series" label="1914 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q11335096" start="24161" end="24173" title="Braves Field" label="Braves Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560101" start="24322" end="24326" title="1915 World Series" label="1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560258" start="24331" end="24335" title="1916 World Series" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="24487" end="24504" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876300" start="24670" end="24692" title="Beanpot (ice hockey)" label="hockey Beanpot tourney"/>
<link wikidata="Q49118" start="24816" end="24830" title="Boston College" label="Boston College"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="24832" end="24850" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q37548" start="24852" end="24875" title="Northeastern University" label="Northeastern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="24885" end="24920" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q294531" start="24979" end="24991" title="Neil Diamond" label="Neil Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115187" start="25005" end="25019" title="Sweet Caroline" label="Sweet Caroline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510894" start="25310" end="25327" title="Futures at Fenway" label="Futures at Fenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="25360" end="25383" title="Minor League Baseball" label="minor-league affiliates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077036" start="25406" end="25418" title="doubleheader (baseball)" label="doubleheader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208358" start="25544" end="25558" title="Eastern League (1938–2020)" label="Eastern League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034674" start="25606" end="25630" title="Cape Cod Baseball League" label="Cape Cod Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4816398" start="25765" end="25800" title="Atlantic Collegiate Baseball League" label="Atlantic Collegiate Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611856" start="25946" end="25959" title="Steve Balboni" label="Steve Balboni"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964859" start="26225" end="26235" title="Chris Sale" label="Chris Sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430054" start="26239" end="26268" title="Florida Gulf Coast University" label="Florida Gulf Coast University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326154" start="26437" end="26450" title="First baseman" label="First Baseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15997743" start="26451" end="26463" title="Hugh Bradley (baseball)" label="Hugh Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="26478" end="26486" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074753" start="26533" end="26543" title="Grand slam (baseball)" label="Grand slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278604" start="26570" end="26587" title="Rabbit Maranville" label="Rabbit Maranville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869139" start="26595" end="26608" title="Boston Braves" label="Boston Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="26635" end="26647" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375888" start="26691" end="26702" title="Rube Foster (AL pitcher)" label="Rube Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="26767" end="26774" title="New York Yankees" label="Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259864" start="26797" end="26829" title="Pumpsie Green" label="Elijah &amp;quot;Pumpsie&amp;quot; Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q871529" start="26942" end="26955" title="Switch hitter" label="switch-hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308312" start="26956" end="26968" title="Reggie Smith" label="Reggie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704434" start="27928" end="27936" title="Al Mello" label="Al Mello"/>
<link wikidata="Q317017" start="28153" end="28170" title="James J. Braddock" label="James J. Braddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q767519" start="28287" end="28299" title="Ernie Schaaf" label="Ernie Schaaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101790" start="28475" end="28489" title="George Nichols (boxer)" label="George Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q49193" start="28519" end="28542" title="Brockton, Massachusetts" label="Brockton, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643853" start="28674" end="28690" title="Maxie Rosenbloom" label="Maxie Rosenbloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q127506" start="28727" end="28734" title="Taunton, Massachusetts" label="Taunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981344" start="28767" end="28776" title="Cocoa Kid" label="Cocoa Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017239" start="28792" end="28802" title="Dave Shade" label="Dave Shade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278164" start="28829" end="28850" title="Wilton, New Hampshire" label="Wilton, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740848" start="28952" end="28965" title="Kid Chocolate" label="Kid Chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q427464" start="29046" end="29058" title="Jack Sharkey" label="Jack Sharkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829382" start="29274" end="29282" title="Al McCoy (boxer)" label="Al McCoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3945219" start="29496" end="29507" title="Sal Bartolo" label="Sal Bartolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16014521" start="29596" end="29610" title="Tami Mauriello" label="Tami Mauriello"/>
<link wikidata="Q3260140" start="29623" end="29631" title="Lou Nova" label="Lou Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393855" start="29707" end="29719" title="Tony DeMarco" label="Tony DeMarco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536385" start="29732" end="29745" title="George Araujo" label="George Araujo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643019" start="30306" end="30324" title="Boston Soccer Club" label="Boston Soccer Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q279311" start="30333" end="30348" title="Fall River F.C. (1922–1931)" label="Fall River F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q16820431" start="30356" end="30378" title="American Soccer League (1921–33)" label="American Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252424" start="30444" end="30466" title="Providence F.C." label="Providence Clamdiggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143950" start="30471" end="30487" title="Indiana Flooring" label="Indiana Flooring"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597" start="30549" end="30561" title="Rangers F.C." label="Rangers F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7005470" start="30685" end="30704" title="New Bedford Whalers" label="New Bedford Whalers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845944" start="30846" end="30862" title="New York Yankees (soccer)" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q19593" start="30870" end="30876" title="Celtic F.C." label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6267555" start="30906" end="30918" title="Johnny Reder" label="Johnny Reder"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="30955" end="30969" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358722" start="31030" end="31044" title="Atlanta Chiefs" label="Atlanta Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133584" start="31049" end="31064" title="Toronto Falcons (1967–1968)" label="Toronto Falcons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151172" start="31072" end="31107" title="National Professional Soccer League (1967)" label="National Professional Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743282" start="31140" end="31150" title="Jimmy Fund" label="Jimmy Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q187502" start="31200" end="31214" title="Boston Beacons" label="Boston Beacons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095556" start="31234" end="31262" title="North American Soccer League (1968–84)" label="North American Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q75729" start="31362" end="31375" title="Sporting Clube de Portugal" label="Sporting C.P."/>
<link wikidata="Q1130849" start="31628" end="31637" title="Liverpool F.C." label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="31650" end="31664" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324524" start="31679" end="31698" title="Fenway Sports Group" label="Fenway Sports Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739" start="31704" end="31713" title="A.S. Roma" label="A.S. Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q15804" start="31726" end="31733" title="Serie A" label="Serie A"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990608" start="31760" end="31781" title="Thomas R. DiBenedetto" label="Thomas R. DiBenedetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947786" start="32179" end="32194" title="Boston Bulldogs (AFL)" label="Boston Bulldogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743809" start="32208" end="32232" title="American Football League (1926)" label="American Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q11335096" start="32259" end="32271" title="Braves Field" label="Braves Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948087" start="32277" end="32293" title="Boston Shamrocks (AFL)" label="Boston Shamrocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743807" start="32308" end="32332" title="American Football League (1936)" label="American Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q15615101" start="32368" end="32383" title="Boston Redskins" label="Boston Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="32391" end="32415" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q894603" start="32555" end="32567" title="Boston Yanks" label="Boston Yanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q193390" start="32603" end="32618" title="Boston Patriots" label="Boston Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q464508" start="32632" end="32656" title="American Football League" label="American Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339834" start="32723" end="32738" title="Nickerson Field" label="Nickerson Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="32770" end="32787" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49118" start="32789" end="32803" title="Boston College" label="Boston College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49114" start="32805" end="32821" title="Brown University" label="Brown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49110" start="32827" end="32844" title="Boston University" label="Boston University"/>
<link wikidata="Q178848" start="32918" end="32928" title="University of Notre Dame" label="Notre Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q508643" start="33018" end="33035" title="Harvard–Yale football rivalry" label="Harvard–Yale game"/>
<link wikidata="Q65043763" start="33121" end="33132" title="Fenway Bowl" label="Fenway Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922711" start="33147" end="33156" title="bowl game" label="bowl game"/>
<link wikidata="Q756355" start="33232" end="33257" title="Atlantic Coast Conference" label="Atlantic Coast Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312525" start="33282" end="33310" title="American Athletic Conference" label="American Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="33376" end="33393" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6689457" start="33463" end="33473" title="Louisville Cardinals football" label="Louisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120214" start="33483" end="33493" title="Cincinnati Bearcats football" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q15855112" start="33574" end="33600" title="World Heavyweight Wrestling Championship (original version)" label="World Heavyweight Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555331" start="33601" end="33615" title="Gus Sonnenberg" label="Gus Sonnenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282396" start="33625" end="33655" title="Ed Lewis (wrestler)" label="Ed &amp;quot;Strangler&amp;quot; Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141507" start="34728" end="34758" title="AWA World Heavyweight Championship (Boston version)" label="AWA World Heavyweight Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334747" start="34759" end="34772" title="Ed Don George" label="Ed Don George"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146384" start="34777" end="34807" title="World Heavyweight Championship (National Wrestling Association)" label="NWA World Heavyweight Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280964" start="34808" end="34818" title="Jim Londos" label="Jim Londos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220065" start="34880" end="34899" title="Danno O&amp;#x27;Mahony" label="Danno O&amp;#x27;Mahony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489506" start="35027" end="35039" title="Frank Sexton (wrestler)" label="Frank Sexton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570736" start="35576" end="35609" title="List of world heavyweight boxing champions" label="world heavyweight boxing champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q317017" start="35610" end="35627" title="James J. Braddock" label="James J. Braddock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149473" start="35633" end="35644" title="Paul Bowser" label="Paul Bowser"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445545" start="35719" end="35732" title="Jack Spellman" label="Jack Spellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15708549" start="35738" end="35750" title="Karl Pojello" label="Karl Pojello"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612174" start="35947" end="35958" title="Steve Casey" label="Steve Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351410" start="36030" end="36041" title="Tor Johnson" label="Tor Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979311" start="36047" end="36083" title="William &amp;quot;Wee Willie&amp;quot; Davis" label="William &amp;quot;Wee Willie&amp;quot; Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28975991" start="36294" end="36305" title="Dick Shikat" label="Dick Shikat"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="36336" end="36339" title="WWE" label="WWE"/>
<link wikidata="Q332814" start="36464" end="36495" title="WWE Championship" label="WWWF World Heavyweight Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q369270" start="36496" end="36512" title="Bruno Sammartino" label="Bruno Sammartino"/>
<link wikidata="Q939657" start="36520" end="36535" title="Killer Kowalski" label="Killer Kowalski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36541" end="36556" title="Professional wrestling match types#Stretcher match" label="stretcher match"/>
<link wikidata="Q783592" start="36615" end="36624" title="The Sheik (wrestler)" label="The Sheik"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996714" start="36629" end="36643" title="Bulldog Brower" label="Bulldog Brower"/>
<link wikidata="Q17191898" start="36675" end="36688" title="Mitsu Arakawa" label="Mitsu Arakawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11342157" start="36700" end="36716" title="midget wrestling" label="midget wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q256279" start="36792" end="36811" title="The Fabulous Moolah" label="The Fabulous Moolah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296323" start="36813" end="36831" title="Donna Christanello" label="Donna Christanello"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821331" start="36837" end="36846" title="Toni Rose" label="Toni Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937786" start="36851" end="36864" title="Vivian Vachon" label="Vivian Vachon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898386" start="36878" end="36891" title="Bette Boucher" label="Bette Boucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q973052" start="36921" end="36934" title="George Steele" label="George Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749389" start="36939" end="36952" title="Victor Rivera (wrestler)" label="Victor Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q659358" start="36954" end="36970" title="Tony Parisi (wrestler)" label="Antonio Pugliese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633691" start="36975" end="36995" title="Mikel Scicluna" label="Baron Mikel Scicluna"/>
<link wikidata="Q284407" start="36997" end="37012" title="Dominic DeNucci" label="Dominic DeNucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q556873" start="37017" end="37027" title="Lou Albano" label="Lou Albano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418168" start="37186" end="37204" title="NHL Winter Classic" label="NHL Winter Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q196627" start="37232" end="37251" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q4615595" start="37257" end="37270" title="2009–10 Boston Bruins season" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616087" start="37280" end="37299" title="2009–10 Philadelphia Flyers season" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505148" start="37307" end="37328" title="sudden-death overtime" label="sudden-death overtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512985" start="37752" end="37763" title="Hockey East" label="Hockey East"/>
<link wikidata="Q193643" start="38147" end="38166" title="Pittsburgh Penguins" label="Pittsburgh Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q96392370" start="38267" end="38271" title="Mayo county football team" label="Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474330" start="38277" end="38307" title="All-Ireland Senior Football Championship" label="All-Ireland Football champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170842" start="38371" end="38375" title="Cork county hurling team" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778808" start="38381" end="38410" title="All-Ireland Senior Hurling Championship" label="All-Ireland Hurling champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q42955290" start="38506" end="38527" title="Players Champions Cup" label="Players Champions Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q104844694" start="38573" end="38579" title="Galway county hurling team" label="Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q104844683" start="38589" end="38595" title="Dublin county hurling team" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q714" start="38730" end="38743" title="Stevie Wonder" label="Stevie Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q544387" start="38748" end="38759" title="Ray Charles" label="Ray Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276681" start="38834" end="38873" title="Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band" label="Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760923" start="38896" end="38911" title="The Rising Tour" label="The Rising Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276681" start="39001" end="39040" title="Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band" label="Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q726071" start="39042" end="39055" title="Jimmy Buffett" label="Jimmy Buffett"/>
<link wikidata="Q194333" start="39057" end="39067" title="Billy Joel" label="Billy Joel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34424" start="39069" end="39076" title="Shakira" label="Shakira"/>
<link wikidata="Q464749" start="39078" end="39085" title="Journey (band)" label="Journey"/>
<link wikidata="Q182890" start="39087" end="39098" title="Def Leppard" label="Def Leppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="39100" end="39118" title="The Rolling Stones" label="The Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q294531" start="39120" end="39132" title="Neil Diamond" label="Neil Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q178095" start="39134" end="39144" title="The Police" label="The Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q195439" start="39146" end="39158" title="Jason Aldean" label="Jason Aldean"/>
<link wikidata="Q486688" start="39160" end="39171" title="Mötley Crüe" label="Mötley Crüe"/>
<link wikidata="Q832086" start="39173" end="39191" title="Dave Matthews Band" label="Dave Matthews Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117272" start="39193" end="39226" title="Tom Petty &amp;amp; The Heartbreakers" label="Tom Petty &amp;amp; The Heartbreakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="39228" end="39237" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q921267" start="39239" end="39244" title="Phish" label="Phish"/>
<link wikidata="Q180861" start="39246" end="39258" title="Roger Waters" label="Roger Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="39260" end="39274" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q310300" start="39276" end="39288" title="James Taylor" label="James Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q234693" start="39336" end="39348" title="Bonnie Raitt" label="Bonnie Raitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q355009" start="39360" end="39374" title="Jackson Browne" label="Jackson Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="39377" end="39386" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q483718" start="39388" end="39400" title="Foo Fighters" label="Foo Fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q20857901" start="39402" end="39420" title="Dead &amp;amp; Company" label="Dead &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q212464" start="39425" end="39446" title="New Kids On The Block" label="New Kids On The Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848" start="39501" end="39510" title="Lady Gaga" label="Lady Gaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q28678664" start="39523" end="39540" title="Joanne World Tour" label="Joanne World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q87111616" start="39640" end="39659" title="The Chromatica Ball" label="The Chromatica Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="39670" end="39677" title="The Who" label="The Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q864369" start="39731" end="39756" title="Boston Symphony Orchestra" label="Boston Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11895" start="39777" end="39795" title="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses" label="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q86755393" start="39829" end="39838" title="Guns N&amp;#x27; Roses 2020 Tour" label="2020 Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669983" start="39871" end="39889" title="Absurd (song)" label="&amp;quot;Absurd&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="39891" end="39900" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q160009" start="40072" end="40076" title="Pink (singer)" label="Pink"/>
<link wikidata="Q115517355" start="40117" end="40132" title="Summer Carnival (tour)" label="Summer Carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018390" start="40218" end="40244" title="Polartec Big Air at Fenway" label="Polartec Big Air At Fenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616045" start="40258" end="40265" title="big air" label="big air"/>
<link wikidata="Q212928" start="40397" end="40425" title="International Ski Federation" label="International Ski Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15926177" start="40487" end="40496" title="Ty Walker (snowboarder)" label="Ty Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399136" start="40498" end="40513" title="Sage Kotsenburg" label="Sage Kotsenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11728522" start="40519" end="40535" title="Joss Christensen" label="Joss Christensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486536" start="40663" end="40675" title="Frank Fallon" label="Frank Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051241" start="40690" end="40704" title="public address system" label="public address"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494941" start="40773" end="40784" title="Fred Cusick" label="Fred Cusick"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="40828" end="40841" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495099" start="40958" end="40970" title="Sherm Feller" label="Sherm Feller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039876" start="41448" end="41458" title="Carl Beane" label="Carl Beane"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="41581" end="41593" title="Myocardial infarction" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933181" start="41714" end="41723" title="Bob Lobel" label="Bob Lobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q27308139" start="41729" end="41740" title="Dick Flavin (poet)" label="Dick Flavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11645907" start="41824" end="41839" title="List of Major League Baseball retired numbers" label="retired numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q221048" start="41936" end="41951" title="Jackie Robinson" label="Jackie Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214372" start="42374" end="42389" title="Dan Shaughnessy" label="Dan Shaughnessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="42934" end="42964" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="National Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="43140" end="43157" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320754" start="43382" end="43394" title="Johnny Pesky" label="Johnny Pesky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630084" start="43751" end="43768" title="2013 World Series" label="2013 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q448005" start="43790" end="43801" title="David Ortiz" label="David Ortiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371324" start="43894" end="43912" title="ground rule double" label="ground rule double"/>
<link wikidata="Q171985" start="45089" end="45131" title="Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority" label="Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q152061" start="45139" end="45149" title="Green Line (MBTA)" label="Green Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389462" start="45164" end="45179" title="Kenmore station" label="Kenmore station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443657" start="45255" end="45269" title="Fenway station" label="Fenway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q8050469" start="45301" end="45318" title="Lansdowne station (MBTA)" label="Lansdowne station"/>
<link wikidata="Q801994" start="45341" end="45366" title="Framingham/Worcester Line" label="Framingham/Worcester Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q54453" start="45421" end="45434" title="South Station" label="South Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675991" start="45438" end="45446" title="Back Bay (MBTA station)" label="Back Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q152029" start="45633" end="45644" title="Orange Line (MBTA)" label="Orange Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q172457" start="45648" end="45661" title="MBTA Commuter Rail" label="commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675991" start="45665" end="45673" title="Back Bay (MBTA station)" label="Back Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736904" start="45677" end="45684" title="Ruggles (MBTA station)" label="Ruggles"/>
<link wikidata="Q731271" start="45746" end="45768" title="Massachusetts Turnpike" label="Massachusetts Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247150" start="45859" end="45872" title="Storrow Drive" label="Storrow Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589053" start="45910" end="45948" title="List of Major League Baseball stadiums" label="List of Major League Baseball stadiums"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977984" start="45951" end="46030" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in southern Boston, Massachusetts" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in southern Boston, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048957" start="46033" end="46051" title="Cask&amp;#x27;n Flagon" label="Cask&amp;#x27;n Flagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196333" start="46054" end="46071" title="Lists of stadiums" label="Lists of stadiums"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11240" wikidata="Q160184" url="?curid=11240" title="Flatulence">
<text>Flatulence is the expulsion of gas from the intestines via the anus, commonly referred to as farting. &quot;Flatus&quot; is the medical word for gas generated in the stomach or bowels. A proportion of intestinal gas may be swallowed environmental air, and hence flatus is not entirely generated in the stomach or bowels. The scientific study of this area of medicine is termed flatology.

Passing gas is a normal bodily process. Flatus is brought to the rectum and pressurized by muscles in the intestines. It is normal to pass flatus (&quot;to fart&quot;), though volume and frequency vary greatly among individuals. It is also normal for intestinal gas to have a feculent or unpleasant odor, which may be intense. The noise commonly associated with flatulence is produced by the anus and buttocks, which act together in a manner similar to that of an embouchure. Both the sound and odor are sources of embarrassment, annoyance or amusement (flatulence humor). Many societies have a taboo about flatus. Thus, many people either let their flatus out quietly or even hold it completely. However, holding the gases inside is not healthy.

There are several general symptoms related to intestinal gas: pain, bloating and abdominal distension, excessive flatus volume, excessive flatus odor, and gas incontinence. Furthermore, eructation (colloquially known as &quot;burping&quot;) is sometimes included under the topic of flatulence. When excessive or malodorous, flatus can be a sign of a health disorder, such as irritable bowel syndrome, celiac disease or lactose intolerance.

==Terminology==
Non-medical definitions of the term include &quot;the uncomfortable condition of having gas in the stomach and bowels&quot;, or &quot;a state of excessive gas in the alimentary canal&quot;. These definitions highlight that many people consider &quot;bloating&quot;, abdominal distension or increased volume of intestinal gas, to be synonymous with the term flatulence (although this is technically inaccurate).

Colloquially, flatulence may be referred to as &quot;farting&quot;, &quot;pumping&quot;, &quot;trumping&quot;, &quot;blowing off&quot;, &quot;pooting&quot;, &quot;passing gas&quot;, &quot;breaking wind&quot;, &quot;backfiring&quot;, &quot;tooting&quot;, &quot;beefing&quot;, or simply (in American English) &quot;gas&quot; or (British English) &quot;wind&quot;. Derived terms include vaginal flatulence, otherwise known as a &quot;queef&quot;. In rhyming slang, blowing a raspberry (at someone) means imitating with the mouth the sound of a fart, in real or feigned derision.

==Signs and symptoms==

Generally speaking, there are four different types of complaints that relate to intestinal gas, which may present individually or in combination.

===Bloating and pain===
Patients may complain of bloating as abdominal distension, discomfort and pain from &quot;trapped wind&quot;. In the past, functional bowel disorders such as irritable bowel syndrome that produced symptoms of bloating were attributed to increased production of intestinal gas.

However, three significant pieces of evidence refute this theory. First, in normal subjects, even very high rates of gas infusion into the small intestine (30mL/min) is tolerated without complaints of pain or bloating and harmlessly passed as flatus per rectum. Secondly, studies aiming to quantify the total volume of gas produced by patients with irritable bowel syndrome (some including gas emitted from the mouth by eructation) have consistently failed to demonstrate increased volumes compared to healthy subjects. The proportion of hydrogen produced may be increased in some patients with irritable bowel syndrome, but this does not affect the total volume. Thirdly, the volume of flatus produced by patients with irritable bowel syndrome who have pain and abdominal distension would be tolerated in normal subjects without any complaints of pain.

Patients who complain of bloating frequently can be shown to have objective increases in abdominal girth, often increased throughout the day and then resolving during sleep. The increase in girth combined with the fact that the total volume of flatus is not increased led to studies aiming to image the distribution of intestinal gas in patients with bloating. They found that gas was not distributed normally in these patients: there was segmental gas pooling and focal distension. In conclusion, abdominal distension, pain and bloating symptoms are the result of abnormal intestinal gas dynamics rather than increased flatus production.

===Excessive volume===
The range of volumes of flatus in normal individuals varies hugely (476–1,491 mL/24 h). All intestinal gas is either swallowed environmental air, present intrinsically in foods and beverages, or the result of gut fermentation.

Swallowing small amounts of air occurs while eating and drinking. This is emitted from the mouth by eructation (burping) and is normal. Excessive swallowing of environmental air is called aerophagia, and has been shown in a few case reports to be responsible for increased flatus volume. This is, however, considered a rare cause of increased flatus volume. Gases contained in food and beverages are likewise emitted largely through eructation, e.g., carbonated beverages.

Endogenously produced intestinal gases make up 74 percent of flatus in normal subjects. The volume of gas produced is partially dependent upon the composition of the intestinal microbiota, which is normally very resistant to change, but is also very different in different individuals. Some patients are predisposed to increased endogenous gas production by virtue of their gut microbiota composition. The greatest concentration of gut bacteria is in the colon, while the small intestine is normally nearly sterile. Fermentation occurs when unabsorbed food residues arrive in the colon.

Therefore, even more than the composition of the microbiota, diet is the primary factor that dictates the volume of flatus produced. Diets that aim to reduce the amount of undigested fermentable food residues arriving in the colon have been shown to significantly reduce the volume of flatus produced. Again, increased volume of intestinal gas will not cause bloating and pain in normal subjects. Abnormal intestinal gas dynamics will create pain, distension, and bloating, regardless of whether there is high or low total flatus volume.

===Odor===
Although flatus possesses an odor, this may be abnormally increased in some patients and cause social distress to the patient. Increased odor of flatus presents a distinct clinical issue from other complaints related to intestinal gas. Some patients may exhibit over-sensitivity to bad flatus odor, and in extreme forms, olfactory reference syndrome may be diagnosed. Recent informal research found a correlation between flatus odor and both loudness and humidity content.

===Incontinence of flatus===
&quot;Gas incontinence&quot; could be defined as loss of voluntary control over the passage of flatus. It is a recognised subtype of faecal incontinence, and is usually related to minor disruptions of the continence mechanisms. Some consider gas incontinence to be the first, sometimes only, symptom of faecal incontinence.

==Cause==
Intestinal gas is composed of varying quantities of exogenous sources and endogenous sources. The exogenous gases are swallowed (aerophagia) when eating or drinking or increased swallowing during times of excessive salivation (as might occur when nauseated or as the result of gastroesophageal reflux disease). The endogenous gases are produced either as a by-product of digesting certain types of food, or of incomplete digestion, as is the case during steatorrhea. Anything that causes food to be incompletely digested by the stomach or small intestine may cause flatulence when the material arrives in the large intestine, due to fermentation by yeast or prokaryotes normally or abnormally present in the gastrointestinal tract.

Flatulence-producing foods are typically high in certain polysaccharides, especially oligosaccharides such as inulin. Those foods include beans, lentils, dairy products, onions, garlic, spring onions, leeks, turnips, swedes, radishes, sweet potatoes, potatoes, cashews, Jerusalem artichokes, oats, wheat, and yeast in breads. Cauliflower, broccoli, cabbage, Brussels sprouts and other cruciferous vegetables that belong to the genus &quot;Brassica&quot; are commonly reputed to not only increase flatulence, but to increase the pungency of the flatus.

In beans, endogenous gases seem to arise from complex oligosaccharides (carbohydrates) that are particularly resistant to digestion by mammals, but are readily digestible by microorganisms (methane-producing archaea; &quot;Methanobrevibacter smithii&quot;) that inhabit the digestive tract. These oligosaccharides pass through the small intestine largely unchanged, and when they reach the large intestine, bacteria ferment them, producing copious amounts of flatus.

When excessive or malodorous, flatus can be a sign of a health disorder, such as irritable bowel syndrome, celiac disease, non-celiac gluten sensitivity or lactose intolerance. It can also be caused by certain medicines, such as ibuprofen, laxatives, antifungal medicines or statins. Some infections, such as giardiasis, are also associated with flatulence.

Interest in the causes of flatulence was spurred by high-altitude flight and human spaceflight; the low atmospheric pressure, confined conditions, and stresses peculiar to those endeavours were cause for concern. In the field of mountaineering, the phenomenon of high altitude flatus expulsion was first recorded over two hundred years ago.

==Mechanism==

===Production, composition, and odor===
Flatus (intestinal gas) is mostly produced as a byproduct of bacterial fermentation in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract, especially the colon. There are reports of aerophagia (excessive air swallowing) causing excessive intestinal gas, but this is considered rare.

Over 99% of the volume of flatus is composed of odorless gases. These include oxygen, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, hydrogen and methane. Nitrogen is not produced in the gut, but a component of environmental air. Patients who have excessive intestinal gas that is mostly composed of nitrogen have aerophagia. Hydrogen, carbon dioxide and methane are all produced in the gut and contribute 74% of the volume of flatus in normal subjects. Methane and hydrogen are flammable, and so flatus can be ignited if it contains adequate amounts of these components.

Not all humans produce flatus that contains methane. For example, in one study of the faeces of nine adults, only five of the samples contained archaea capable of producing methane. The prevalence of methane over hydrogen in human flatus may correlate with obesity, constipation and irritable bowel syndrome, as archaea that oxidise hydrogen into methane promote the metabolism&#x27;s ability to absorb fatty acids from food.

The remaining trace (&lt;1% volume) compounds contribute to the odor of flatus. Historically, compounds such as indole, skatole, ammonia and short chain fatty acids were thought to cause the odor of flatus. More recent evidence proves that the major contribution to the odor of flatus comes from a combination of volatile sulfur compounds. Hydrogen sulfide, methyl mercaptan (also known as methanethiol), dimethyl sulfide, dimethyl disulfide and dimethyl trisulfide are present in flatus. The benzopyrrole volatiles indole and skatole have an odor of mothballs, and therefore probably do not contribute greatly to the characteristic odor of flatus.

In one study, hydrogen sulfide concentration was shown to correlate convincingly with perceived bad odor of flatus, followed by methyl mercaptan and dimethyl sulfide. This is supported by the fact that hydrogen sulfide may be the most abundant volatile sulfur compound present. These results were generated from subjects who were eating a diet high in pinto beans to stimulate flatus production.

Others report that methyl mercaptan was the greatest contributor to the odor of flatus in patients not under any specific dietary alterations. It has now been demonstrated that methyl mercaptan, dimethyl sulfide, and hydrogen sulfide (described as decomposing vegetables, unpleasantly sweet/wild radish and rotten eggs respectively) are all present in human flatus in concentrations above their smell perception thresholds.

It is recognized that increased dietary sulfur-containing amino acids significantly increases the odor of flatus. It is therefore likely that the odor of flatus is created by a combination of volatile sulfur compounds, with minimal contribution from non-sulfur volatiles. This odor can also be caused by the presence of large numbers of microflora bacteria or the presence of faeces in the rectum. Diets high in protein, especially sulfur-containing amino acids, have been demonstrated to significantly increase the odor of flatus.

===Volume and intestinal gas dynamics===
Normal flatus volume is 476 to 1491 mL per 24 hours. This variability between individuals is greatly dependent upon diet. Similarly, the number of flatus episodes per day is variable; the normal range is given as 8–20 per day. The volume of flatus associated with each flatulence event again varies (5–375 mL). The volume of the first flatulence upon waking in the morning is significantly larger than those during the day. This may be due to buildup of intestinal gas in the colon during sleep, the peak in peristaltic activity in the first few hours after waking or the strong prokinetic effect of rectal distension on the rate of transit of intestinal gas. It is now known that gas is moved along the gut independently of solids and liquids, and this transit is more efficient in the erect position compared to when supine. It is thought that large volumes of intestinal gas present low resistance, and can be propelled by subtle changes in gut tone, capacitance and proximal contraction and distal relaxation. This process is thought not to affect solid and liquid intra-lumenal contents.

Researchers investigating the role of sensory nerve endings in the anal canal did not find them to be essential for retaining fluids in the anus, and instead speculate that their role may be to distinguish between flatus and faeces, thereby helping detect a need to defecate or to signal the end of defecation.

The sound varies depending on the volume of gas, the size of the opening that the air is being pushed through, which is affected by the state of tension in the sphincter muscle, and the force or velocity of the gas being propelled, as well as other factors, such as whether the gas was caused by swallowed air. Among humans, flatulence occasionally happens accidentally, such as incidentally to coughing or sneezing or during orgasm; on other occasions, flatulence can be voluntarily elicited by tensing the rectum or &quot;bearing down&quot; on stomach or bowel muscles and subsequently relaxing the anal sphincter, resulting in the expulsion of flatus.

==Management==

Since problems involving intestinal gas present as different (but sometimes combined) complaints, the management is cause-related.

===Pain and bloating===

While not affecting the production of the gases themselves, surfactants (agents that lower surface tension) can reduce the disagreeable sensations associated with flatulence, by aiding the dissolution of the gases into liquid and solid faecal matter. Preparations containing simethicone reportedly operate by promoting the coalescence of smaller bubbles into larger ones more easily passed from the body, either by burping or flatulence. Such preparations do not decrease the total amount of gas generated in or passed from the colon, but make the bubbles larger and thereby allowing them to be passed more easily.

Other drugs including prokinetics, lubiprostone, antibiotics and probiotics are also used to treat bloating in patients with functional bowel disorders such as irritable bowel syndrome, and there is some evidence that these measures may reduce symptoms.

A flexible tube, inserted into the rectum, can be used to collect intestinal gas in a flatus bag. This method is occasionally needed in a hospital setting, when the patient is unable to pass gas normally.

===Volume===

One method of reducing the volume of flatus produced is dietary modification, reducing the amount of fermentable carbohydrates. This is the theory behind diets such as the low-FODMAP diet (a diet low in fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides, alcohols, and polyols).

Most starches, including potatoes, corn, noodles, and wheat, produce gas as they are broken down in the large intestine. Intestinal gas can be reduced by fermenting the beans, and making them less gas-inducing, or by cooking them in the liquor from a previous batch. For example, the fermented bean product miso is less likely to produce as much intestinal gas. Some legumes also stand up to prolonged cooking, which can help break down the oligosaccharides into simple sugars. Fermentative lactic acid bacteria such as &quot;Lactobacillus casei&quot; and &quot;Lactobacillus plantarum&quot; reduce flatulence in the human intestinal tract.

Probiotics (live yogurt, kefir, etc.) are reputed to reduce flatulence when used to restore balance to the normal intestinal flora. Live (bioactive) yogurt contains, among other lactic bacteria, &quot;Lactobacillus acidophilus&quot;, which may be useful in reducing flatulence. &quot;L. acidophilus&quot; may make the intestinal environment more acidic, supporting a natural balance of the fermentative processes. &quot;L. acidophilus&quot; is available in supplements. Prebiotics, which generally are non-digestible oligosaccharides, such as fructooligosaccharide, generally increase flatulence in a similar way as described for lactose intolerance.

Digestive enzyme supplements may significantly reduce the amount of flatulence caused by some components of foods not being digested by the body and thereby promoting the action of microbes in the small and large intestines. It has been suggested that alpha-galactosidase enzymes, which can digest certain complex sugars, are effective in reducing the volume and frequency of flatus. The enzymes alpha-galactosidase, lactase, amylase, lipase, protease, cellulase, glucoamylase, invertase, malt diastase, pectinase, and bromelain are available, either individually or in combination blends, in commercial products.

The antibiotic rifaximin, often used to treat diarrhea caused by the microorganism &quot;E. coli&quot;, may reduce both the production of intestinal gas and the frequency of flatus events.

===Odor===

Bismuth

The odor created by flatulence is commonly treated with bismuth subgallate, available under the name Devrom. Bismuth subgallate is commonly used by individuals who have had ostomy surgery, bariatric surgery, faecal incontinence and irritable bowel syndrome. Bismuth subsalicylate is a compound that binds hydrogen sulfide, and one study reported a dose of 524 mg four times a day for 3–7 days bismuth subsalicylate yielded a &gt;95% reduction in faecal hydrogen sulfide release in both humans and rats.
Another bismuth compound, bismuth subnitrate was also shown to bind to hydrogen sulfide. Another study showed that bismuth acted synergistically with various antibiotics to inhibit sulfate-reducing gut bacteria and sulfide production. Some authors proposed a theory that hydrogen sulfide was involved in the development of ulcerative colitis and that bismuth might be helpful in the management of this condition. However, bismuth administration in rats did not prevent them from developing ulcerative colitis despite reduced hydrogen sulfide production. Also, evidence suggests that colonic hydrogen sulfide is largely present in bound forms, probably sulfides of iron and other metals. Rarely, serious bismuth toxicity may occur with higher doses.

 Activated charcoal

Despite being an ancient treatment for various digestive complaints, activated charcoal did not produce reduction in both the total flatus volume nor the release of sulfur-containing gasses, and there was no reduction in abdominal symptoms (after 0.52g activated charcoal four times a day for one week). The authors suggested that saturation of charcoal binding sites during its passage through the gut was the reason for this. A further study concluded that activated charcoal (4g) does not influence gas formation in vitro or in vivo. Other authors reported that activated charcoal was effective. A study in 8 dogs concluded activated charcoal (unknown oral dose) reduced hydrogen sulfide levels by 71%. In combination with yucca schidigera, and zinc acetate, this was increased to an 86% reduction in hydrogen sulfide, although flatus volume and number was unchanged. An early study reported activated charcoal (unknown oral dose) prevented a large increase in the number of flatus events and increased breath hydrogen concentrations that normally occur following a gas-producing meal.

Garments and external devices

In 1998, Chester &quot;Buck&quot; Weimer of Pueblo, Colorado, received a patent for the first undergarment that contained a replaceable charcoal filter. The undergarments are air-tight and provide a pocketed escape hole in which a charcoal filter can be inserted. In 2001 Weimer received the Ig Nobel Prize for Biology for his invention.

A similar product was released in 2002, but rather than an entire undergarment, consumers are able to purchase an insert similar to a pantiliner that contains activated charcoal. The inventors, Myra and Brian Conant of Mililani, Hawaii, still claim on their website to have discovered the undergarment product in 2002 (four years after Chester Weimer filed for a patent for his product), but state that their tests &quot;concluded&quot; that they should release an insert instead.

===Incontinence===

Flatus incontinence where there is involuntary passage of gas, is a type of faecal incontinence, and is managed similarly.

==Society and culture==
In many cultures, flatulence in public is regarded as embarrassing, but, depending on context, may also be considered humorous. People will often strain to hold in the passing of gas when in polite company, or position themselves to silence or conceal the passing of gas. In other cultures, it may be no more embarrassing than coughing.

While the act of passing flatus in some cultures is generally considered to be an unfortunate occurrence in public settings, flatulence may, in casual circumstances and especially among children, be used as either a humorous supplement to a joke (&quot;pull my finger&quot;), or as a comic activity in and of itself. The social acceptability of flatulence-based humour in entertainment and the mass media varies over the course of time and between cultures. A sufficient number of entertainers have performed using their flatus to lead to the coining of the term flatulist. The whoopee cushion is a joking device invented in the early 20th century for simulating a fart. In 2008, a farting application for the iPhone earned nearly $10,000 in one day.

A farting game named &quot;Touch Wood&quot; was documented by John Gregory Bourke in the 1890s. It was known as &quot;Safety&quot; in the 20th century in the U.S., and is still played by children as of 2011.

In January 2011, the Malawi Minister of Justice, George Chaponda, said that Air Fouling Legislation would make public &quot;farting&quot; illegal in his country. When reporting the story, the media satirised Chaponda&#x27;s statement with punning headlines. Later, the minister withdrew his statement. 

===Environmental impact===
Flatulence is often blamed as a significant source of greenhouse gases, owing to the erroneous belief that the methane released by livestock is in the flatus. While livestock account for around 20% of global methane emissions, 90–95% of that is released by exhaling or burping. In cows, gas and burps are produced by methane-generating microbes called methanogens, which live inside the cow&#x27;s digestive system. Proposals for reducing methane production in cows include the feeding of supplements such as oregano and seaweed, and the genetic engineering of gut biome microbes to produce less methane.

Since New Zealand produces large amounts of agricultural products, it has the unique position of having higher methane emissions from livestock compared to other greenhouse gas sources. The New Zealand government is a signatory to the Kyoto Protocol and therefore attempts to reduce greenhouse emissions. To achieve this, an agricultural emissions research levy was proposed, which promptly became known as a &quot;fart tax&quot; or &quot;flatulence tax&quot;. It encountered opposition from farmers, farming lobby groups and opposition politicians.

===Entertainment===
Historical comment on the ability to fart at will is observed as early as Saint Augustine&#x27;s &quot;City of God&quot; (5th century A.D.). Augustine mentions &quot;people who produce at will without any stench such rhythmical sounds from their fundament that they appear to be making music even from that quarter.&quot; Intentional passing of gas and its use as entertainment for others appear to have been somewhat well known in pre-modern Europe, according to mentions of it in medieval and later literature, including Rabelais.

Le Pétomane (&quot;the Fartomaniac&quot;) was a famous French performer in the 19th century who, as well as many professional farters before him, did flatulence impressions and held shows. The performer Mr. Methane carries on le Pétomane&#x27;s tradition today. Also, a 2002 fiction film &quot;Thunderpants&quot; revolves around a boy named Patrick Smash who has an ongoing flatulence problem from the time of his birth.

Since the 1970s, farting has increasingly been featured in film, especially comedies such as &quot;Blazing Saddles&quot; and &quot;Scooby-Doo&quot;.

In the popular vulgar cartoon series &quot;South Park,&quot; characters sometimes watch a show-within-a-show called &quot;The Terrance and Phillip Show&quot; whose humor primarily revolves around flatulence.

==Personal experiences==
People find other peoples&#x27; flatus unpleasant, but are unfazed by, and may even enjoy, the scent of their own. While there has been little research carried out upon the subject, some speculative guesses have been made as to why this might be so. For example, one explanation for this phenomenon is that people are very familiar with the scent of their own flatus, and that survival in nature may depend on the detection of and reaction to foreign scents. 

Some people have Eproctophilla, the fetish of flatulence, finding sexual gratification and pleasure from either the sound of the gas, smells from the gas, feeling of the gas, some combination of the three, or all three.

==See also==
* Antiflatulent
* Armpit fart
* Borborygmus
* Eproctophilia
* Fart lighting
* Flatulence humor
* &quot;The Gas We Pass&quot;
* Terrance and Phillip
* Tympany
* Fart (word)
==References==
=== Citations ===
=== General and cited references ===
* Allen, V. (2007). &quot;On Farting: Language and Laughter in the Middle Ages&quot;. Palgrave MacMillan. .
* 
* 
* Persels, J., &amp; Ganim, R. (2004). &quot;Fecal Matters in Early Modern Literature and Art: Studies in Scatology&quot;. (Chap. 1: &quot;The Honorable Art of Farting in Continental Renaissance&quot;). .

== External links ==

* The Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy, Gas
* Dictionary of Fart Slang
* Invisible College of Experimental Flatology</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q160184" start="0" end="10" title="Flatulence" label="Flatulence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="44" end="54" title="Gastrointestinal tract" label="intestines"/>
<link wikidata="Q160184" start="93" end="100" title="Flatulence" label="farting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029907" start="166" end="173" title="stomach" label="stomach"/>
<link wikidata="Q160184" start="377" end="386" title="Flatulence" label="flatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q158716" start="454" end="460" title="rectum" label="rectum"/>
<link wikidata="Q308695" start="480" end="487" title="peristalsis" label="muscles"/>
<link wikidata="Q496" start="665" end="673" title="Feces" label="feculent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379958" start="781" end="785" title="external anal sphincter" label="anus"/>
<link wikidata="Q637545" start="790" end="798" title="gluteus maximus" label="buttocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q175234" start="853" end="863" title="embouchure" label="embouchure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761451" start="904" end="917" title="embarrassment" label="embarrassment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457998" start="943" end="959" title="flatulence humor" label="flatulence humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q171180" start="984" end="989" title="taboo" label="taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4927059" start="1205" end="1213" title="bloating" label="bloating"/>
<link wikidata="Q209789" start="1323" end="1333" title="burping" label="eructation"/>
<link wikidata="Q838966" start="1512" end="1536" title="irritable bowel syndrome" label="irritable bowel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11088" start="1538" end="1552" title="celiac disease" label="celiac disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q219223" start="1556" end="1575" title="lactose intolerance" label="lactose intolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536390" start="1860" end="1880" title="abdominal distension" label="abdominal distension"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="2295" end="2311" title="American English" label="American English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="2333" end="2348" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q558165" start="2390" end="2408" title="vaginal flatulence" label="vaginal flatulence"/>
<link wikidata="Q429083" start="2453" end="2466" title="rhyming slang" label="rhyming slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130485" start="2468" end="2487" title="blowing a raspberry" label="blowing a raspberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536390" start="2815" end="2835" title="abdominal distension" label="abdominal distension"/>
<link wikidata="Q838966" start="2936" end="2960" title="irritable bowel syndrome" label="irritable bowel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q35831" start="4078" end="4083" title="sleep" label="sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q381619" start="4990" end="5000" title="aerophagia" label="aerophagia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386741" start="6735" end="6763" title="olfactory reference syndrome" label="olfactory reference syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147182" start="7050" end="7069" title="faecal incontinence" label="faecal incontinence"/>
<link wikidata="Q381619" start="7381" end="7391" title="aerophagia" label="aerophagia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223591" start="7529" end="7552" title="gastroesophageal reflux" label="gastroesophageal reflux"/>
<link wikidata="Q285982" start="7567" end="7577" title="endogenous" label="endogenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q11978" start="7673" end="7682" title="digestion" label="digestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549428" start="7706" end="7717" title="steatorrhea" label="steatorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029907" start="7780" end="7787" title="stomach" label="stomach"/>
<link wikidata="Q11090" start="7791" end="7806" title="small intestine" label="small intestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41760" start="7885" end="7897" title="Fermentation (biochemistry)" label="fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="7901" end="7906" title="yeast" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q19081" start="7910" end="7921" title="prokaryotes" label="prokaryotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="7960" end="7982" title="Human gastrointestinal tract" label="gastrointestinal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q134219" start="8042" end="8056" title="polysaccharide" label="polysaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q320607" start="8070" end="8086" title="oligosaccharides" label="oligosaccharides"/>
<link wikidata="Q201552" start="8095" end="8101" title="inulin" label="inulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="8123" end="8127" title="bean" label="bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q131226" start="8130" end="8136" title="lentil" label="lentil"/>
<link wikidata="Q185217" start="8139" end="8152" title="dairy product" label="dairy product"/>
<link wikidata="Q23485" start="8155" end="8160" title="onion" label="onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q23400" start="8163" end="8169" title="garlic" label="garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q774278" start="8171" end="8184" title="scallion" label="spring onions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807269" start="8186" end="8190" title="leek" label="leek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916957" start="8193" end="8199" title="turnip" label="turnip"/>
<link wikidata="Q158464" start="8202" end="8208" title="rutabaga" label="swedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224565" start="8210" end="8216" title="radish" label="radish"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="8220" end="8232" title="sweet potato" label="sweet potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="8236" end="8244" title="potatoes" label="potatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34007" start="8246" end="8252" title="cashew" label="cashew"/>
<link wikidata="Q146190" start="8255" end="8274" title="Jerusalem artichoke" label="Jerusalem artichoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="8277" end="8280" title="oat" label="oat"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="8283" end="8288" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="8294" end="8299" title="yeast" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802" start="8303" end="8308" title="bread" label="bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537" start="8311" end="8322" title="Cauliflower" label="Cauliflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q47722" start="8324" end="8332" title="broccoli" label="broccoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q35051" start="8334" end="8341" title="cabbage" label="cabbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q150463" start="8343" end="8359" title="Brussels sprouts" label="Brussels sprouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189799" start="8370" end="8392" title="cruciferous vegetables" label="cruciferous vegetables"/>
<link wikidata="Q58677" start="8424" end="8432" title="Brassica" label="Brassica"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="8610" end="8622" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="8712" end="8726" title="microorganisms" label="microorganisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q22275999" start="8728" end="8745" title="methanogenesis" label="methane-producing"/>
<link wikidata="Q309517" start="8761" end="8787" title="Methanobrevibacter smithii" label="Methanobrevibacter smithii"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="8812" end="8827" title="digestive tract" label="digestive tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="8945" end="8953" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q838966" start="9087" end="9111" title="irritable bowel syndrome" label="irritable bowel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q11088" start="9113" end="9127" title="celiac disease" label="celiac disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q19772377" start="9129" end="9158" title="non-celiac gluten sensitivity" label="non-celiac gluten sensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q219223" start="9162" end="9181" title="lactose intolerance" label="lactose intolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q186969" start="9235" end="9244" title="ibuprofen" label="ibuprofen"/>
<link wikidata="Q217972" start="9246" end="9254" title="laxative" label="laxative"/>
<link wikidata="Q578726" start="9257" end="9267" title="antifungal" label="antifungal"/>
<link wikidata="Q954845" start="9281" end="9287" title="statin" label="statin"/>
<link wikidata="Q326071" start="9315" end="9325" title="giardiasis" label="giardiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q206021" start="9431" end="9437" title="flight" label="flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q752783" start="9442" end="9459" title="human spaceflight" label="human spaceflight"/>
<link wikidata="Q81809" start="9469" end="9489" title="atmospheric pressure" label="atmospheric pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029598" start="9628" end="9658" title="high altitude flatus expulsion" label="high altitude flatus expulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083" start="9897" end="9902" title="Colon (anatomy)" label="colon"/>
<link wikidata="Q381619" start="9925" end="9935" title="aerophagia" label="aerophagia"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="10105" end="10111" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="10113" end="10121" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="10123" end="10137" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="10139" end="10147" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="10152" end="10159" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q910035" start="10485" end="10494" title="flammable" label="flammable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436457" start="10503" end="10524" title="Fart lighting" label="flatus can be ignited"/>
<link wikidata="Q496" start="10665" end="10671" title="feces" label="faeces"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872" start="10723" end="10730" title="archaea" label="archaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q319541" start="11118" end="11124" title="indole" label="indole"/>
<link wikidata="Q412281" start="11126" end="11133" title="skatole" label="skatole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="11135" end="11142" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698455" start="11147" end="11170" title="short chain fatty acids" label="short chain fatty acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q682" start="11328" end="11334" title="sulfur" label="sulfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="11346" end="11362" title="Hydrogen sulfide" label="Hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q409309" start="11364" end="11380" title="methyl mercaptan" label="methyl mercaptan"/>
<link wikidata="Q409309" start="11396" end="11408" title="methanethiol" label="methanethiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q423133" start="11411" end="11427" title="dimethyl sulfide" label="dimethyl sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q419800" start="11429" end="11447" title="dimethyl disulfide" label="dimethyl disulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277321" start="11452" end="11471" title="dimethyl trisulfide" label="dimethyl trisulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q319541" start="11522" end="11528" title="indole" label="indole"/>
<link wikidata="Q412281" start="11533" end="11540" title="skatole" label="skatole"/>
<link wikidata="Q323635" start="12008" end="12019" title="pinto beans" label="pinto beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="12826" end="12834" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q746416" start="14618" end="14634" title="sphincter muscle" label="sphincter muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11402" start="14644" end="14649" title="force" label="force"/>
<link wikidata="Q11465" start="14653" end="14661" title="velocity" label="velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11432" start="14669" end="14672" title="gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q35805" start="14853" end="14858" title="cough" label="cough"/>
<link wikidata="Q35830" start="14865" end="14873" title="sneezing" label="sneezing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887" start="14884" end="14890" title="orgasm" label="orgasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q191154" start="15347" end="15358" title="surfactants" label="surfactants"/>
<link wikidata="Q170749" start="15378" end="15393" title="surface tension" label="surface tension"/>
<link wikidata="Q419415" start="15562" end="15573" title="simethicone" label="simethicone"/>
<link wikidata="Q209789" start="15702" end="15706" title="burp" label="burp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429522" start="15925" end="15936" title="prokinetics" label="prokinetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6695342" start="15938" end="15950" title="lubiprostone" label="lubiprostone"/>
<link wikidata="Q158716" start="16193" end="16199" title="rectum" label="rectum"/>
<link wikidata="Q85782503" start="16550" end="16565" title="low-FODMAP diet" label="low-FODMAP diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q235169" start="16975" end="16979" title="miso" label="miso"/>
<link wikidata="Q145909" start="17035" end="17041" title="legume" label="legume"/>
<link wikidata="Q139777" start="17194" end="17213" title="Lactobacillus casei" label="Lactobacillus casei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756682" start="17230" end="17253" title="Lactobacillus plantarum" label="Lactobacillus plantarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816730" start="17310" end="17319" title="Probiotic" label="Probiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13317" start="17322" end="17333" title="yogurt" label="live yogurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q185749" start="17335" end="17340" title="kefir" label="kefir"/>
<link wikidata="Q739734" start="17424" end="17440" title="intestinal flora" label="intestinal flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q132644" start="17511" end="17536" title="Lactobacillus acidophilus" label="Lactobacillus acidophilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q132644" start="17594" end="17608" title="Lactobacillus acidophilus" label="L. acidophilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q132644" start="17730" end="17744" title="Lactobacillus acidophilus" label="L. acidophilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q218870" start="17780" end="17790" title="Prebiotic (nutrition)" label="Prebiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q418945" start="17853" end="17874" title="fructooligosaccharide" label="fructooligosaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q419557" start="17962" end="17978" title="Digestive enzyme" label="Digestive enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="18175" end="18185" title="intestines" label="intestines"/>
<link wikidata="Q83170235" start="18214" end="18233" title="alpha-galactosidase" label="alpha-galactosidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="18234" end="18241" title="enzymes" label="enzymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="18350" end="18357" title="enzymes" label="enzymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q83170235" start="18358" end="18377" title="alpha-galactosidase" label="alpha-galactosidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q379764" start="18379" end="18386" title="lactase" label="lactase"/>
<link wikidata="Q17153" start="18388" end="18395" title="amylase" label="amylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q380967" start="18397" end="18403" title="lipase" label="lipase"/>
<link wikidata="Q212410" start="18405" end="18413" title="protease" label="protease"/>
<link wikidata="Q410324" start="18415" end="18424" title="cellulase" label="cellulase"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18426" end="18438" title="Amylase#γ-Amylase" label="glucoamylase"/>
<link wikidata="Q419189" start="18440" end="18449" title="invertase" label="invertase"/>
<link wikidata="Q609677" start="18456" end="18464" title="diastase" label="diastase"/>
<link wikidata="Q419568" start="18466" end="18475" title="pectinase" label="pectinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q415756" start="18481" end="18490" title="bromelain" label="bromelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="18581" end="18591" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q416073" start="18592" end="18601" title="rifaximin" label="rifaximin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="18623" end="18631" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="18646" end="18659" title="microorganism" label="microorganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q25419" start="18666" end="18673" title="Escherichia coli" label="E. coli"/>
<link wikidata="Q485537" start="18792" end="18796" title="odor" label="odor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757667" start="18844" end="18862" title="bismuth subgallate" label="bismuth subgallate"/>
<link wikidata="Q911690" start="18961" end="18967" title="ostomy" label="ostomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q357503" start="18977" end="18994" title="bariatric surgery" label="bariatric surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147182" start="18996" end="19015" title="faecal incontinence" label="faecal incontinence"/>
<link wikidata="Q838966" start="19020" end="19044" title="irritable bowel syndrome" label="irritable bowel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q81890" start="19046" end="19067" title="Bismuth subsalicylate" label="Bismuth subsalicylate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477" start="19614" end="19632" title="ulcerative colitis" label="ulcerative colitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q190878" start="20131" end="20149" title="Activated Charcoal" label="activated charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q675576" start="21227" end="21243" title="Pueblo, Colorado" label="Pueblo, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q198763" start="21277" end="21289" title="undergarment" label="undergarment"/>
<link wikidata="Q190878" start="21319" end="21334" title="Activated carbon" label="charcoal filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475577" start="21358" end="21367" title="Hermetic seal" label="air-tight"/>
<link wikidata="Q13586490" start="21391" end="21402" title="path of least resistance" label="escape hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q184253" start="21475" end="21489" title="Ig Nobel Prize" label="Ig Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273163" start="21656" end="21666" title="pantiliner" label="pantiliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003096" start="21741" end="21757" title="Mililani, Hawaii" label="Mililani, Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147182" start="22100" end="22119" title="faecal incontinence" label="faecal incontinence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="22180" end="22187" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q35805" start="22499" end="22504" title="cough" label="cough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255632" start="23073" end="23082" title="flatulist" label="flatulist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17215" start="23088" end="23103" title="whoopee cushion" label="whoopee cushion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="23220" end="23226" title="iPhone" label="iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436447" start="23264" end="23271" title="fart (word)" label="farting"/>
<link wikidata="Q320314" start="23324" end="23343" title="John Gregory Bourke" label="John Gregory Bourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020" start="23492" end="23498" title="Malawi" label="Malawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q55648385" start="23499" end="23518" title="Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs (Malawi)" label="Minister of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537823" start="23520" end="23535" title="George Chaponda" label="George Chaponda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4621770" start="23547" end="23570" title="2011 Malawian Air Fouling Legislation" label="Air Fouling Legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="23856" end="23870" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="23933" end="23942" title="livestock" label="livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q30672844" start="24010" end="24027" title="methane emissions" label="methane emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q9530" start="24059" end="24067" title="breath" label="exhaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q209789" start="24071" end="24078" title="burping" label="burping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169785" start="24154" end="24165" title="methanogens" label="methanogens"/>
<link wikidata="Q134283" start="24311" end="24318" title="oregano" label="oregano"/>
<link wikidata="Q237169" start="24323" end="24330" title="seaweed" label="seaweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="24643" end="24657" title="Kyoto Protocol" label="Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="24691" end="24711" title="greenhouse gas emissions" label="greenhouse emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693958" start="24733" end="24769" title="agricultural emissions research levy" label="agricultural emissions research levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693958" start="24823" end="24831" title="Agricultural emissions research levy" label="fart tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018" start="25053" end="25068" title="Saint Augustine" label="Saint Augustine"/>
<link wikidata="Q212318" start="25082" end="25093" title="City of God (book)" label="City of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q131018" start="25502" end="25510" title="Rabelais" label="Rabelais"/>
<link wikidata="Q318582" start="25513" end="25524" title="Le Pétomane" label="Le Pétomane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255632" start="25626" end="25645" title="Flatulist" label="professional farter"/>
<link wikidata="Q430448" start="25716" end="25727" title="Mr. Methane" label="Mr. Methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q708825" start="25807" end="25819" title="Thunderpants" label="Thunderpants"/>
<link wikidata="Q957323" start="26034" end="26049" title="Blazing Saddles" label="Blazing Saddles"/>
<link wikidata="Q936302" start="26066" end="26076" title="Scooby-Doo (film)" label="Scooby-Doo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="26128" end="26138" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306994" start="26175" end="26193" title="show-within-a-show" label="show-within-a-show"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26211" end="26231" title="List_of_South_Park_characters#Terrance_and_Phillip" label="Terrance and Phillip"/>
<link wikidata="Q182116" start="26816" end="26822" title="Fetishism" label="fetish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5887" start="26846" end="26866" title="sexual gratification" label="sexual gratification"/>
<link wikidata="Q208195" start="26871" end="26879" title="pleasure" label="pleasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774728" start="27016" end="27029" title="Antiflatulent" label="Antiflatulent"/>
<link wikidata="Q65075954" start="27032" end="27043" title="Armpit fart" label="Armpit fart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781127" start="27046" end="27057" title="Borborygmus" label="Borborygmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654782" start="27060" end="27073" title="Eproctophilia" label="Eproctophilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436457" start="27076" end="27089" title="Fart lighting" label="Fart lighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457998" start="27092" end="27108" title="Flatulence humor" label="Flatulence humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735891" start="27117" end="27132" title="The Gas We Pass" label="The Gas We Pass"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27141" end="27161" title="List_of_South_Park_characters#Terrance_and_Phillip" label="Terrance and Phillip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413614" start="27164" end="27171" title="Tympany" label="Tympany"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436447" start="27174" end="27185" title="Fart (word)" label="Fart (word)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11243" wikidata="Q108174" url="?curid=11243" title="Filter">
<text>[[Filtration]] is a physical process that separates solid matter and fluid from a mixture.
Filter, filtering, filters or filtration may also refer to:
==Science and technology==

===Computing===
* Filter (higher-order function), in functional programming
* Filter (software), a computer program to process a data stream
* Filter (video), a software component that performs some operation on a multimedia stream
* Email filtering, the processing of email to organize it according to specified criteria
* Content-control software also known as an Internet filter
* Wordfilter, a script typically used on Internet forums or chat rooms
* Berkeley Packet Filter, filter expression used in the qualification of network data
* DSL filter, a low-pass filter installed between analog devices and a telephone line
* Helicon Filter, a raster graphics editor
* Filter (large eddy simulation), a mathematical operation intended to remove a range of small scales from the solution to the Navier-Stokes equations
* Kalman filter, an approximating algorithm in optimal control applications and problems

* Filter (social media), an appearance-altering digital image effect for social media

=== Device ===
* Filter (chemistry), a device which separates solids from fluids (liquids or gases) by adding a medium through which only the fluid can pass
** Filter (aquarium), critical components of both freshwater and marine aquaria
** Filter paper, a semi-permeable paper barrier placed perpendicular to a liquid or air flow. It is used to separate fine solids from liquids or air
** Air filter, a device composed of fibrous materials which removes solid particulates such as dust, pollen, mold, and bacteria from the air
** Oil filter, a filter to remove contaminants from engine oil, transmission oil, lubricating oil, or hydraulic oil
** Pneumatic filter, a device which removes contaminants from a compressed air stream
** Water filter, removes impurities from water by means of a fine physical barrier, a chemical process or a biological process
** Cigarette filter, a part of a cigarette intended to filter the smoke inhaled by a smoker
** Coffee filter, a utensil used to separate coffee grounds from liquid coffee
** Fuel filter, found in most internal combustion engines
** Filtration (wine)
* Sieve or macroscopic filter, a device for separating wanted elements from unwanted material

=== Mathematics ===
* Filter (mathematics), a special subset of a partially ordered set.
* Filter (set theory), a special family of subsets that forms an (order theoretic) filter with respect to set inclusion
* Filters in topology, the use of collections of subsets to describe convergence.
* Filtering problem (stochastic processes), a mathematical model for a number of filtering problems in signal processing and the like.
* Filtration (mathematics), an indexed set of subobjects of a given algebraic structure S.

=== Optics ===
* Optical filter, selectively transmits light of different wavelengths
** Interference filter, reflects one or more spectral bands or lines and transmits others, while maintaining a nearly zero coefficient of absorption for all wavelengths of interest
** Dichroic filter, a very accurate color filter used to selectively pass light of a small range of colors while reflecting other colors
** Hydrogen-alpha filter, an optical filter that transmits a narrow bandwidth of light centred on the H-alpha wavelength
** Photographic filter, a camera accessory consisting of an optical filter that can be inserted in the optical path
** Infrared cut-off filter, designed to reflect or block mid-infrared wavelengths while passing visible light
** Chelsea filter, a dichromatic optical filter used for identifying coloured stones
** Astronomical filter, a telescope accessory used to enhance the details of celestial objects

===Signal processing===
* Filter (signal processing)
** Electronic filter, an electronic circuit which processes signals, for example to remove unwanted frequency components
** Digital filter, a system that performs mathematical operations to reduce or enhance certain aspects of a signal
** Analogue filter, a basic building block of signal processing much used in electronics
** Filters used in digital image processing

==Arts and entertainment==
* &quot;Filter&quot; (TV series), a show on the G4 channel
* &quot;Filter&quot; (magazine), an indie music magazine
* Filter Theatre, a British theatre company
* The Filter, a digital content services company based in England
* Filter (band), an American rock band
* &quot;Filter&quot;, a song from the album &quot;Bend&quot; by 8stops7
* &quot;Filter&quot;, a song from the album &quot;Map of the Soul: 7&quot; by BTS
* &quot;Filter&quot;, a song from the album &quot;Ruby&quot; by Jennie

==Other uses==
* Biofilter, a pollution control technique using a bioreactor containing living material to capture and biologically degrade pollutants
* Filtering (housing), the process of housing units becoming more affordable with age
* Category-based filtering of perception, according to (objectivist interpretations of) Kant
** Affective filter, an impediment to learning or acquisition caused by negative emotional (&quot;affective&quot;) responses to one&#x27;s environment
* Lane splitting, a practice that cyclists use to pass slow or stopped congested traffic
*The ability of a person to self-censor themselves (their thoughts) whilst speaking

==See also==
* Filter coffee, a method for preparing coffee
* Filter feeder, an animal that strains food particles from water
* Filtration camp (disambiguation)
* Lifter (signal processing)
* Philtre (disambiguation)
* Separation process
* Ultrafilter</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q108174" start="0" end="14" title="Filter" label="[[Filtration]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q108174" start="91" end="97" title="Filter" label="Filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q108174" start="99" end="108" title="Filter" label="filtering"/>
<link wikidata="Q108174" start="110" end="117" title="Filter" label="filters"/>
<link wikidata="Q108174" start="121" end="131" title="Filter" label="filtration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672873" start="197" end="227" title="Filter (higher-order function)" label="Filter (higher-order function)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706314" start="257" end="274" title="Filter (software)" label="Filter (software)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449221" start="322" end="336" title="Filter (video)" label="Filter (video)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141106" start="413" end="428" title="Email filtering" label="Email filtering"/>
<link wikidata="Q13515741" start="503" end="527" title="Content-control software" label="Content-control software"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034393" start="563" end="573" title="Wordfilter" label="Wordfilter"/>
<link wikidata="Q820849" start="634" end="656" title="Berkeley Packet Filter" label="Berkeley Packet Filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155705" start="720" end="730" title="DSL filter" label="DSL filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705090" start="806" end="820" title="Helicon Filter" label="Helicon Filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449219" start="849" end="879" title="Filter (large eddy simulation)" label="Filter (large eddy simulation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q846780" start="1000" end="1013" title="Kalman filter" label="Kalman filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q115818673" start="1090" end="1111" title="Filter (social media)" label="Filter (social media)"/>
<link wikidata="Q244772" start="1192" end="1210" title="Filter (chemistry)" label="Filter (chemistry)"/>
<link wikidata="Q623170" start="1335" end="1352" title="Filter (aquarium)" label="Filter (aquarium)"/>
<link wikidata="Q910257" start="1415" end="1427" title="Filter paper" label="Filter paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q583488" start="1564" end="1574" title="Air filter" label="Air filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q296984" start="1705" end="1715" title="Oil filter" label="Oil filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205964" start="1821" end="1837" title="Pneumatic filter" label="Pneumatic filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q605696" start="1907" end="1919" title="Water filter" label="Water filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361201" start="2034" end="2050" title="Cigarette filter" label="Cigarette filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541241" start="2126" end="2139" title="Coffee filter" label="Coffee filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q603491" start="2205" end="2216" title="Fuel filter" label="Fuel filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126958" start="2263" end="2280" title="Filtration (wine)" label="Filtration (wine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q381155" start="2283" end="2288" title="Sieve" label="Sieve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052692" start="2398" end="2418" title="Filter (mathematics)" label="Filter (mathematics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16545258" start="2467" end="2486" title="Filter (set theory)" label="Filter (set theory)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104901581" start="2587" end="2606" title="Filters in topology" label="Filters in topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449244" start="2669" end="2709" title="Filtering problem (stochastic processes)" label="Filtering problem (stochastic processes)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187724" start="2804" end="2828" title="Filtration (mathematics)" label="Filtration (mathematics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134091" start="2911" end="2925" title="Optical filter" label="Optical filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q904883" start="2983" end="3002" title="Interference filter" label="Interference filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q904883" start="3164" end="3179" title="Dichroic filter" label="Dichroic filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q585943" start="3301" end="3322" title="Hydrogen-alpha filter" label="Hydrogen-alpha filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q876650" start="3422" end="3441" title="Photographic filter" label="Photographic filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236081" start="3538" end="3561" title="Infrared cut-off filter" label="Infrared cut-off filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090153" start="3648" end="3662" title="Chelsea filter" label="Chelsea filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811658" start="3733" end="3752" title="Astronomical filter" label="Astronomical filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072260" start="3852" end="3878" title="Filter (signal processing)" label="Filter (signal processing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q327754" start="3882" end="3899" title="Electronic filter" label="Electronic filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163067" start="4003" end="4017" title="Digital filter" label="Digital filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q359205" start="4118" end="4133" title="Analogue filter" label="Analogue filter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4223" end="4247" title="Digital image processing#Filtering" label="digital image processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029390" start="4278" end="4308" title="Filter (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Filter&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17772161" start="4337" end="4366" title="Filter (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Filter&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449224" start="4394" end="4408" title="Filter Theatre" label="Filter Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838433" start="4438" end="4448" title="The Filter" label="The Filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q750954" start="4504" end="4517" title="Filter (band)" label="Filter (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886978" start="4591" end="4595" title="Bend (8stops7 album)" label="Bend"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4663" end="4681" title="Map of the Soul: 7" label="Map of the Soul: 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q131909420" start="4745" end="4749" title="Ruby (Jennie album)" label="Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q864323" start="4784" end="4793" title="Biofilter" label="Biofilter"/>
<link wikidata="Q122226894" start="4920" end="4939" title="Filtering (housing)" label="Filtering (housing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118499" start="5006" end="5014" title="Category (Kant)" label="Category"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036788" start="5100" end="5116" title="Affective filter" label="Affective filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4207201" start="5250" end="5264" title="Lane splitting" label="Lane splitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q543" start="5370" end="5376" title="Censorship" label="censor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155703" start="5437" end="5450" title="Filter coffee" label="Filter coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252491" start="5484" end="5497" title="Filter feeder" label="Filter feeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q20811407" start="5550" end="5582" title="Filtration camp (disambiguation)" label="Filtration camp (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054571" start="5585" end="5611" title="Lifter (signal processing)" label="Lifter (signal processing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186318" start="5614" end="5638" title="Philtre (disambiguation)" label="Philtre (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q898987" start="5641" end="5659" title="Separation process" label="Separation process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571831" start="5662" end="5673" title="Ultrafilter" label="Ultrafilter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11244" wikidata="Q3066164" url="?curid=11244" title="Free Methodist Church">
<text>The Free Methodist Church (FMC) is a Methodist Christian denomination within the holiness movement, based in the United States. It is evangelical in nature and is Wesleyan–Arminian in theology.

The Free Methodist Church has members in over 100 countries, with 62,516 members in the United States and 1,547,820 members worldwide. The &quot;Light &amp; Life Magazine&quot; is their official publication. The Free Methodist Church World Ministries Center is in Indianapolis, Indiana.

==History==

The Free Methodist Church was organized at Pekin, New York, in 1860. The founders had been members of the Methodist Episcopal Church but were excluded from its membership for earnestly advocating what they saw as the doctrines and usages of authentic Wesleyan Methodism. Under the leadership of the Rev. Benjamin Titus (B. T.) Roberts, a graduate of Wesleyan University, the movement spread rapidly. Societies were organized, churches built, and the work established.

Before the founding of the church, Roberts began publication of a monthly journal, &quot;The Earnest Christian&quot;. In 1868, &quot;The Free Methodist&quot; (now &quot;Light &amp; Life&quot;) was begun. A publishing house was established in 1886 to produce books, periodicals, and Sunday school curriculum and literature.

The name &quot;Methodist&quot; was retained for the newly organized church because the founders believed that they were continuing the authentic practice of the doctrines and standards of Methodism; to them, their expulsion from the Methodist Episcopal Church happened because of their adherence to the same. The word &quot;Free&quot; was suggested and adopted because the new church (1) was anti-slavery; (2) wanted pews to be free to all regardless of status, rather than sold or rented (as was common); (3) promoted freedom of worship in the Holy Spirit, as opposed to stifling formality; (4) upheld the principle of &quot;freedom&quot; from secret and oath-bound societies (in particular the Masonic Lodge), so as to have full loyalty to Christ; (5) stood for &quot;freedom&quot; from the abuse of ecclesiastical authority (due to the bishop&#x27;s action in allowing expulsion of 120 clergy and lay); and (6) desired its members to experience entire sanctification via the Holy Spirit through consecration and faith.

At the 1910 session of the General Conference of the Methodist Church at Rochester, New York, a full acknowledgement was made of the wrong done to the late Roberts fifty years before, and the credentials taken from him were restored in a public meeting on his behalf to his son, Rev. Benson Roberts.

Holiness Conservatives within the Free Methodist Church left to form the Reformed Free Methodist Church in 1932, the United Holiness Church in 1966 (which joined the Bible Methodist Connection of Churches in 1994) and the Evangelical Wesleyan Church in 1963.

Free Methodist headquarters were located in Winona Lake, Indiana until 1990, when the denomination moved to Indianapolis, Indiana.

The Free Methodist Church released a 21st Century articulation of its Historic Freedoms to include the following:

# Freedom of all races to worship together in unity.
# Freedom for the poor to be treated with dignity in the church and with justice in the world.
# Freedom for women and men to be treated respectfully and use their gifts equally in the church, in the home, and in the world.
# Freedom for laity to be fairly represented in the governing bodies of the church.
# Freedom from spiritual, political, social or conceptual alliances that compromise or subvert the exclusive allegiance we profess to Jesus Christ.
# Freedom to engage in worship that is moved and inspired by the Holy Spirit.
# Freedom from sin&#x27;s power through full surrender to God.

==Statistics==
The church has about 62,516 members in the United States as of 2021. Worldwide its membership is over 1,500,000. with large segments of membership in East Central Africa (Rwanda, Burundi, DRC) and other countries.

==Beliefs and practices== 
In doctrine, Free Methodists’ beliefs are the standard beliefs of Wesleyan-Arminian Protestantism, with distinctive emphasis on the teaching of entire sanctification as held by John Wesley, to whom the Free Methodist Church traces its origins.

The Free Methodist Church, along with the United Methodist Church, shares a common heritage linked to the Methodist revival in England during the 18th century. The Free Methodist Church itself arose within the context of the holiness movement within 19th century Methodism.

The first general superintendent, B. T. Roberts, was in favor of ordaining women, but never saw it take place in his lifetime. Out of his own conviction he wrote &quot;Ordaining Women: Biblical and Historical Insights&quot;. The impact of his writings eventually prevailed in the church. The Free Methodist Church affirmed the ordination of women in 1911. As of June 2008, women represented 11% of ordained clergy (216 of 2,011) and 26% of candidates for the ministry.

Free Methodists recognize and license unordained persons for particular ministries. They mandate lay representation in numbers equal to clergy in the councils of the church.

As a reaction to paid musicians in the Methodist Episcopal Church, early Free Methodists enjoyed a capella congregational hymns during worship. However, the General Conference of 1943 voted to allow each Conference to vote on whether or not their churches could have instrumental music. As a result, pianos and organs became common across most conferences. Currently, many churches have worship teams composed of vocalists, drums, keyboards, guitars, and other instruments.

==Organization==
The Free Methodist Church&#x27;s highest governing body is the World Conference, which is composed of representatives, both lay and clergy, from all countries with a Free Methodist General Conference. As the church in each country develops, its status progresses from Mission District to Annual Conference to General Conference. There are currently 20 General Conferences in the world, which are linked together through the articles of religion and common constitution of the first two chapters of the Book of Discipline, the World Conference, and the Council of Bishops.
The USA branch of the Free Methodist Church is currently led by three bishops: Bishop Keith Cowart, Bishop Kaye Kolde, and Bishop Kenny Martin. Bishop Cowart was first elected in 2019 and re-elected in 2023. Bishops Kolde and Martin were first elected in 2023.

==World Missions==

Free Methodist World Missions oversees ministries across Africa, Asia, Europe, Latin America, and the Middle East. Today, 95% of Free Methodists are located outside the United States, and that number is growing daily.

International Child Care Ministries (ICCM), a child sponsorship initiative serves more than 21,000 children in 29 countries around the world. Through education, meals and medical care, children in need are given an opportunity for a better life. Each sponsored child is connected to a Free Methodist congregation or ministry at a local level.

Set Free Movement is seeking to mobilize faith communities, financial partners, and all segments of society towards ending human trafficking and creating new futures through community-based action.

Volunteers in Service Abroad (VISA) connects volunteers from the Free Methodist Church in the US and UK with Free Methodist World Missions for hands-on ministry internationally.
The church currently has ministry over 88 countries, including:

==Higher education==
B. T. Roberts began what is now Roberts Wesleyan College in 1866. Spring Arbor College followed in 1873 (renamed Spring Arbor University in 2001), Seattle Pacific University in 1891, and Greenville College (renamed Greenville University in 2017) in 1892. Central College began in 1914, a continuation of Orleans Seminary begun in 1884. Los Angeles Pacific College existed from 1903 to 1965.

The following educational institutions are a part of the Association of Free Methodist Educational Institutions. The schools are not owned by the denomination but meet a set of requirements to maintain this relationship.

* Central Christian College, McPherson, KS
* Greenville University, Greenville, IL
* Roberts Wesleyan University, North Chili, NY
* Spring Arbor University, Spring Arbor, MI
* Seattle Pacific University, Seattle, WA

In addition, the Free Methodist Church is one of several denominations supporting Azusa Pacific University (Azusa, CA). Wessington Springs College is a former, now closed institution which was located in South Dakota. Internationally, there is Osaka Christian College of the Japanese Free Methodist Church, Hope Africa University, a recently founded school in Bujumbura, Burundi, Haiti Providence University, and the Faculdade de Teologia Metodista Livre, São Paulo, Brazil.

Through the John Wesley Seminary Foundation (JWSF) graduate students who are preparing for full-time ministry in the Free Methodist Church are provided a grant or loan at the following affiliated schools:

* Asbury Theological Seminary – (KY, FL, TN, OK, CO Campuses)
* Azusa Pacific Seminary, Azusa, CA
* Northeastern Seminary at Roberts Wesleyan College, Rochester, NY
* Portland Seminary at George Fox Evangelical Seminary, Portland, OR
* Seattle Pacific Seminary, Seattle, WA
* Wesley Biblical Seminary, Jackson, MS
* Wesley House of Studies at Baylor University’s Truett Theological Seminary, Waco, TX
* Wesley Seminary at Indiana Wesleyan University, Marion, IN

==Publishing==
Like John Wesley before him, B. T. Roberts recognized the Christian&#x27;s responsibility for publishing.

Before the founding of the church in 1860, B. T. Roberts began publication of a monthly journal, &quot;The Earnest Christian&quot;. In 1868 &quot;The Free Methodist&quot; (now &quot;Light &amp; Life&quot; Magazine) began. A publishing house was established in 1886 to produce books, periodicals and Sunday school curriculum and literature.

===Beginnings===
Early leaders, T. B. Arnold and B. T. Roberts privately financed and produced several publications.

The official publishing institution was established by the church at the 1886 General Conference. The church purchased the publishing business built by Rev. T. B. Arnold for $8,000. Arnold was named first publisher and B. T. Roberts was elected editor of &quot;The Free Methodist&quot;. The Free Methodist Publishing House is recognized under its trade name Light and Life Press.

===Growth and development===
The Free Methodist Publishing House operated at three locations in Chicago, Illinois. In February 1935, it moved along with Free Methodist Headquarters to Winona Lake, Indiana.

During its history, the Free Methodist Publishing House built up a plant and accumulated property worth several hundred thousand dollars. It also contributed thousands of dollars out of its profits to other activities of the church.

Over the years, as the ministry of the Free Methodist Church expanded, various departments of the general church gradually moved into Free Methodist Publishing House accommodations. This was provided at vast cost and without the investment of any capital by the general church.

In 1960, the Free Methodist Publishing House board issued a deed in favor of the general church, whereby the church became the owner of the old property, plus nearly eight acres of land. For this the general church paid nothing, but agreed to make payments of $5,000 per year over a ten-year period to the Free Methodist Publishing House.

=== Audio publications ===
In 1944 the Free Methodist Church began a weekly radio show called The Light and Life Radio Hour which featured hymns, sermons, prayer, and scripture reading. The show ran until 1980 and featured several different hosts over the years including Dr. Leroy Lowell, Myron F. Boyd, and Robert Andrews.

In 2016 Josh Avery began The FMC Radio Show which was a spiritual successor to The Light and Life Radio Hour but embodied a very different focus. In a podcast format, the show is subtitled &quot;your officially unofficial source for all things Free Methodist&quot;. Instead of worship and sermon, the show means to act as a uniting factor in the Free Methodist Church by informing listeners about different things that are happening in the denomination.

Today, the Light+Life podcast features ministries of the Free Methodist Church that tell their stories of ministry fruitfulness.

===Ministry===
&quot;Arnold’s Commentary&quot; was published from 1894 to 1980. In the late 1950s and early 1960s the church pioneered fully graded church school materials. In 1960 the &quot;Aldersgate Biblical Series&quot; was developed as the only inductive curriculum of its time.

A fully equipped printing area consisting of letterpresses, offset press, cutters, folders, bindery, linotypes etc. contributed toward making the church independent of commercial printers for the production for its printing needs at that time.

Acting on the recommendation of its executive committee, the board voted in 1988 to phase out printing operations. This decision and the 1989 General Conference decision to move the Press and Headquarters from Winona Lake to Indianapolis in 1990 shifted the focus of the Press. Where formerly, the Press produced and published Sunday school curriculum, this venture is now carried on in cooperation with other holiness denominations.

Beginning in 2008, the Wesleyan Publishing House, publishing arm of the Wesleyan Church, began serving the distribution and customer service needs of Light and Life Press.

===Mission statement===
Light &amp; Life Communications, the official publishing arm of the Free Methodist Church, is a not-for-profit corporation that exists to serve in partnership with its parent body, the Free Methodist Church. Its primary purpose is to publish and distribute materials that enable the church to fulfill its stated mission. Light &amp; Life Communications also offers its services and materials to all who seek to make Christ known.

==Publications==
*Light + Life Communications is the publishing division of the Free Methodist Church.
*Light + Life Magazine is the official magazine of the Free Methodist Church USA, published online. It includes in-depth journalism and interviews exploring Christian faith. Each issue is also translated into Spanish and published concurrently as Revista Luz y Vida. Jeff Finley is the magazine&#x27;s executive editor.
*Light + Life Bookstore is the official bookstore of Free Methodist Church USA. Free Methodist books and exclusive titles on Christian faith and Wesleyan holiness theology.
*The Light + Life podcast hosts conversations that deepen people&#x27;s faith through the Light+Life of Jesus Christ.
*Free Methodist World Missions Heartbeat is the monthly magazine of Free Methodist World Missions.
*Free Methodist Conversations is an online resource for discussing important values and issues.

==References==
==External links==
*Official site
*Free Methodist World Missions
*International Child Care Ministries</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3066164" start="4" end="25" title="Free Methodist Church" label="Free Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066164" start="27" end="30" title="Free Methodist Church" label="FMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="37" end="46" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="47" end="69" title="Christian denomination" label="Christian denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050725" start="81" end="98" title="holiness movement" label="holiness movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="113" end="126" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="134" end="145" title="Evangelicalism" label="evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q15633792" start="163" end="180" title="Wesleyan theology" label="Wesleyan–Arminian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="459" end="480" title="Indianapolis, Indiana" label="Indianapolis, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161037" start="539" end="554" title="Pekin, New York" label="Pekin, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q369557" start="602" end="628" title="Methodist Episcopal Church" label="Methodist Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834229" start="800" end="830" title="B. T. Roberts" label="Benjamin Titus (B. T.) Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49167" start="846" end="865" title="Wesleyan University" label="Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="1985" end="1998" title="Freemasonry" label="Masonic Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2237" end="2258" title="Christian perfection#Wesleyan teaching" label="entire sanctification"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2287" end="2299" title="Consecration in Christianity#Entire consecration" label="consecration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163105" start="2613" end="2635" title="Conservative holiness movement" label="Holiness Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q85796422" start="2686" end="2716" title="Reformed Free Methodist Church" label="Reformed Free Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588282" start="2730" end="2752" title="United Holiness Church" label="United Holiness Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588282" start="2779" end="2817" title="Bible Methodist Connection of Churches" label="Bible Methodist Connection of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611209" start="2835" end="2862" title="Evangelical Wesleyan Church" label="Evangelical Wesleyan Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590154" start="2917" end="2937" title="Winona Lake, Indiana" label="Winona Lake, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="3957" end="3963" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q967" start="3965" end="3972" title="Burundi" label="Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="3974" end="3977" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="DRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q13446873" start="4103" end="4111" title="Arminianism" label="Arminian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384645" start="4172" end="4193" title="entire sanctification" label="entire sanctification"/>
<link wikidata="Q213393" start="4205" end="4216" title="John Wesley" label="John Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="4315" end="4338" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050725" start="4498" end="4515" title="holiness movement" label="holiness movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q369557" start="5232" end="5258" title="Methodist Episcopal Church" label="Methodist Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5290" end="5299" title="A cappella#Christian" label="a capella"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682290" start="7901" end="7928" title="Los Angeles Pacific College (defunct)" label="Los Angeles Pacific College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060545" start="8181" end="8206" title="Central Christian College of Kansas" label="Central Christian College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2189250" start="8208" end="8221" title="McPherson, KS" label="McPherson, KS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604671" start="8224" end="8245" title="Greenville College" label="Greenville University"/>
<link wikidata="Q576219" start="8247" end="8261" title="Greenville, IL" label="Greenville, IL"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352053" start="8264" end="8291" title="Roberts Wesleyan University" label="Roberts Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412213" start="8293" end="8308" title="Chili, New York" label="North Chili, NY"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580375" start="8311" end="8334" title="Spring Arbor University" label="Spring Arbor University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724977" start="8336" end="8352" title="Spring Arbor, MI" label="Spring Arbor, MI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904851" start="8355" end="8381" title="Seattle Pacific University" label="Seattle Pacific University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="8383" end="8394" title="Seattle, WA" label="Seattle, WA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583636" start="8478" end="8502" title="Azusa Pacific University" label="Azusa Pacific University"/>
<link wikidata="Q794396" start="8504" end="8513" title="Azusa, CA" label="Azusa, CA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984157" start="8516" end="8542" title="Wessington Springs College" label="Wessington Springs College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="8600" end="8612" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105545" start="8640" end="8663" title="Osaka Christian College" label="Osaka Christian College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854" start="8756" end="8774" title="Bujumbura, Burundi" label="Bujumbura, Burundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18128003" start="8813" end="8850" title="Faculdade de Teologia Metodista Livre" label="Faculdade de Teologia Metodista Livre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645880" start="9080" end="9107" title="Asbury Theological Seminary" label="Asbury Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583636" start="9142" end="9164" title="Azusa Pacific University" label="Azusa Pacific Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058057" start="9178" end="9199" title="Northeastern Seminary" label="Northeastern Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539400" start="9245" end="9262" title="Portland Seminary" label="Portland Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539406" start="9266" end="9297" title="George Fox University" label="George Fox Evangelical Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="9299" end="9311" title="Portland, OR" label="Portland, OR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904851" start="9314" end="9338" title="Seattle Pacific University" label="Seattle Pacific Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7983850" start="9354" end="9378" title="Wesley Biblical Seminary" label="Wesley Biblical Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q28198" start="9380" end="9391" title="Jackson, MS" label="Jackson, MS"/>
<link wikidata="Q812573" start="9421" end="9438" title="Baylor University" label="Baylor University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023698" start="9500" end="9527" title="Indiana Wesleyan University" label="Indiana Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q41298" start="14209" end="14217" title="magazine" label="magazine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="11245" wikidata="Q5456381" url="?curid=11245" title="Fixed point">
<text>Fixed point may refer to:

* Fixed point (mathematics), a value that does not change under a given transformation
* Fixed-point arithmetic, a manner of doing arithmetic on computers
* Fixed point, a benchmark (surveying) used by geodesists
* Fixed point join, also called a recursive join
* Fixed point, in quantum field theory, a coupling where the beta function vanishes – see 
* Temperature reference point, usually defined by a phase change or triple point.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q217608" start="29" end="54" title="Fixed point (mathematics)" label="Fixed point (mathematics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q649900" start="116" end="138" title="Fixed-point arithmetic" label="Fixed-point arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161707" start="199" end="220" title="benchmark (surveying)" label="benchmark (surveying)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17119419" start="274" end="288" title="recursive join" label="recursive join"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394680" start="382" end="409" title="Temperature reference point" label="Temperature reference point"/>
</links>
</doc>
