<doc id="14194" wikidata="Q380274" url="?curid=14194" title="History of medicine">
<text>The history of medicine is both a study of medicine throughout history as well as a multidisciplinary field of study that seeks to explore and understand medical practices, both past and present, throughout human societies.

The history of medicine is the study and documentation of the evolution of medical treatments, practices, and knowledge over time. Medical historians often draw from other humanities fields of study including economics, health sciences, sociology, and politics to better understand the institutions, practices, people, professions, and social systems that have shaped medicine. When a period which predates or lacks written sources regarding medicine, information is instead drawn from archaeological sources. This field tracks the evolution of human societies&#x27; approach to health, illness, and injury ranging from prehistory to the modern day, the events that shape these approaches, and their impact on populations.

Early medical traditions include those of Babylon, China, Egypt and India. Invention of the microscope was a consequence of improved understanding, during the Renaissance. Prior to the 19th century, humorism (also known as humoralism) was thought to explain the cause of disease but it was gradually replaced by the germ theory of disease, leading to effective treatments and even cures for many infectious diseases. Military doctors advanced the methods of trauma treatment and surgery. Public health measures were developed especially in the 19th century as the rapid growth of cities required systematic sanitary measures. Advanced research centers opened in the early 20th century, often connected with major hospitals. The mid-20th century was characterized by new biological treatments, such as antibiotics. These advancements, along with developments in chemistry, genetics, and radiography led to modern medicine. Medicine was heavily professionalized in the 20th century, and new careers opened to women as nurses (from the 1870s) and as physicians (especially after 1970).

== Prehistoric medicine ==
Prehistoric medicine is a field of study focused on understanding the use of medicinal plants, healing practices, illnesses, and wellness of humans before written records existed. Although styled prehistoric &quot;medicine&quot;, prehistoric healthcare practices were vastly different from what we understand medicine to be in the present era and more accurately refers to studies and exploration of early healing practices.

This period extends across the first use of stone tools by early humans 3.3 million years ago to the beginning of writing systems and subsequent recorded history 5000 years ago.

As human populations were once scattered across the world, forming isolated communities and cultures that sporadically interacted, a range of archaeological periods have been developed to account for the differing contexts of technology, sociocultural developments, and uptake of writing systems throughout early human societies. Prehistoric medicine is then highly contextual to the location and people in question, creating an ununiform period of study to reflect various degrees of societal development.

Without written records, insights into prehistoric medicine comes indirectly from interpreting evidence left behind by prehistoric humans. One branch of this includes the archaeology of medicine; a discipline that uses a range of archaeological techniques from observing illness in human remains, plant fossils, to excavations to uncover medical practices. There is evidence of healing practices within Neanderthals and other early human species. Prehistoric evidence of human engagement with medicine include the discovery of psychoactive plant sources such as psilocybin mushrooms in 6000 BCE Sahara to primitive dental care in 10,900 BCE (13,000 BP) Riparo Fredian (present-day Italy) and 7000 BCE Mehrgarh (present-day Pakistan).

Anthropology is another academic branch that contributes to understanding prehistoric medicine in uncovering the sociocultural relationships, meaning, and interpretation of prehistoric evidence. The overlap of medicine as both a root to healing the body as well as the spiritual throughout prehistoric periods highlights the multiple purposes that healing practices and plants could potentially have. From proto-religions to developed spiritual systems, relationships of humans and supernatural entities, from Gods to shamans, have played an interwoven part in prehistoric medicine.

== Ancient medicine ==
Ancient history covers time between 3000 BCE to 500 CE, starting from evidenced development of writing systems to the end of the classical era and beginning of the post-classical period. This periodisation presents history as if it were the same everywhere, however it is important to note that socioculture and technological developments could differ locally from settlement to settlement as well as globally from one society to the next.

Ancient medicine covers a similar period of time and presented a range of similar healing theories from across the world connecting nature, religion, and humans within ideas of circulating fluids and energy. Although prominent scholars and texts detailed well-defined medical insights, their real-world applications were marred by knowledge destruction and loss, poor communication, localised reinterpretations, and subsequent inconsistent applications.

=== Ancient Mesopotamian medicine ===
The Mesopotamian region, covering much of present-day Iraq, Kuwait, Syria, Iran, and Turkey, was dominated by a series of civilisations including Sumer, the earliest known civilisation in the Fertile Crescent region, alongside the Akkadians (including Assyrians and Babylonians). Overlapping ideas of what we now understand as medicine, science, magic, and religion characterised early Mesopotamian healing practices as a hybrid naturalistic and supernatural belief system.

The Sumerians developed one of the earliest known writing systems in the 3rd millennium BCE, and created numerous cuneiform clay tablets regarding their civilisation. These included detailed accounts of drug prescriptions and operations, as well as exorcisms. These were administered and carried out by highly defined professionals including &quot;bârû&quot; (seers), &quot;âs[h]ipu&quot; (exorcists), and &quot;asû&quot; (physician-priests). An example of an early, prescription-like medication appeared in Sumerian during the Third Dynasty of Ur ( 2112 BCE – 2004 BCE).

Following the conquest of the Sumerian civilisation by the Akkadian Empire and the empire&#x27;s eventual collapse from a number of social and environmental factors, the Babylonian civilisation began to dominate the region. Examples of Babylonian Medicine include the extensive Babylonian medical text, the &quot;Diagnostic Handbook,&quot; written by the &quot;ummânū&quot;, or chief scholar, Esagil-kin-apli of Borsippa, in the middle of the 11th century BCE during the reign of the Babylonian king Adad-apla-iddina (1069–1046 BCE).

This medical treatise devoted great attention to the practice of diagnosis, prognosis, physical examination, and remedies. The text contains a list of medical symptoms and often detailed empirical observations along with logical rules used in combining observed symptoms on the body of a patient with their diagnosis and prognosis. Here, clearly developed rationales were developed to understand the causes of disease and injury, supported by theories, agreed upon at the time, of elements we might now understand as natural causes, supernatural magic and religious explanations.Most known and recovered artefacts from the ancient Mesopotamian civilisations centre on the neo-Assyrian ( 900 – 600 BCE) and neo-Babylonian ( 600 – 500 BCE) periods, as the last empires ruled by native Mesopotamian rulers. These discoveries include a huge array of medical clay tablets from this period, although damage to the clay documents creates large gaps in our understanding of medical practices.

Throughout the civilisations of Mesopotamia there are a wide range of medical innovations, including evidenced practices of prophylaxis, measures to prevent the spread of disease, accounts of stroke, and an awareness of mental illnesses.

=== Ancient Egyptian medicine ===
Ancient Egypt, a civilisation spanning the valley of the river Nile (throughout parts of present-day Egypt, Sudan, and South Sudan), existed from its unification in 3150 BCE to its collapse via Persian conquest in 525 BCE and ultimate downfall from the conquest of Alexander the Great in 332 BCE.

Throughout unique dynasties, golden eras, and intermediate periods of instability, ancient Egyptians developed a complex, experimental, and communicative medical tradition that has been uncovered through surviving documents, most made of papyrus, such as the Kahun Gynaecological Papyrus, the Edwin Smith Papyrus, the Ebers Papyrus, the London Medical Papyrus, to the Greek Magical Papyri.

Herodotus described the Egyptians as &quot;the healthiest of all men, next to the Libyans&quot;, because of the dry climate and the notable public health system that they possessed. According to him, &quot;the practice of medicine is so specialized among them that each physician is a healer of one disease and no more.&quot; Although Egyptian medicine, to a considerable extent, dealt with the supernatural, it eventually developed a practical use in the fields of anatomy, public health, and clinical diagnostics.

Medical information in the Edwin Smith Papyrus may date to a time as early as 3000 BCE. Imhotep in the 3rd dynasty is sometimes credited with being the founder of ancient Egyptian medicine and with being the original author of the &quot;Edwin Smith Papyrus&quot;, detailing cures, ailments and anatomical observations. This papyrus is regarded as a copy of several earlier works and was written c. 1600 BCE. It is an ancient textbook on surgery almost completely devoid of magical thinking and describes in exquisite detail the &quot;examination, diagnosis, treatment,&quot; and &quot;prognosis&quot; of numerous ailments.

The Kahun Gynaecological Papyrus treats women&#x27;s complaints, including problems with conception. Thirty-four cases detailing diagnosis and treatment survive, although some of them are mere fragments. Dating to 1800 BCE, it is the oldest surviving medical text of any kind.

Medical institutions, referred to as Houses of Life, are known to have been established in ancient Egypt as early as 2200 BCE.

The Ebers Papyrus is the oldest written text mentioning enemas. Many medications were administered by enemas and one of the many types of medical specialists was an Iri, the Shepherd of the Anus.

The earliest known physician is also credited to ancient Egypt: Hesy-Ra, &quot;Chief of Dentists and Physicians&quot; for King Djoser in the 27th century BCE. Also, the earliest known woman physician, Peseshet, practiced in Ancient Egypt at the time of the 4th dynasty. Her title was &quot;Lady Overseer of the Lady Physicians.&quot;

=== Ancient Chinese medicine ===
Medical and healing practices in early Chinese dynasties were heavily shaped by the practice of traditional Chinese medicine (TCM). Starting around the Zhou dynasty, parts of this system were being developed and are demonstrated in early writings on herbs in &quot;Classic of Changes&quot; (&quot;Yi Jing&quot;) and &quot;Classic of Poetry&quot; (&quot;Shi Jing&quot;).

China also developed a large body of traditional medicine. Much of the philosophy of traditional Chinese medicine derived from empirical observations of disease and illness by Taoist physicians and reflects the classical Chinese belief that individual human experiences express causative principles effective in the environment at all scales. These causative principles, whether material, essential, or mystical, correlate as the expression of the natural order of the universe.

The foundational text of Chinese medicine is the &quot;Huangdi Neijing&quot;, (or &quot;Yellow Emperor&#x27;s Inner Canon&quot;), written 5th century to 3rd century BCE. Near the end of the 2nd century CE, during the Han dynasty, Zhang Zhongjing, wrote a &quot;Treatise on Cold Damage&quot;, which contains the earliest known reference to the &quot;Neijing Suwen&quot;. The Jin dynasty practitioner and advocate of acupuncture and moxibustion, Huangfu Mi (215–282), also quotes the Yellow Emperor in his &quot;Jiayi jing&quot;, c. 265. During the Tang dynasty, the &quot;Suwen&quot; was expanded and revised and is now the best extant representation of the foundational roots of traditional Chinese medicine. Traditional Chinese medicine that is based on the use of herbal medicine, acupuncture, massage and other forms of therapy has been practiced in China for thousands of years.

Critics say that TCM theory and practice have no basis in modern science, and TCM practitioners do not agree on what diagnosis and treatments should be used for any given person. A 2007 editorial in the journal &quot;Nature&quot; wrote that TCM &quot;remains poorly researched and supported, and most of its treatments have no logical mechanism of action.&quot; It also described TCM as &quot;fraught with pseudoscience&quot;. A review of the literature in 2008 found that scientists are &quot;still unable to find a shred of evidence&quot; according to standards of science-based medicine for traditional Chinese concepts such as &quot;qi&quot;, meridians, and acupuncture points, and that the traditional principles of acupuncture are deeply flawed. There are concerns over a number of potentially toxic plants, animal parts, and mineral Chinese compounds, as well as the facilitation of disease. Trafficked and farm-raised animals used in TCM are a source of several fatal zoonotic diseases. There are additional concerns over the illegal trade and transport of endangered species including rhinoceroses and tigers, and the welfare of specially farmed animals, including bears.

=== Ancient Indian medicine ===

The Atharvaveda, a sacred text of Hinduism dating from the middle Vedic age (c. 1200–900 BCE), is one of the first Indian texts dealing with medicine. It is a text filled with magical charms, spells, and incantations used for various purposes, such as protection against demons, rekindling love, ensuring childbirth, and achieving success in battle, trade, and even gambling. It also includes numerous charms aimed at curing diseases and several remedies from medicinal herbs, overall making it a key source of medical knowledge during the Vedic period. The use of herbs to treat ailments would later form a large part of Ayurveda. 

Ayurveda, meaning the &quot;complete knowledge for long life&quot; is another medical system of India. Its two most famous texts (samhitas) belong to the schools of Charaka and Sushruta. The Samhitas represent later revised versions (recensions) of their original works. The earliest foundations of Ayurveda were built on a synthesis of traditional herbal practices together with a massive addition of theoretical conceptualizations, new nosologies and new therapies dating from about 600 BCE onwards, and coming out of the communities of thinkers which included the Buddha and others.

According to the compendium of Charaka, the Charakasamhitā, health and disease are not predetermined and life may be prolonged by human effort. The compendium of Suśruta, the Suśrutasamhitā defines the purpose of medicine to cure the diseases of the sick, protect the healthy, and to prolong life. Both these ancient compendia include details of the examination, diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis of numerous ailments. The Suśrutasamhitā is notable for describing procedures on various forms of surgery, including rhinoplasty, the repair of torn ear lobes, perineal lithotomy, cataract surgery, and several other excisions and other surgical procedures. Most remarkable was Susruta&#x27;s surgery specially the rhinoplasty for which he is called father of plastic surgery. Susruta also described more than 125 surgical instruments in detail. Also remarkable is Sushruta&#x27;s penchant for scientific classification:
His medical treatise consists of 184 chapters, 1,120 conditions are listed, including injuries and illnesses relating to aging and mental illness.

The Ayurvedic classics mention eight branches of medicine: kāyācikitsā (internal medicine), śalyacikitsā (surgery including anatomy), śālākyacikitsā (eye, ear, nose, and throat diseases), kaumārabhṛtya (pediatrics with obstetrics and gynaecology), bhūtavidyā (spirit and psychiatric medicine), agada tantra (toxicology with treatments of stings and bites), rasāyana (science of rejuvenation), and vājīkaraṇa (aphrodisiac and fertility). Apart from learning these, the student of Āyurveda was expected to know ten arts that were indispensable in the preparation and application of his medicines: distillation, operative skills, cooking, horticulture, metallurgy, sugar manufacture, pharmacy, analysis and separation of minerals, compounding of metals, and preparation of alkalis. The teaching of various subjects was done during the instruction of relevant clinical subjects. For example, the teaching of anatomy was a part of the teaching of surgery, embryology was a part of training in pediatrics and obstetrics, and the knowledge of physiology and pathology was interwoven in the teaching of all the clinical disciplines.

Even today Ayurvedic treatment is practiced, but it is considered pseudoscientific because its premises are not based on science, some ayurvedic medicines have been found to contain toxic substances. Both the lack of scientific soundness in the theoretical foundations of ayurveda and the quality of research have been criticized.

=== Ancient Greek medicine ===
==== Humors ====
The theory of humors was derived from ancient medical works, dominated Western medicine until the 19th century, and is credited to Greek philosopher and surgeon Galen of Pergamon (129 – ). In Greek medicine, there are thought to be four humors, or bodily fluids that are linked to illness: blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile. Early scientists believed that food is digested into blood, muscle, and bones, while the humors that were not blood were then formed by indigestible materials that are left over. An excess or shortage of any one of the four humors is theorized to cause an imbalance that results in sickness; the aforementioned statement was hypothesized by sources before Hippocrates. Hippocrates () deduced that the four seasons of the year and four ages of man that affect the body in relation to the humors. The four ages of man are childhood, youth, prime age, and old age. Black bile is associated with autumn, phlegm with winter, blood with spring, and yellow bile with summer.

In &quot;De temperamentis,&quot; Galen linked what he called temperaments, or personality characteristics, to a person&#x27;s natural mixture of humors. He also said that the best place to check the balance of temperaments was in the palm of the hand. A person that is considered to be phlegmatic is said to be an introvert, even-tempered, calm, and peaceful. This person would have an excess of phlegm, which is described as a viscous substance or mucous. Similarly, a melancholic temperament related to being moody, anxious, depressed, introverted, and pessimistic. A melancholic temperament is caused by an excess of black bile, which is sedimentary and dark in colour. Being extroverted, talkative, easygoing, carefree, and sociable coincides with a sanguine temperament, which is linked to too much blood. Finally, a choleric temperament is related to too much yellow bile, which is actually red in colour and has the texture of foam; it is associated with being aggressive, excitable, impulsive, and also extroverted.

There are numerous ways to treat a disproportion of the humors. For example, if someone was suspected to have too much blood, then the physician would perform bloodletting as a treatment. Likewise, if a person believed to have too much phlegm should feel better after expectorating, and someone with too much yellow bile would purge. Another factor to be considered in the balance of humors is the quality of air where one resides, such as the climate and elevation. Also, the standard of food and drink, balance of sleeping and waking, exercise and rest, retention and evacuation are important. Moods such as anger, sadness, joy, and love can affect the balance. During that time, the importance of balance was demonstrated by the fact that women lose blood monthly during menstruation, and have a lesser occurrence of gout, arthritis, and epilepsy than men do. Galen also hypothesized that there are three faculties. The natural faculty affects growth and reproduction and is produced in the liver. Animal or vital faculty controls respiration and emotion, coming from the heart. In the brain, the psychic faculty commands the senses and thoughts. The structure of bodily functions is related to the humors as well. Greek physicians understood that food was cooked in the stomach; this is where the nutrients are extracted. The best, most potent and pure nutrients from food are reserved for blood, which is produced in the liver and carried through veins to organs. Blood enhanced with pneuma, which means wind or breath, is carried by the arteries. The path that blood take is as follows: venous blood passes through the vena cava and is moved into the right ventricle of the heart; then, the pulmonary artery takes it to the lungs. Later, the pulmonary vein then mixes air from the lungs with blood to form arterial blood, which has different observable characteristics. After leaving the liver, half of the yellow bile that is produced travels to the blood, while the other half travels to the gallbladder. Similarly, half of the black bile produced gets mixed in with blood, and the other half is used by the spleen.

==== People ====
Around 800 BCE Homer in the &quot;Iliad&quot; gives descriptions of wound treatment by the two sons of Asklepios, the admirable physicians Podaleirius and Machaon and one acting doctor, Patroclus. Because Machaon is wounded and Podaleirius is in combat Eurypylus asks Patroclus to &quot;cut out the arrow-head, and wash the dark blood from my thigh with warm water, and sprinkle soothing herbs with power to heal on my wound&quot;. Asklepios, like Imhotep, came to be associated as a god of healing over time.

Temples dedicated to the healer-god Asclepius, known as &quot;Asclepieia&quot; (, sing. , &quot;Asclepieion&quot;), functioned as centers of medical advice, prognosis, and healing. At these shrines, patients would enter a dream-like state of induced sleep known as &quot;enkoimesis&quot; () not unlike anesthesia, in which they either received guidance from the deity in a dream or were cured by surgery. Asclepeia provided carefully controlled spaces conducive to healing and fulfilled several of the requirements of institutions created for healing. In the Asclepeion of Epidaurus, three large marble boards dated to 350 BCE preserve the names, case histories, complaints, and cures of about 70 patients who came to the temple with a problem and shed it there. Some of the surgical cures listed, such as the opening of an abdominal abscess or the removal of traumatic foreign material, are realistic enough to have taken place, but with the patient in a state of enkoimesis induced with the help of soporific substances such as opium. Alcmaeon of Croton wrote on medicine between 500 and 450 BCE. He argued that channels linked the sensory organs to the brain, and it is possible that he discovered one type of channel, the optic nerves, by dissection.

Hippocrates of Kos (), considered the &quot;father of modern medicine.&quot; The Hippocratic Corpus is a collection of around seventy early medical works from ancient Greece strongly associated with Hippocrates and his students. Most famously, the Hippocratics invented the Hippocratic Oath for physicians. Contemporary physicians swear an oath of office which includes aspects found in early editions of the Hippocratic Oath.

Hippocrates and his followers were first to describe many diseases and medical conditions. Though humorism (humoralism) as a medical system predates 5th-century Greek medicine, Hippocrates and his students systematized the thinking that illness can be explained by an imbalance of blood, phlegm, black bile, and yellow bile. Hippocrates is given credit for the first description of clubbing of the fingers, an important diagnostic sign in chronic suppurative lung disease, lung cancer and cyanotic heart disease. For this reason, clubbed fingers are sometimes referred to as &quot;Hippocratic fingers&quot;. Hippocrates was also the first physician to describe the Hippocratic face in &quot;Prognosis&quot;. Shakespeare famously alludes to this description when writing of Falstaff&#x27;s death in Act II, Scene iii. of &quot;Henry V&quot;. Hippocrates began to categorize illnesses as acute, chronic, endemic and epidemic, and use terms such as, &quot;exacerbation, relapse, resolution, crisis, paroxysm, peak, and convalescence.&quot;
The Greek Galen (c. ) was one of the greatest physicians of the ancient world, as his theories dominated all medical studies for nearly 1500 years. His theories and experimentation laid the foundation for modern medicine surrounding the heart and blood. Galen&#x27;s influence and innovations in medicine can be attributed to the experiments he conducted, which were unlike any other medical experiments of his time. Galen strongly believed that medical dissection was one of the essential procedures in truly understanding medicine. He began to dissect different animals that were anatomically similar to humans, which allowed him to learn more about the internal organs and extrapolate the surgical studies to the human body. In addition, he performed many audacious operations—including brain and eye surgeries—that were not tried again for almost two millennia. Through the dissections and surgical procedures, Galen concluded that blood is able to circulate throughout the human body, and the heart is most similar to the human soul. In &quot;Ars medica&quot; (&quot;Arts of Medicine&quot;), he further explains the mental properties in terms of specific mixtures of the bodily organs. While much of his work surrounded the physical anatomy, he also worked heavily in humoral physiology.

Galen&#x27;s medical work was regarded as authoritative until well into the Middle Ages. He left a physiological model of the human body that became the mainstay of the medieval physician&#x27;s university anatomy curriculum. Although he attempted to extrapolate the animal dissections towards the model of the human body, some of Galen&#x27;s theories were incorrect. This caused his model to suffer greatly from stasis and intellectual stagnation. Greek and Roman taboos caused dissection of the human body to usually be banned in ancient times, but in the Middle Ages it changed.

In 1523 Galen&#x27;s &quot;On the Natural Faculties&quot; was published in London. In the 1530s Belgian anatomist and physician Andreas Vesalius launched a project to translate many of Galen&#x27;s Greek texts into Latin. Vesalius&#x27;s most famous work, &quot;De humani corporis fabrica&quot; was greatly influenced by Galenic writing and form.
==== Herophilus and Erasistratus ====

Two great Alexandrians laid the foundations for the scientific study of anatomy and physiology, Herophilus of Chalcedon and Erasistratus of Ceos. Other Alexandrian surgeons gave us ligature (hemostasis), lithotomy, hernia operations, ophthalmic surgery, plastic surgery, methods of reduction of dislocations and fractures, tracheotomy, and mandrake as an anaesthetic. Some of what we know of them comes from Celsus and Galen of Pergamum.

Herophilus of Chalcedon, the renowned Alexandrian physician, was one of the pioneers of human anatomy. Though his knowledge of the anatomical structure of the human body was vast, he specialized in the aspects of neural anatomy. Thus, his experimentation was centered around the anatomical composition of the blood-vascular system and the pulsations that can be analyzed from the system. Furthermore, the surgical experimentation he administered caused him to become very prominent throughout the field of medicine, as he was one of the first physicians to initiate the exploration and dissection of the human body.

The banned practice of human dissection was lifted during his time within the scholastic community. This brief moment in the history of Greek medicine allowed him to further study the brain, which he believed was the core of the nervous system. He also distinguished between veins and arteries, noting that the latter pulse and the former do not. Thus, while working at the medical school of Alexandria, Herophilus placed intelligence in the brain based on his surgical exploration of the body, and he connected the nervous system to motion and sensation. In addition, he and his contemporary, Erasistratus of Chios, continued to research the role of veins and nerves. After conducting extensive research, the two Alexandrians mapped out the course of the veins and nerves across the human body. Erasistratus connected the increased complexity of the surface of the human brain compared to other animals to its superior intelligence. He sometimes employed experiments to further his research, at one time repeatedly weighing a caged bird, and noting its weight loss between feeding times. In Erasistratus&#x27; physiology, air enters the body, is then drawn by the lungs into the heart, where it is transformed into vital spirit, and is then pumped by the arteries throughout the body. Some of this vital spirit reaches the brain, where it is transformed into animal spirit, which is then distributed by the nerves.

=== Ancient Roman medicine ===
The Romans invented numerous surgical instruments, including the first instruments unique to women, as well as the surgical uses of forceps, scalpels, cautery, cross-bladed scissors, the surgical needle, the sound, and speculas. Romans also performed cataract surgery.

The Roman army physician Dioscorides (–90 CE), was a Greek botanist and pharmacologist. He wrote the encyclopedia &quot;De Materia Medica&quot; describing over 600 herbal cures, forming an influential pharmacopoeia which was used extensively for the following 1,500 years.

Early Christians in the Roman Empire incorporated medicine into their theology, ritual practices, and metaphors.

== Post-classical medicine ==

=== Middle East ===

==== Places ====

===== Byzantine medicine =====
Byzantine medicine encompasses the common medical practices of the Byzantine Empire from about 400 CE to 1453 CE. Byzantine medicine was notable for building upon the knowledge base developed by its Greco-Roman predecessors. In preserving medical practices from antiquity, Byzantine medicine influenced Islamic medicine as well as fostering the Western rebirth of medicine during the Renaissance.

Byzantine physicians often compiled and standardized medical knowledge into textbooks. Their records tended to include both diagnostic explanations and technical drawings. The Medical Compendium in Seven Books, written by the leading physician Paul of Aegina, survived as a particularly thorough source of medical knowledge. This compendium, written in the late seventh century, remained in use as a standard textbook for the following 800 years.

Late antiquity ushered in a revolution in medical science, and historical records often mention civilian hospitals (although battlefield medicine and wartime triage were recorded well before Imperial Rome). Constantinople stood out as a center of medicine during the Middle Ages, which was aided by its crossroads location, wealth, and accumulated knowledge.

The first ever known example of separating conjoined twins occurred in the Byzantine Empire in the 10th century. The next example of separating conjoined twins would be recorded many centuries later in Germany in 1689.

The Byzantine Empire&#x27;s neighbors, the Persian Sassanid Empire, also made their noteworthy contributions mainly with the establishment of the Academy of Gondeshapur, which was &quot;the most important medical center of the ancient world during the 6th and 7th centuries.&quot; In addition, Cyril Elgood, British physician and a historian of medicine in Persia, commented that thanks to medical centers like the Academy of Gondeshapur, &quot;to a very large extent, the credit for the whole hospital system must be given to Persia.&quot;

===== Islamic medicine =====
The Islamic civilization rose to primacy in medical science as its physicians contributed significantly to the field of medicine, including anatomy, ophthalmology, pharmacology, pharmacy, physiology, and surgery. Islamic civilization&#x27;s contribution to these fields within medicine was a gradual process that took hundreds of years. During the time of the first great Muslim dynasty, the Umayyad Caliphate (661–750 CE), these fields were in their very early stages of development, and not much progress was made. One reason for the limited advancement in medicine during the Umayyad Caliphate was the Caliphate&#x27;s focus on expansion after the death of Muhammad (632 CE). The focus on expansionism redirected resources from other fields, such as medicine. The priority on these factors led a large percentage of the population to believe that God will provide cures for their illnesses and diseases because of the attention on spirituality.

There were also many other areas of interest during that time before there was a rising interest in the field of medicine. Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan, the fifth caliph of the Umayyad, developed governmental administration, adopted Arabic as the main language, and focused on many other areas. However, this rising interest in Islamic medicine grew significantly when the Abbasid Caliphate (750–1258 CE) overthrew the Umayyad Caliphate in 750 CE. This change in dynasty from the Umayyad Caliphate to the Abbasid Caliphate served as a turning point towards scientific and medical developments. A large contributor to this was that under Abbasid rule much of the Greek legacy was transmitted into Arabic which by then, was the main language of Islamic nations. Because of this, many Islamic physicians were heavily influenced by the works of Greek scholars of Alexandria and Egypt and were able to further expand on those texts to produce new medical pieces of knowledge. This period of time is also known as the Islamic Golden Age where there was a period of development and flourishment of technology, commerce, and sciences including medicine. Additionally, during this time the creation of the first Islamic Hospital in 805 CE by the Abbasid caliph Harun al-Rashid in Baghdad was recounted as a glorious event of the Golden Age. This hospital in Baghdad contributed immensely to Baghdad&#x27;s success and also provided educational opportunities for Islamic physicians. During the Islamic Golden Age, there were many famous Islamic physicians that paved the way for medical advancements and understandings. However, this would not be possible without the influence from many different areas of the world that influenced the Arabs.

Muslims were influenced by ancient Indian, Persian, Greek, Roman and Byzantine medical practices, and helped them to develop it further. Galen &amp; Hippocrates were pre-eminent authorities. The translation of 129 of Galen&#x27;s works into Arabic by the Nestorian Christian Hunayn ibn Ishaq and his assistants, and in particular Galen&#x27;s insistence on a rational systematic approach to medicine, set the template for Islamic medicine, which rapidly spread throughout the Arab Empire. Its most famous physicians included the Persian polymaths Muhammad ibn Zakarīya al-Rāzi and Avicenna, who wrote more than 40 works on health, medicine, and well-being. Taking leads from Greece and Rome, Islamic scholars kept both the art and science of medicine alive and moving forward. Persian polymath Avicenna has also been called the &quot;father of medicine&quot;. He wrote &quot;The Canon of Medicine&quot; which became a standard medical text at many medieval European universities, considered one of the most famous books in the history of medicine. &quot;The Canon of Medicine&quot; presents an overview of the contemporary medical knowledge of the medieval Islamic world, which had been influenced by earlier traditions including Greco-Roman medicine (particularly Galen), Persian medicine, Chinese medicine and Indian medicine. Persian physician al-Rāzi was one of the first to question the Greek theory of humorism, which nevertheless remained influential in both medieval Western and medieval Islamic medicine. Some volumes of al-Rāzi&#x27;s work &quot;Al-Mansuri&quot;, namely &quot;On Surgery&quot; and &quot;A General Book on Therapy&quot;, became part of the medical curriculum in European universities. Additionally, he has been described as a doctor&#x27;s doctor, the father of pediatrics, and a pioneer of ophthalmology. For example, he was the first to recognize the reaction of the eye&#x27;s pupil to light.

In addition to contributions to humanity&#x27;s understanding of human anatomy, Islamicate scientists and scholars, physicians specifically, played an invaluable role in the development of the modern hospital system, creating the foundations on which more contemporary medical professionals would build models of public health systems in Europe and elsewhere. During the time of the Safavid empire (16th–18th centuries) in Iran and the Mughal empire (16th–19th centuries) in India, Muslim scholars radically transformed the institution of the hospital, creating an environment in which rapidly developing medical knowledge of the time could be passed among students and teachers from a wide range of cultures. There were two main schools of thought with patient care at the time. These included humoral physiology from the Persians and Ayurvedic practice. After these theories were translated from Sanskrit to Persian and vice-versa, hospitals could have a mix of culture and techniques. This allowed for a sense of collaborative medicine. Hospitals became increasingly common during this period as wealthy patrons commonly founded them. Many features that are still in use today, such as an emphasis on hygiene, a staff fully dedicated to the care of patients, and separation of individual patients from each other were developed in Islamicate hospitals long before they came into practice in Europe. At the time, the patient care aspects of hospitals in Europe had not taken effect. European hospitals were places of religion rather than institutions of science. As was the case with much of the scientific work done by Islamicate scholars, many of these novel developments in medical practice were transmitted to European cultures hundreds of years after they had long been used throughout the Islamicate world. Although Islamicate scientists were responsible for discovering much of the knowledge that allows the hospital system to function safely today, European scholars who built on this work still receive the majority of the credit historically.

Before the development of scientific medical practices in the Islamicate empires, medical care was mainly performed by religious figures such as priests. Without a profound understanding of how infectious diseases worked and why sickness spread from person to person, these early attempts at caring for the ill and injured often did more harm than good. Contrarily, with the development of new and safer practices by scholars and physicians in hospitals of the Islamic world, ideas vital for the effective care of patients were developed, learned, and transmitted widely. Hospitals developed novel &quot;concepts and structures&quot; which are still in use today: separate wards for male and female patients, pharmacies, medical record-keeping, and personal and institutional sanitation and hygiene. Much of this knowledge was recorded and passed on through Islamicate medical texts, many of which were carried to Europe and translated for the use of European medical workers. The Tasrif, written by surgeon Abu Al-Qasim Al-Zahrawi, was translated into Latin; it became one of the most important medical texts in European universities during the Middle Ages and contained useful information on surgical techniques and spread of bacterial infection.

The hospital was a typical institution included in the majority of Muslim cities, and although they were often physically attached to religious institutions, they were not themselves places of religious practice. Rather, they served as facilities in which education and scientific innovation could flourish. If they had places of worship, they were secondary to the medical side of the hospital. Islamicate hospitals, along with observatories used for astronomical science, were some of the most important points of exchange for the spread of scientific knowledge. Undoubtedly, the hospital system developed in the Islamicate world played an invaluable role in the creation and evolution of the hospitals we as a society know and depend on today.

=== Europe ===
After 400 CE, the study and practice of medicine in the Western Roman Empire went into deep decline. Medical services were provided, especially for the poor, in the thousands of monastic hospitals that sprang up across Europe, but the care was rudimentary and mainly palliative. Most of the writings of Galen and Hippocrates were lost to the West, with the summaries and compendia of St. Isidore of Seville being the primary channel for transmitting Greek medical ideas. The Carolingian Renaissance brought increased contact with Byzantium and a greater awareness of ancient medicine, but only with the Renaissance of the 12th century and the new translations coming from Muslim and Jewish sources in Spain, and the fifteenth-century flood of resources after the fall of Constantinople did the West fully recover its acquaintance with classical antiquity.

Greek and Roman taboos had meant that dissection was usually banned in ancient times, but in the Middle Ages it changed: medical teachers and students at Bologna began to open human bodies, and Mondino de Luzzi (–1326) produced the first known anatomy textbook based on human dissection.

Wallis identifies a prestige hierarchy with university educated physicians on top, followed by learned surgeons; craft-trained surgeons; barber surgeons; itinerant specialists such as dentist and oculists; empirics; and midwives.

====Institutions====
The first medical schools were opened in the 9th century, most notably the Schola Medica Salernitana at Salerno in southern Italy. The cosmopolitan influences from Greek, Latin, Arabic, and Hebrew sources gave it an international reputation as the Hippocratic City. Students from wealthy families came for three years of preliminary studies and five of medical studies. The medicine, following the laws of Federico II, that he founded in 1224 the university and improved the Schola Salernitana, in the period between 1200 and 1400, it had in Sicily (so-called Sicilian Middle Ages) a particular development so much to create a true school of Jewish medicine.

As a result of which, after a legal examination, was conferred to a Jewish Sicilian woman, Virdimura, wife of another physician Pasquale of Catania, the historical record of before woman officially trained to exercise of the medical profession.

At the University of Bologna the training of physicians began in 1219. The Italian city attracted students from across Europe. Taddeo Alderotti built a tradition of medical education that established the characteristic features of Italian learned medicine and was copied by medical schools elsewhere.Turisanus (d. 1320) was his student.

The University of Padua was founded about 1220 by walkouts from the University of Bologna, and began teaching medicine in 1222. It played a leading role in the identification and treatment of diseases and ailments, specializing in autopsies and the inner workings of the body. Starting in 1595, Padua&#x27;s famous anatomical theatre drew artists and scientists studying the human body during public dissections. The intensive study of Galen led to critiques of Galen modeled on his own writing, as in the first book of Vesalius&#x27;s &quot;De humani corporis fabrica.&quot; Andreas Vesalius held the chair of Surgery and Anatomy (&quot;explicator chirurgiae&quot;) and in 1543 published his anatomical discoveries in &quot;De Humani Corporis Fabrica&quot;. He portrayed the human body as an interdependent system of organ groupings. The book triggered great public interest in dissections and caused many other European cities to establish anatomical theatres.

By the thirteenth century, the medical school at Montpellier began to eclipse the Salernitan school. In the 12th century, universities were founded in Italy, France, and England, which soon developed schools of medicine. The University of Montpellier in France and Italy&#x27;s University of Padua and University of Bologna were leading schools. Nearly all the learning was from lectures and readings in Hippocrates, Galen, Avicenna, and Aristotle. In later centuries, the importance of universities founded in the late Middle Ages gradually increased, e.g. Charles University in Prague (established in 1348), Jagiellonian University in Kraków (1364), University of Vienna (1365), Heidelberg University (1386) and University of Greifswald (1456).
== Early modern medicine ==

=== Places ===

==== England ====
In England, there were but three small hospitals after 1550. Pelling and Webster estimate that in London in the 1580 to 1600 period, out of a population of nearly 200,000 people, there were about 500 medical practitioners. Nurses and midwives are not included. There were about 50 physicians, 100 licensed surgeons, 100 apothecaries, and 250 additional unlicensed practitioners. In the last category about 25% were women. All across England—and indeed all of the world—the vast majority of the people in city, town or countryside depended for medical care on local amateurs with no professional training but with a reputation as wise healers who could diagnose problems and advise sick people what to do—and perhaps set broken bones, pull a tooth, give some traditional herbs or brews or perform a little magic to cure what ailed them.

=== People ===
=== Europe ===

The Renaissance brought an intense focus on scholarship to Christian Europe. A major effort to translate the Arabic and Greek scientific works into Latin emerged. Europeans gradually became experts not only in the ancient writings of the Romans and Greeks, but in the contemporary writings of Islamic scientists. During the later centuries of the Renaissance came an increase in experimental investigation, particularly in the field of dissection and body examination, thus advancing our knowledge of human anatomy.

==== Ideas ====

* Animalcules: In 1677 Antonie van Leeuwenhoek identified &quot;animalcules&quot;, which we now know as microorganisms, within their paper &quot;letter on the protozoa&quot;.
* Blood circulation: In 1628 the English physician William Harvey made a ground-breaking discovery when he correctly described the circulation of the blood in his &quot;Exercitatio Anatomica de Motu Cordis et Sanguinis in Animalibus&quot;. Before this time the most useful manual in medicine used both by students and expert physicians was Dioscorides&#x27; &quot;De Materia Medica&quot;, a pharmacopoeia.

==== Inventions ====
* Microscopes: Bacteria and protists were first observed with a microscope by Antonie van Leeuwenhoek in 1676, initiating the scientific field of microbiology.

==== Institutions ====
At the University of Bologna the curriculum was revised and strengthened in 1560–1590. The representative professor was Julius Caesar Aranzi (Arantius) (1530–1589). He became Professor of Anatomy and Surgery at the University of Bologna in 1556, where he established anatomy as a major branch of medicine for the first time. Aranzi combined anatomy with a description of pathological processes, based largely on his own research, Galen, and the work of his contemporary Italians. Aranzi discovered the &#x27;Nodules of Aranzio&#x27; in the semilunar valves of the heart and wrote the first description of the superior levator palpebral and the coracobrachialis muscles. His books (in Latin) covered surgical techniques for many conditions, including hydrocephalus, nasal polyp, goitre and tumours to phimosis, ascites, haemorrhoids, anal abscess and fistulae.

==== People ====

===== Woman =====
Catholic women played large roles in health and healing in medieval and early modern Europe. A life as a nun was a prestigious role; wealthy families provided dowries for their daughters, and these funded the convents, while the nuns provided free nursing care for the poor.

The Catholic elites provided hospital services because of their theology of salvation that good works were the route to heaven. The Protestant reformers rejected the notion that rich men could gain God&#x27;s grace through good works—and thereby escape purgatory—by providing cash endowments to charitable institutions. They also rejected the Catholic idea that the poor patients earned grace and salvation through their suffering. Protestants generally closed all the convents and most of the hospitals, sending women home to become housewives, often against their will. On the other hand, local officials recognized the public value of hospitals, and some were continued in Protestant lands, but without monks or nuns and in the control of local governments.

In London, the crown allowed two hospitals to continue their charitable work, under nonreligious control of city officials. The convents were all shut down but Harkness finds that women—some of them former nuns—were part of a new system that delivered essential medical services to people outside their family. They were employed by parishes and hospitals, as well as by private families, and provided nursing care as well as some medical, pharmaceutical, and surgical services.

Meanwhile, in Catholic lands such as France, rich families continued to fund convents and monasteries, and enrolled their daughters as nuns who provided free health services to the poor. Nursing was a religious role for the nurse, and there was little call for science.

=== Asia ===

==== China ====
In the 18th century, during the Qing dynasty, there was a proliferation of popular books as well as more advanced encyclopedias on traditional medicine. Jesuit missionaries introduced Western science and medicine to the royal court, although the Chinese physicians ignored them.

==== India ====
Unani medicine, based on Avicenna&#x27;s &quot;Canon of Medicine&quot; (ca. 1025), was developed in India throughout the medieval and Early Modern periods. Its use continued, especially in Muslim communities, during the Indian Sultanate and Mughal periods. Unani medicine is in some respects close to Ayurveda and to Early Modern European medicine. All share a theory of the presence of the elements (in Unani, as in Europe, they are considered to be fire, water, earth, and air) and humors in the human body. According to Unani physicians, these elements are present in different humoral fluids and their balance leads to health and their imbalance leads to illness.

Sanskrit medical literature of the Early Modern period included innovative works such as the &quot;Compendium of Śārṅgadhara&quot; (Skt. &quot;Śārṅgadharasaṃhitā&quot;, ca. 1350) and especially &quot;The Illumination of Bhāva&quot; (&quot;Bhāvaprakāśa,&quot; by &quot;Bhāvamiśra,&quot; ca. 1550). The latter work also contained an extensive dictionary of materia medica, and became a standard textbook used widely by ayurvedic practitioners in north India up to the present day (2024). Medical innovations of this period included pulse diagnosis, urine diagnosis, the use of mercury and china root to treat syphilis, and the increasing use of metallic ingredients in drugs.

By the 18th century CE, Ayurvedic medical therapy was still widely used among most of the population. Muslim rulers built large hospitals in 1595 in Hyderabad, and in Delhi in 1719, and numerous commentaries on ancient texts were written.
=== Europe ===

==== Events ====

===== European Age of Enlightenment =====
During the Age of Enlightenment, the 18th century, science was held in high esteem and physicians upgraded their social status by becoming more scientific. The health field was crowded with self-trained barber-surgeons, apothecaries, midwives, drug peddlers, and charlatans.

Across Europe medical schools relied primarily on lectures and readings. The final year student would have limited clinical experience by trailing the professor through the wards. Laboratory work was uncommon, and dissections were rarely done because of legal restrictions on cadavers. Most schools were small, and only Edinburgh Medical School, Scotland, with 11,000 alumni, produced large numbers of graduates.

==== Places ====

===== Spain and the Spanish Empire =====
In the Spanish Empire, the viceregal capital of Mexico City was a site of medical training for physicians and the creation of hospitals. Epidemic disease had decimated indigenous populations starting with the early sixteenth-century Spanish conquest of the Aztec empire, when a black auxiliary in the armed forces of conqueror Hernán Cortés, with an active case of smallpox, set off a virgin land epidemic among indigenous peoples, Spanish allies and enemies alike. Aztec emperor Cuitlahuac died of smallpox. Disease was a significant factor in the Spanish conquest elsewhere as well.

Medical education instituted at the Royal and Pontifical University of Mexico chiefly served the needs of urban elites. Male and female &quot;curanderos&quot; or lay practitioners, attended to the ills of the popular classes. The Spanish crown began regulating the medical profession just a few years after the conquest, setting up the Royal Tribunal of the Protomedicato, a board for licensing medical personnel in 1527. Licensing became more systematic after 1646 with physicians, druggists, surgeons, and bleeders requiring a license before they could publicly practice. Crown regulation of medical practice became more general in the Spanish empire.

Elites and the popular classes alike called on divine intervention in personal and society-wide health crises, such as the epidemic of 1737. The intervention of the Virgin of Guadalupe was depicted in a scene of dead and dying Indians, with elites on their knees praying for her aid. In the late eighteenth century, the crown began implementing secularizing policies on the Iberian peninsula and its overseas empire to control disease more systematically and scientifically.

===== Spanish Quest for Medicinal Spices =====
Botanical medicines also became popular during the 16th, 17th, and 18th Centuries. Spanish pharmaceutical books during this time contain medicinal recipes consisting of spices, herbs, and other botanical products. For example, nutmeg oil was documented for curing stomach ailments and cardamom oil was believed to relieve intestinal ailments. During the rise of the global trade market, spices and herbs, along with many other goods, that were indigenous to different territories began to appear in different locations across the globe. Herbs and spices were especially popular for their utility in cooking and medicines. As a result of this popularity and increased demand for spices, some areas in Asia, like China and Indonesia, became hubs for spice cultivation and trade. The Spanish Empire also wanted to benefit from the international spice trade, so they looked towards their American colonies.

The Spanish American colonies became an area where the Spanish searched to discover new spices and indigenous American medicinal recipes. The Florentine Codex, a 16th-century ethnographic research study in Mesoamerica by the Spanish Franciscan friar Bernardino de Sahagún, is a major contribution to the history of Nahua medicine. The Spanish did discover many spices and herbs new to them, some of which were reportedly similar to Asian spices. A Spanish physician by the name of Nicolás Monardes studied many of the American spices coming into Spain. He documented many of the new American spices and their medicinal properties in his survey &quot;Historia medicinal de las cosas que se traen de nuestras Indias Occidentales&quot;. For example, Monardes describes the &quot;Long Pepper&quot; (Pimienta luenga), found along the coasts of the countries that are now known Panama and Colombia, as a pepper that was more flavorful, healthy, and spicy in comparison to the Eastern black pepper. The Spanish interest in American spices can first be seen in the commissioning of the &quot;Libellus de Medicinalibus Indorum Herbis&quot;, which was a Spanish-American codex describing indigenous American spices and herbs and describing the ways that these were used in natural Aztec medicines. The codex was commissioned in the year 1552 by Francisco de Mendoza, the son of Antonio de Mendoza, who was the first Viceroy of New Spain. Francisco de Mendoza was interested in studying the properties of these herbs and spices, so that he would be able to profit from the trade of these herbs and the medicines that could be produced by them.

Francisco de Mendoza recruited the help of Monardez in studying the traditional medicines of the indigenous people living in what was then the Spanish colonies. Monardez researched these medicines and performed experiments to discover the possibilities of spice cultivation and medicine creation in the Spanish colonies. The Spanish transplanted some herbs from Asia, but only a few foreign crops were successfully grown in the Spanish Colonies. One notable crop brought from Asia and successfully grown in the Spanish colonies was ginger, as it was considered Hispaniola&#x27;s number 1 crop at the end of the 16th Century. The Spanish Empire did profit from cultivating herbs and spices, but they also introduced pre-Columbian American medicinal knowledge to Europe. Other Europeans were inspired by the actions of Spain and decided to try to establish a botanical transplant system in colonies that they controlled, however, these subsequent attempts were not successful.

===== United Kingdom and the British Empire =====

The London Dispensary opened in 1696, the first clinic in the British Empire to dispense medicines to poor sick people. The innovation was slow to catch on, but new dispensaries were open in the 1770s. In the colonies, small hospitals opened in Philadelphia in 1752, New York in 1771, and Boston (Massachusetts General Hospital) in 1811.

Guy&#x27;s Hospital, the first great British hospital with a modern foundation, opened in 1721 in London, with funding from businessman Thomas Guy. It had been preceded by St Bartholomew&#x27;s Hospital and St Thomas&#x27;s Hospital, both medieval foundations. In 1821 a bequest of £200,000 by William Hunt in 1829 funded expansion for an additional hundred beds at Guy&#x27;s. Samuel Sharp (1709–78), a surgeon at Guy&#x27;s Hospital from 1733 to 1757, was internationally famous; his &quot;A Treatise on the Operations of Surgery&quot; (1st ed., 1739), was the first British study focused exclusively on operative technique.

English physician Thomas Percival (1740–1804) wrote a comprehensive system of medical conduct, &quot;Medical Ethics; or, a Code of Institutes and Precepts, Adapted to the Professional Conduct of Physicians and Surgeons&quot; (1803) that set the standard for many textbooks.

== Late modern medicine ==

=== Germ theory and bacteriology ===
In the 1830s in Italy, Agostino Bassi traced the silkworm disease muscardine to microorganisms. Meanwhile, in Germany, Theodor Schwann led research on alcoholic fermentation by yeast, proposing that living microorganisms were responsible.
Leading chemists, such as Justus von Liebig, seeking solely physicochemical explanations, derided this claim and alleged that Schwann was regressing to vitalism.

In 1847 in Vienna, Ignaz Semmelweis (1818–1865), dramatically reduced the death rate of new mothers (due to childbed fever) by requiring physicians to clean their hands before attending childbirth, yet his principles were marginalized and attacked by professional peers. At that time most people still believed that infections were caused by foul odors called miasmas.


French scientist Louis Pasteur confirmed Schwann&#x27;s fermentation experiments in 1857 and afterwards supported the hypothesis that yeast were microorganisms. Moreover, he suggested that such a process might also explain contagious disease. In 1860, Pasteur&#x27;s report on bacterial fermentation of butyric acid motivated fellow Frenchman Casimir Davaine to identify a similar species (which he called ) as the pathogen of the deadly disease anthrax. Others dismissed &quot;&quot; as a mere byproduct of the disease. British surgeon Joseph Lister, however, took these findings seriously and subsequently introduced antisepsis to wound treatment in 1865.

German physician Robert Koch, noting fellow German Ferdinand Cohn&#x27;s report of a spore stage of a certain bacterial species, traced the life cycle of Davaine&#x27;s , identified spores, inoculated laboratory animals with them, and reproduced anthrax—a breakthrough for experimental pathology and germ theory of disease. Pasteur&#x27;s group added ecological investigations confirming spores&#x27; role in the natural setting, while Koch published a landmark treatise in 1878 on the bacterial pathology of wounds. In 1881, Koch reported discovery of the &quot;tubercle bacillus&quot;, cementing germ theory and Koch&#x27;s acclaim.

Upon the outbreak of a cholera epidemic in Alexandria, Egypt, two medical missions went to investigate and attend the sick, one was sent out by Pasteur and the other led by Koch. Koch&#x27;s group returned in 1883, having successfully discovered the cholera pathogen. In Germany, however, Koch&#x27;s bacteriologists had to vie against Max von Pettenkofer, Germany&#x27;s leading proponent of miasmatic theory. Pettenkofer conceded bacteria&#x27;s casual involvement, but maintained that other, environmental factors were required to turn it pathogenic, and opposed water treatment as a misdirected effort amid more important ways to improve public health. The massive cholera epidemic in Hamburg in 1892 devastated Pettenkoffer&#x27;s position, and yielded German public health to &quot;Koch&#x27;s bacteriology&quot;.

On losing the 1883 rivalry in Alexandria, Pasteur switched research direction, and introduced his third vaccine—rabies vaccine—the first vaccine for humans since Jenner&#x27;s for smallpox. From across the globe, donations poured in, funding the founding of Pasteur Institute, the globe&#x27;s first biomedical institute, which opened in 1888. Along with Koch&#x27;s bacteriologists, Pasteur&#x27;s group—which preferred the term &quot;microbiology&quot;—led medicine into the new era of &quot;scientific medicine&quot; upon bacteriology and germ theory. Accepted from Jakob Henle, Koch&#x27;s steps to confirm a species&#x27; pathogenicity became famed as &quot;Koch&#x27;s postulates&quot;. Although his proposed tuberculosis treatment, tuberculin, seemingly failed, it soon was used to test for infection with the involved species. In 1905, Koch was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, and remains renowned as the founder of medical microbiology.

=== Nursing ===
The breakthrough to professionalization based on knowledge of advanced medicine was led by Florence Nightingale in England. She resolved to provide more advanced training than she saw on the Continent. At Kaiserswerth, where the first German nursing schools were founded in 1836 by Theodor Fliedner, she said, &quot;The nursing was nil and the hygiene horrible.&quot; Britain&#x27;s male doctors preferred the old system, but Nightingale won out and her Nightingale Training School opened in 1860 and became a model. The Nightingale solution depended on the patronage of upper-class women, and they proved eager to serve. Royalty became involved. In 1902 the wife of the British king took control of the nursing unit of the British army, became its president, and renamed it after herself as the Queen Alexandra&#x27;s Royal Army Nursing Corps; when she died the next queen became president. Today its Colonel in Chief is Sophie, Countess of Wessex, the daughter-in-law of Queen Elizabeth II. In the United States, upper-middle-class women who already supported hospitals promoted nursing. The new profession proved highly attractive to women of all backgrounds, and schools of nursing opened in the late 19th century. Nurses were soon a part of large hospitals, where they provided a steady stream of low-paid idealistic workers. The International Red Cross began operations in numerous countries in the late 19th century, promoting nursing as an ideal profession for middle-class women.

=== Statistical methods ===
A major breakthrough in epidemiology came with the introduction of statistical maps and graphs. They allowed careful analysis of seasonality issues in disease incidents, and the maps allowed public health officials to identify critical loci for the dissemination of disease. John Snow in London developed the methods. In 1849, he observed that the symptoms of cholera, which had already claimed around 500 lives within a month, were vomiting and diarrhoea. He concluded that the source of contamination must be through ingestion, rather than inhalation as was previously thought. It was this insight that resulted in the removal of The Pump On Broad Street, after which deaths from cholera plummeted. English nurse Florence Nightingale pioneered analysis of large amounts of statistical data, using graphs and tables, regarding the condition of thousands of patients in the Crimean War to evaluate the efficacy of hospital services. Her methods proved convincing and led to reforms in military and civilian hospitals, usually with the full support of the government.

By the late 19th and early 20th century English statisticians led by Francis Galton, Karl Pearson and Ronald Fisher developed the mathematical tools such as correlations and hypothesis tests that made possible much more sophisticated analysis of statistical data.

During the U.S. Civil War the Sanitary Commission collected enormous amounts of statistical data, and opened up the problems of storing information for fast access and mechanically searching for data patterns. The pioneer was John Shaw Billings (1838–1913). A senior surgeon in the war, Billings built the Library of the Surgeon General&#x27;s Office (now the National Library of Medicine), the centerpiece of modern medical information systems. Billings figured out how to mechanically analyze medical and demographic data by turning facts into numbers and punching the numbers onto cardboard cards that could be sorted and counted by machine. The applications were developed by his assistant Herman Hollerith; Hollerith invented the punch card and counter-sorter system that dominated statistical data manipulation until the 1970s. Hollerith&#x27;s company became International Business Machines (IBM) in 1911.

=== Psychiatry ===

Until the nineteenth century, the care of the insane was largely a communal and family responsibility rather than a medical one. The vast majority of the mentally ill were treated in domestic contexts with only the most unmanageable or burdensome likely to be institutionally confined. This situation was transformed radically from the late eighteenth century as, amid changing cultural conceptions of madness, a new-found optimism in the curability of insanity within the asylum setting emerged. Increasingly, lunacy was perceived less as a physiological condition than as a mental and moral one to which the correct response was persuasion, aimed at inculcating internal restraint, rather than external coercion. This new therapeutic sensibility, referred to as moral treatment, was epitomised in French physician Philippe Pinel&#x27;s quasi-mythological unchaining of the lunatics of the Bicêtre Hospital in Paris and realised in an institutional setting with the foundation in 1796 of the Quaker-run York Retreat in England.

From the early nineteenth century, as lay-led lunacy reform movements gained influence, ever more state governments in the West extended their authority and responsibility over the mentally ill. Small-scale asylums, conceived as instruments to reshape both the mind and behaviour of the disturbed, proliferated across these regions. By the 1830s, moral treatment, together with the asylum itself, became increasingly medicalised and asylum doctors began to establish a distinct medical identity with the establishment in the 1840s of associations for their members in France, Germany, the United Kingdom and America, together with the founding of medico-psychological journals. Medical optimism in the capacity of the asylum to cure insanity soured by the close of the nineteenth century as the growth of the asylum population far outstripped that of the general population. Processes of long-term institutional segregation, allowing for the psychiatric conceptualisation of the natural course of mental illness, supported the perspective that the insane were a distinct population, subject to mental pathologies stemming from specific medical causes. As degeneration theory grew in influence from the mid-nineteenth century, heredity was seen as the central causal element in chronic mental illness, and with national asylum systems overcrowded and insanity apparently undergoing an inexorable rise, the focus of psychiatric therapeutics shifted from a concern with treating the individual to maintaining the racial and biological health of national populations.
Emil Kraepelin (1856–1926) introduced new medical categories of mental illness, which eventually came into psychiatric usage despite their basis in behavior rather than pathology or underlying cause. Shell shock among frontline soldiers exposed to heavy artillery bombardment was first diagnosed by British Army doctors in 1915. By 1916, similar symptoms were also noted in soldiers not exposed to explosive shocks, leading to questions as to whether the disorder was physical or psychiatric. In the 1920s surrealist opposition to psychiatry was expressed in a number of surrealist publications. In the 1930s several controversial medical practices were introduced including inducing seizures (by electroshock, insulin or other drugs) or cutting parts of the brain apart (leucotomy or lobotomy). Both came into widespread use by psychiatry, but there were grave concerns and much opposition on grounds of basic morality, harmful effects, or misuse.

In the 1950s new psychiatric drugs, notably the antipsychotic chlorpromazine, were designed in laboratories and slowly came into preferred use. Although often accepted as an advance in some ways, there was some opposition, due to serious adverse effects such as tardive dyskinesia. Patients often opposed psychiatry and refused or stopped taking the drugs when not subject to psychiatric control. There was also increasing opposition to the use of psychiatric hospitals, and attempts to move people back into the community on a collaborative user-led group approach (&quot;therapeutic communities&quot;) not controlled by psychiatry. Campaigns against masturbation were done in the Victorian era and elsewhere. Lobotomy was used until the 1970s to treat schizophrenia. This was denounced by the anti-psychiatric movement in the 1960s and later.

=== Women ===
It was very difficult for women to become doctors in any field before the 1970s. Elizabeth Blackwell became the first woman to formally study and practice medicine in the United States. She was a leader in women&#x27;s medical education. While Blackwell viewed medicine as a means for social and moral reform, her student Mary Putnam Jacobi (1842–1906) focused on curing disease. At a deeper level of disagreement, Blackwell felt that women would succeed in medicine because of their humane female values, but Jacobi believed that women should participate as the equals of men in all medical specialties using identical methods, values and insights. Although the majority of medical doctors in the Soviet Union were women, they were paid less than the male dominated factory workers.

=== Asia ===

==== Places ====

===== China =====
Finally in the 19th century, Western medicine was introduced at the local level by Christian medical missionaries from the London Missionary Society (Britain), the Methodist Church (Britain) and the Presbyterian Church (US). Benjamin Hobson (1816–1873) in 1839, set up a highly successful Wai Ai Clinic in Guangzhou, China. The Hong Kong College of Medicine for Chinese was founded in 1887 by the London Missionary Society, with its first graduate (in 1892) being Sun Yat-sen, who later led the Chinese Revolution (1911). The Hong Kong College of Medicine for Chinese was the forerunner of the School of Medicine of the University of Hong Kong, which started in 1911.

Because of the social custom that men and women should not be near to one another, the women of China were reluctant to be treated by male doctors. The missionaries sent women doctors such as Dr. Mary Hannah Fulton (1854–1927). Supported by the Foreign Missions Board of the Presbyterian Church (US) she in 1902 founded the first medical college for women in China, the Hackett Medical College for Women, in Guangzhou.

===== Japan =====

European ideas of modern medicine were spread widely through the world by medical missionaries, and the dissemination of textbooks. Japanese elites enthusiastically embraced Western medicine after the Meiji Restoration of the 1860s. However they had been prepared by their knowledge of the Dutch and German medicine, for they had some contact with Europe through the Dutch. Highly influential was the 1765 edition of Hendrik van Deventer&#x27;s pioneer work &quot;Nieuw Ligt&quot; (&quot;A New Light&quot;) on Japanese obstetrics, especially on Katakura Kakuryo&#x27;s publication in 1799 of &quot;Sanka Hatsumo&quot; (&quot;Enlightenment of Obstetrics&quot;). A cadre of Japanese physicians began to interact with Dutch doctors, who introduced smallpox vaccinations. By 1820 Japanese ranpô medical practitioners not only translated Dutch medical texts, they integrated their readings with clinical diagnoses. These men became leaders of the modernization of medicine in their country. They broke from Japanese traditions of closed medical fraternities and adopted the European approach of an open community of collaboration based on expertise in the latest scientific methods.

Kitasato Shibasaburō (1853–1931) studied bacteriology in Germany under Robert Koch. In 1891 he founded the Institute of Infectious Diseases in Tokyo, which introduced the study of bacteriology to Japan. He and French researcher Alexandre Yersin went to Hong Kong in 1894, where; Kitasato confirmed Yersin&#x27;s discovery that the bacterium &quot;Yersinia pestis&quot; is the agent of the plague. In 1897 he isolated and described the organism that caused dysentery. He became the first dean of medicine at Keio University, and the first president of the Japan Medical Association.

Japanese physicians immediately recognized the values of X-Rays. They were able to purchase the equipment locally from the Shimadzu Company, which developed, manufactured, marketed, and distributed X-Ray machines after 1900. Japan not only adopted German methods of public health in the home islands, but implemented them in its colonies, especially Korea and Taiwan, and after 1931 in Manchuria. A heavy investment in sanitation resulted in a dramatic increase of life expectancy.

=== Europe ===
The practice of medicine changed in the face of rapid advances in science, as well as new approaches by physicians. Hospital doctors began much more systematic analysis of patients&#x27; symptoms in diagnosis. Among the more powerful new techniques were anaesthesia, and the development of both antiseptic and aseptic operating theatres. Effective cures were developed for certain endemic infectious diseases. However, the decline in many of the most lethal diseases was due more to improvements in public health and nutrition than to advances in medicine.

Medicine was revolutionized in the 19th century and beyond by advances in chemistry, laboratory techniques, and equipment. Old ideas of infectious disease epidemiology were gradually replaced by advances in bacteriology and virology.

The Russian Orthodox Church sponsored seven orders of nursing sisters in the late 19th century. They ran hospitals, clinics, almshouses, pharmacies, and shelters as well as training schools for nurses. In the Soviet era (1917–1991), with the aristocratic sponsors gone, nursing became a low-prestige occupation based in poorly maintained hospitals.

==== Places ====

===== France =====
Paris (France) and Vienna were the two leading medical centers on the Continent in the era 1750–1914.

In the 1770s–1850s Paris became a world center of medical research and teaching. The &quot;Paris School&quot; emphasized that teaching and research should be based in large hospitals and promoted the professionalization of the medical profession and the emphasis on sanitation and public health. A major reformer was Jean-Antoine Chaptal (1756–1832), a physician who was Minister of Internal Affairs. He created the Paris Hospital, health councils, and other bodies.
Louis Pasteur (1822–1895) was one of the most important founders of medical microbiology. He is remembered for his remarkable breakthroughs in the causes and preventions of diseases. His discoveries reduced mortality from puerperal fever, and he created the first vaccines for rabies and anthrax. His experiments supported the germ theory of disease. He was best known to the general public for inventing a method to treat milk and wine to prevent it from causing sickness, a process that came to be called pasteurization. He is regarded as one of the three main founders of microbiology, together with Ferdinand Cohn and Robert Koch. He worked chiefly in Paris and in 1887 founded the Pasteur Institute there to perpetuate his commitment to basic research and its practical applications. As soon as his institute was created, Pasteur brought together scientists with various specialties. The first five departments were directed by Emile Duclaux (general microbiology research) and Charles Chamberland (microbe research applied to hygiene), as well as a biologist, Ilya Ilyich Mechnikov (morphological microbe research) and two physicians, Jacques-Joseph Grancher (rabies) and Emile Roux (technical microbe research). One year after the inauguration of the Institut Pasteur, Roux set up the first course of microbiology ever taught in the world, then entitled &quot;Cours de Microbie Technique&quot; (Course of microbe research techniques). It became the model for numerous research centers around the world named &quot;Pasteur Institutes.&quot;

===== Vienna =====
The First Viennese School of Medicine, 1750–1800, was led by the Dutchman Gerard van Swieten (1700–1772), who aimed to put medicine on new scientific foundations—promoting unprejudiced clinical observation, botanical and chemical research, and introducing simple but powerful remedies. When the Vienna General Hospital opened in 1784, it at once became the world&#x27;s largest hospital and physicians acquired a facility that gradually developed into the most important research centre. Progress ended with the Napoleonic wars and the government shutdown in 1819 of all liberal journals and schools; this caused a general return to traditionalism and eclecticism in medicine.

Vienna was the capital of a diverse empire and attracted not just Germans but Czechs, Hungarians, Jews, Poles and others to its world-class medical facilities. After 1820 the Second Viennese School of Medicine emerged with the contributions of physicians such as Carl Freiherr von Rokitansky, Josef Škoda, Ferdinand Ritter von Hebra, and Ignaz Philipp Semmelweis. Basic medical science expanded and specialization advanced. Furthermore, the first dermatology, eye, as well as ear, nose, and throat clinics in the world were founded in Vienna. The textbook &quot;Lehre von den Augenkrankheiten&quot; of ophthalmologist Georg Joseph Beer (1763–1821) combined practical research and philosophical speculations, and became the standard reference work for decades.

===== Berlin =====

After 1871 Berlin, the capital of the new German Empire, became a leading center for medical research. The Charité is tracing back its origins to the year 1710. More than half of all German Nobel Prize winners in Physiology or Medicine, including Emil von Behring, Robert Koch and Paul Ehrlich, worked there. Koch, (1843–1910), was a representative leader. He became famous for isolating &quot;Bacillus anthracis&quot; (1877), the &quot;Tuberculosis bacillus&quot; (1882) and &quot;Vibrio cholerae&quot; (1883) and for his development of Koch&#x27;s postulates. He was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1905 for his tuberculosis findings. Koch is one of the founders of microbiology and modern medicine. He inspired such major figures as Ehrlich, who discovered the first antibiotic, arsphenamine and Gerhard Domagk, who created the first commercially available antibiotic, Prontosil.

===North America===

==== Events ====

===== American Civil War =====
In the American Civil War (1861–65), as was typical of the 19th century, more soldiers died of disease than in battle, and even larger numbers were temporarily incapacitated by wounds, disease and accidents. Conditions were poor in the Confederacy, where doctors and medical supplies were in short supply. The war had a dramatic long-term impact on medicine in the U.S., from surgical technique to hospitals to nursing and to research facilities. Weapon development—particularly the appearance of Springfield Model 1861, mass-produced and much more accurate than muskets—led to generals underestimating the risks of long range rifle fire; risks exemplified in the death of John Sedgwick and the disastrous Pickett&#x27;s Charge. The rifles could shatter bone forcing amputation and longer ranges meant casualties were sometimes not quickly found. Evacuation of the wounded from Second Battle of Bull Run took a week. As in earlier wars, untreated casualties sometimes survived unexpectedly due to maggots debriding the wound—an observation which led to the surgical use of maggots—still a useful method in the absence of effective antibiotics.

The hygiene of the training and field camps was poor, especially at the beginning of the war when men who had seldom been far from home were brought together for training with thousands of strangers. First came epidemics of the childhood diseases of chicken pox, mumps, whooping cough, and, especially, measles. Operations in the South meant a dangerous and new disease environment, bringing diarrhea, dysentery, typhoid fever, and malaria. There were no antibiotics, so the surgeons prescribed coffee, whiskey, and quinine. Harsh weather, bad water, inadequate shelter in winter quarters, poor policing of camps, and dirty camp hospitals took their toll.

This was a common scenario in wars from time immemorial, and conditions faced by the Confederate army were even worse. The Union responded by building army hospitals in every state. What was different in the Union was the emergence of skilled, well-funded medical organizers who took proactive action, especially in the much enlarged United States Army Medical Department, and the United States Sanitary Commission, a new private agency. Numerous other new agencies also targeted the medical and morale needs of soldiers, including the United States Christian Commission as well as smaller private agencies.

The U.S. Army learned many lessons and in August 1886, it established the Hospital Corps.

=== Institutions ===
Johns Hopkins Hospital, founded in 1889, originated several modern medical practices, including residency and rounds.

=== People ===
=== Cardiovascular ===

==== Blood groups ====
The ABO blood group system was discovered in 1901 by Karl Landsteiner at the University of Vienna. Landsteiner experimented on his staff, mixing their various blood components together, and found that some people&#x27;s blood agglutinated (clumped together) with other blood, while some did not. This then lead him identifying three blood groups, ABC, which would later be renamed to ABO. The less frequently found blood group AB was discovered later in 1902 by Alfred Von Decastello and Adriano Sturli. In 1937 Landsteiner and Alexander S. Wiener further discovered the Rh factor (misnamed from early thinking that this blood group was similar to that found in rhesus monkeys) whose antigens further determine blood reaction between people. This was demonstrated in a 1939 case study by Phillip Levine and Rufus Stetson where a mother who had recently given birth had reacted to their partner&#x27;s blood, highlighting the Rh factor.

==== Blood transfusion ====
Canadian physician Norman Bethune, M.D. developed a mobile blood-transfusion service for frontline operations in the Spanish Civil War (1936–1939), but ironically, he himself died of sepsis.

==== Pacemaker ====
In 1958, Arne Larsson in Sweden became the first patient to depend on an artificial cardiac pacemaker. He died in 2001 at age 86, having outlived its inventor, the surgeon, and 26 pacemakers.

=== Cancer ===
Cancer treatment has been developed with radiotherapy, chemotherapy and surgical oncology.

=== Diagnosis ===
X-ray imaging was the first kind of medical imaging, and later ultrasonic imaging, CT scanning, MR scanning and other imaging methods became available.

=== Disabilities ===
 Prosthetics have improved with lightweight materials as well as neural prosthetics emerging in the end of the 20th century.

=== Diseases ===
Oral rehydration therapy has been extensively used since the 1970s to treat cholera and other diarrhea-inducing infections.

As infectious diseases have become less lethal, and the most common causes of death in developed countries are now tumors and cardiovascular diseases, these conditions have received increased attention in medical research.

=== Disease eradication ===

==== Malaria eradication ====
Starting in World War II, DDT was used as insecticide to combat insect vectors carrying malaria, which was endemic in most tropical regions of the world. The first goal was to protect soldiers, but it was widely adopted as a public health device. In Liberia, for example, the United States had large military operations during the war and the U.S. Public Health Service began the use of DDT for indoor residual spraying (IRS) and as a larvicide, with the goal of controlling malaria in Monrovia, the Liberian capital. In the early 1950s, the project was expanded to nearby villages. In 1953, the World Health Organization (WHO) launched an antimalaria program in parts of Liberia as a pilot project to determine the feasibility of malaria eradication in tropical Africa. However these projects encountered a spate of difficulties that foreshadowed the general retreat from malaria eradication efforts across tropical Africa by the mid-1960s.

=== Pandemics ===

==== 1918 influenza pandemic (1918-1920) ====
The 1918 influenza pandemic was a global pandemic in the early 20th century that occurred between 1918 and 1920. Sometimes known as Spanish Flu due to popular opinion at the time thinking the flu originated from Spain, this pandemic caused close to 50 million deaths around the world. Spreading at the end of World War I.

=== Public health ===
Public health measures became particularly important during the 1918 flu pandemic, which killed at least 50 million people around the world. It became an important case study in epidemiology. Bristow shows there was a gendered response of health caregivers to the pandemic in the United States. Male doctors were unable to cure the patients, and they felt like failures. Women nurses also saw their patients die, but they took pride in their success in fulfilling their professional role of caring for, ministering, comforting, and easing the last hours of their patients, and helping the families of the patients cope as well.

=== Research ===
Evidence-based medicine is a modern concept, not introduced to literature until the 1990s.

=== Sexual and reproductive health ===
The sexual revolution included taboo-breaking research in human sexuality such as the 1948 and 1953 Kinsey reports, invention of hormonal contraception, and the normalization of abortion and homosexuality in many countries. Family planning has promoted a demographic transition in most of the world. With threatening sexually transmitted infections, not least HIV, use of barrier contraception has become imperative. The struggle against HIV has improved antiretroviral treatments.

=== Smoking ===
Tobacco smoking as a cause of lung cancer was first researched in the 1920s, but was not widely supported by publications until the 1950s.

=== Surgery ===
Cardiac surgery was revolutionized in 1948 as open-heart surgery was introduced for the first time since 1925. In 1954 Joseph Murray, J. Hartwell Harrison and others accomplished the first kidney transplantation. Transplantations of other organs, such as heart, liver and pancreas, were also introduced during the later 20th century. The first partial face transplant was performed in 2005, and the first full one in 2010. By the end of the 20th century, microtechnology had been used to create tiny robotic devices to assist microsurgery using micro-video and fiber-optic cameras to view internal tissues during surgery with minimally invasive practices. Laparoscopic surgery was broadly introduced in the 1990s. Natural orifice surgery has followed.

=== War ===

==== Mexican Revolution (1910-1920) ====
During the 19th century, large-scale wars were attended with medics and mobile hospital units which developed advanced techniques for healing massive injuries and controlling infections rampant in battlefield conditions. During the Mexican Revolution (1910–1920), General Pancho Villa organized hospital trains for wounded soldiers. Boxcars marked &quot;Servicio Sanitario&quot; (&quot;sanitary service&quot;) were re-purposed as surgical operating theaters and areas for recuperation, and staffed by up to 40 Mexican and U.S. physicians. Severely wounded soldiers were shuttled back to base hospitals.

==== World War I (1914-1918) ====
Thousands of scarred troops provided the need for improved prosthetic limbs and expanded techniques in plastic surgery or reconstructive surgery. Those practices were combined to broaden cosmetic surgery and other forms of elective surgery.

==== Interwar period (1918–1939) ====
From 1917 to 1932, the American Red Cross moved into Europe with a battery of long-term child health projects. It built and operated hospitals and clinics, and organized antituberculosis and antityphus campaigns. A high priority involved child health programs such as clinics, better baby shows, playgrounds, fresh air camps, and courses for women on infant hygiene. Hundreds of U.S. doctors, nurses, and welfare professionals administered these programs, which aimed to reform the health of European youth and to reshape European public health and welfare along American lines.

==== World War II (1939-1945) ====

The advances in medicine made a dramatic difference for Allied troops, while the Germans and especially the Japanese and Chinese suffered from a severe lack of newer medicines, techniques and facilities. Harrison finds that the chances of recovery for a badly wounded British infantryman were as much as 25 times better than in the First World War. The reason was that:
:&quot;By 1944 most casualties were receiving treatment within hours of wounding, due to the increased mobility of field hospitals and the extensive use of aeroplanes as ambulances. The care of the sick and wounded had also been revolutionized by new medical technologies, such as active immunization against tetanus, sulphonamide drugs, and penicillin.&quot;
During the second World War, Alexis Carrel and Henry Dakin developed the Carrel-Dakin method of treating wounds with an irrigation, Dakin&#x27;s solution, a germicide which helped prevent gangrene.

The War spurred the usage of Roentgen&#x27;s X-ray, and the electrocardiograph, for the monitoring of internal bodily functions. This was followed in the inter-war period by the development of the first anti-bacterial agents such as the sulpha antibiotics.

==== Nazi and Japanese medical research ====
Unethical human subject research, and killing of patients with disabilities, peaked during the Nazi era, with Nazi human experimentation and Aktion T4 during the Holocaust as the most significant examples. Many of the details of these and related events were the focus of the Doctors&#x27; Trial. Subsequently, principles of medical ethics, such as the Nuremberg Code, were introduced to prevent a recurrence of such atrocities. After 1937, the Japanese Army established programs of biological warfare in China. In Unit 731, Japanese doctors and research scientists conducted large numbers of vivisections and experiments on human beings, mostly Chinese victims.

=== Institutions ===

==== World Health Organization ====
The World Health Organization was founded in 1948 as a United Nations agency to improve global health. In most of the world, life expectancy has improved since then, and was about 67 years , and well above 80 years in some countries. Eradication of infectious diseases is an international effort, and several new vaccines have been developed during the post-war years, against infections such as measles, mumps, several strains of influenza and human papilloma virus. The long-known vaccine against Smallpox finally eradicated the disease in the 1970s, and Rinderpest was wiped out in 2011. Eradication of polio is underway. Tissue culture is important for development of vaccines. Despite the early success of antiviral vaccines and antibacterial drugs, antiviral drugs were not introduced until the 1970s. Through the WHO, the international community has developed a response protocol against epidemics, displayed during the SARS epidemic in 2003, the Influenza A virus subtype H5N1 from 2004, the Ebola virus epidemic in West Africa and onwards.

=== People ===
== Contemporary medicine ==

=== Antibiotics and antibiotic resistance ===
The discovery of penicillin in the 20th century by Alexander Fleming provided a vital line of defence against bacterical infections that, without them, often cause patients to suffer prelonged recovery periods and highly increased chances of death. Its discovery and application within medicine allowed previously impossible treatments to take place, including cancer treatments, organ transplants, to open heart surgery. Throughout the 20th century, though, their overprescribed use to humans, as well as to animals that need them due to the conditions of intensive animal farming, has led to the development of antibiotic resistant bacteria.

=== Robotics ===
=== HIV First death ===
The early 21st century, facilitated by extensive global connections, international travel, and unprecedented human disruption of ecological systems, has been defined by a number of noval as well as continuing global pandemics from the 20th century.

==== Past ====
The SARS 2002 to 2004 outbreak affected a number of countries around the world and killed hundreds. This outbreak gave rise to a number of lessons learnt from viral infection control, including more effective isolation room protocols to better hand washing techniques for medical staff. A mutated strain of SARS would go on to develop into COVID-19, causing the future COVID-19 pandemic. A significant influenza strain, H1N1, caused a further pandemic between 2009 and 2010. Known as swine flu, due to its indirect source from pigs, it went on to infect over 700 million people.

==== Ongoing ====
The continuing HIV pandemic, starting in 1981, has infected and led to the deaths of millions of people around the world. Emerging and improved pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) and post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) treatments that aim to reduce the spread of the disease have proven effective in limiting the spread of HIV alongside combined use of safe sex methods, sexual health education, needle exchange programmes, and sexual health screenings. Efforts to find a HIV vaccine are ongoing while health inequities have left certain population groups, like trans women, as well as resource limited regions, like sub-Saharan Africa, at greater risk of contracting HIV compared with, for example, developed countries.

The outbreak of COVID-19, starting in 2019, and subsequent declaration of the COVID-19 pandemic by the WHO is a major pandemic event within the early 21st century. Causing global disruptions, millions of infections and deaths, the pandemic has caused suffering throughout communities. The pandemic has also seen some of the largest logistical organisations of goods, medical equipment, medical professionals, and military personnel since World War II that highlights its far-reaching impact.

=== Personalised medicine ===
The rise of personalised medicine in the 21st century has generated the possibility to develop diagnosis and treatments based on the individual characteristics of a person, rather than through generic practices that defined 20th century medicine. Areas like DNA sequencing, genetic mapping, gene therapy, imaging protocols, proteomics, stem cell therapy, and wireless health monitoring devices are all rising innovations that can help medical professionals fine tune treatment to the individual.

=== Telemedicine ===
Remote surgery is another recent development, with the transatlantic Lindbergh operation in 2001 as a groundbreaking example.

=== Institutions ===

=== People ===
== Themes in medical history ==

=== Racism in medicine ===
Racism has a long history in how medicine has evolved and established itself, both in terms of racism experience upon patients, professionals, and wider systematic violence within medical institutions and systems. See: medical racism in the United States, race and health, and scientific racism.

=== Women in medicine ===
Women have always served as healers and midwives since ancient times. However, the professionalization of medicine forced them increasingly to the sidelines. As hospitals multiplied they relied in Europe on orders of Roman Catholic nun-nurses, and German Protestant and Anglican deaconesses in the early 19th century. They were trained in traditional methods of physical care that involved little knowledge of medicine.

== See also ==
* Health care in the United States
* History of dental treatments
* History of herbalism
* History of hospitals
* History of medicine in Canada
* History of medicine in the United States
* History of nursing
* History of pathology
* History of pharmacy
* History of surgery
* Timeline of nursing history
* Timeline of medicine and medical technology
* History of health care (disambiguation)
== Explanatory notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
== External links ==
* 
* The history of medicine and surgery as portrayed by various artists
* Directory of History of Medicine Collections , Index to the major collections in the United States and Canada, selected by the US National Institute of Health
* Newsletter / Hannah Institute for the History of Medicine . Date: [1988-1997], Wellcome Collection </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q380274" start="4" end="23" title="History of medicine" label="history of medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="397" end="407" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q843601" start="445" end="460" title="Outline of health sciences" label="health sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="477" end="485" title="Political science" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="711" end="734" title="archaeology" label="archaeological sources."/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="982" end="998" title="Babylonian medicine" label="those of Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q200253" start="1000" end="1005" title="Traditional Chinese Medicine" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q787057" start="1007" end="1012" title="Ancient Egyptian medicine" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q132325" start="1017" end="1022" title="Ayurveda" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5782572" start="1148" end="1156" title="humorism" label="humorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425837" start="1265" end="1287" title="germ theory of disease" label="germ theory of disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="1437" end="1450" title="Public health" label="Public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917" start="1662" end="1671" title="hospitals" label="hospitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="1750" end="1761" title="antibiotics" label="antibiotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="1810" end="1819" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="1821" end="1829" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q245341" start="1835" end="1846" title="radiography" label="radiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="1854" end="1869" title="modern medicine" label="modern medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q121176" start="1965" end="1971" title="nurses" label="nurses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058241" start="2060" end="2080" title="Prehistoric medicine" label="Prehistoric medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188840" start="2137" end="2153" title="medicinal plants" label="medicinal plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="2545" end="2557" title="Homo" label="early humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="2600" end="2614" title="writing system" label="writing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145106" start="2631" end="2647" title="recorded history" label="recorded history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040736" start="2807" end="2829" title="List of archaeological periods" label="archaeological periods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415966" start="3344" end="3355" title="Prehistoric archaeology" label="archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="3576" end="3587" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391543" start="3700" end="3718" title="psychoactive plant" label="psychoactive plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q336358" start="3735" end="3754" title="psilocybin mushroom" label="psilocybin mushroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="3764" end="3767" title="Common Era" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="3768" end="3774" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="3810" end="3813" title="Common Era" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q503142" start="3822" end="3824" title="Before Present" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="3870" end="3873" title="Common Era" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q242148" start="3874" end="3882" title="Mehrgarh" label="Mehrgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="3896" end="3904" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="3908" end="3920" title="Anthropology" label="Anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q477774" start="4314" end="4329" title="Evolutionary origin of religion" label="proto-religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="4390" end="4402" title="supernatural" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="4426" end="4433" title="Shamanism" label="shamans"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="4515" end="4530" title="Ancient history" label="Ancient history"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="4556" end="4559" title="Common Era" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="4567" end="4569" title="Common Era" label="CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234117" start="4679" end="4693" title="Post-classical history" label="post-classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860" start="5088" end="5094" title="nature" label="nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="5453" end="5464" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="5503" end="5507" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="5509" end="5515" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="5517" end="5522" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="5524" end="5528" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="5534" end="5540" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="5595" end="5600" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q170526" start="5641" end="5657" title="Fertile Crescent" label="Fertile Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461035" start="5680" end="5689" title="Akkadians" label="Akkadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q377085" start="5701" end="5710" title="Assyrian people" label="Assyrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="5715" end="5724" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q56000" start="5878" end="5890" title="Naturalism (philosophy)" label="naturalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="5895" end="5907" title="supernatural" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q34394" start="5908" end="5921" title="belief system" label="belief system"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="5928" end="5933" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q29945" start="5997" end="6015" title="3rd millennium BCE" label="3rd millennium BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q401" start="6038" end="6047" title="cuneiform" label="cuneiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355478" start="6127" end="6145" title="drug prescriptions" label="drug prescriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807022" start="6298" end="6306" title="Ašipu" label="âs[h]ipu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36790" start="6432" end="6440" title="Sumerian language" label="Sumerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q723587" start="6452" end="6471" title="Third Dynasty of Ur" label="Third Dynasty of Ur"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="6490" end="6493" title="Common Era" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="6527" end="6532" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4461035" start="6556" end="6571" title="Akkadian Empire" label="Akkadian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="6667" end="6676" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="6733" end="6752" title="Babylonian Medicine" label="Babylonian Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396676" start="6890" end="6905" title="Esagil-kin-apli" label="Esagil-kin-apli"/>
<link wikidata="Q625134" start="6909" end="6917" title="Borsippa" label="Borsippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="6953" end="6956" title="Common Era" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q346530" start="6997" end="7013" title="Adad-apla-iddina" label="Adad-apla-iddina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644043" start="7097" end="7106" title="diagnosis" label="diagnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q592442" start="7108" end="7117" title="prognosis" label="prognosis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7183" end="7199" title="medical symptoms" label="medical symptoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q83021" start="7219" end="7228" title="empirical" label="empirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="7578" end="7583" title="Magic (supernatural)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="7663" end="7674" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10914393" start="7704" end="7716" title="Neo-Assyrian Empire" label="neo-Assyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="7729" end="7732" title="Common Era" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q624887" start="7738" end="7752" title="Neo-Babylonian Empire" label="neo-Babylonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="7765" end="7768" title="Common Era" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773974" start="8142" end="8153" title="prophylaxis" label="prophylaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="8291" end="8304" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="8348" end="8358" title="Nile" label="river Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="8392" end="8397" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="8399" end="8404" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q958" start="8410" end="8421" title="South Sudan" label="South Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q187979" start="8441" end="8452" title="Early Dynastic Period (Egypt)" label="unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="8461" end="8464" title="Common Era" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q16843683" start="8485" end="8501" title="History of Persian Egypt" label="Persian conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="8509" end="8512" title="Common Era" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320005" start="8544" end="8575" title="Ptolemaic Kingdom" label="conquest of Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="8583" end="8586" title="Common Era" label="BCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q125576" start="8827" end="8834" title="papyrus" label="papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007045" start="8848" end="8876" title="Kahun Gynaecological Papyrus" label="Kahun Gynaecological Papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q842363" start="8882" end="8901" title="Edwin Smith Papyrus" label="Edwin Smith Papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q310301" start="8907" end="8920" title="Ebers Papyrus" label="Ebers Papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051109" start="8926" end="8948" title="London Medical Papyrus" label="London Medical Papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186625" start="8957" end="8977" title="Greek Magical Papyri" label="Greek Magical Papyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="8980" end="8989" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061510" start="9004" end="9013" title="Egyptians" label="Egyptians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330709" start="9092" end="9103" title="dry climate" label="dry climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="9120" end="9140" title="public health system" label="public health system"/>
<link wikidata="Q842363" start="9524" end="9543" title="Edwin Smith Papyrus" label="Edwin Smith Papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131171" start="9585" end="9592" title="Imhotep" label="Imhotep"/>
<link wikidata="Q220276" start="9600" end="9611" title="Third dynasty of Egypt" label="3rd dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="9791" end="9801" title="anatomical" label="anatomical"/>
<link wikidata="Q83790" start="9922" end="9930" title="textbook" label="textbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q136783" start="9970" end="9986" title="magical thinking" label="magical thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q835153" start="10031" end="10042" title="Physical examination" label="examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644043" start="10044" end="10053" title="diagnosis" label="diagnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q179661" start="10055" end="10064" title="Medical treatment" label="treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q592442" start="10082" end="10091" title="prognosis" label="prognosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007045" start="10125" end="10153" title="Kahun Gynaecological Papyrus" label="Kahun Gynaecological Papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14890574" start="10210" end="10220" title="Conception (biology)" label="conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q310301" start="10531" end="10544" title="Ebers Papyrus" label="Ebers Papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q194517" start="10583" end="10588" title="enema" label="enema"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="10596" end="10607" title="medications" label="medications"/>
<link wikidata="Q766876" start="10773" end="10786" title="History of ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q905355" start="10788" end="10795" title="Hesy-Ra" label="Hesy-Ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q174367" start="10851" end="10857" title="Djoser" label="Djoser"/>
<link wikidata="Q841413" start="10925" end="10933" title="Peseshet" label="Peseshet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="10948" end="10961" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q211001" start="10981" end="10992" title="Fourth dynasty of Egypt" label="4th dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q200253" start="11188" end="11216" title="traditional Chinese medicine" label="traditional Chinese medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="11244" end="11256" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q200253" start="11548" end="11576" title="traditional Chinese medicine" label="traditional Chinese medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="11639" end="11645" title="Taoist" label="Taoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="11932" end="11940" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q428448" start="11998" end="12013" title="Huangdi Neijing" label="Huangdi Neijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q197350" start="12173" end="12188" title="Zhang Zhongjing" label="Zhang Zhongjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8191081" start="12204" end="12227" title="Shang Han Lun" label="Treatise on Cold Damage"/>
<link wikidata="Q428448" start="12292" end="12305" title="Neijing Suwen" label="Neijing Suwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="12317" end="12328" title="Jin Dynasty (265–420)" label="Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q121713" start="12358" end="12369" title="acupuncture" label="acupuncture"/>
<link wikidata="Q937737" start="12374" end="12385" title="moxibustion" label="moxibustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131968" start="12387" end="12397" title="Huangfu Mi" label="Huangfu Mi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29201" start="12425" end="12439" title="Yellow Emperor" label="Yellow Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="12490" end="12502" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q200253" start="12652" end="12680" title="Traditional Chinese medicine" label="Traditional Chinese medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="12885" end="12899" title="scientific knowledge" label="modern science"/>
<link wikidata="Q180445" start="13044" end="13050" title="Nature (journal)" label="Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271540" start="13162" end="13181" title="mechanism of action" label="mechanism of action"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="13233" end="13246" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q691640" start="13394" end="13416" title="science-based medicine" label="science-based medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q182672" start="13803" end="13820" title="Zoonosis" label="zoonotic diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q236092" start="14046" end="14057" title="Atharvaveda" label="Atharvaveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="14076" end="14084" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q215262" start="14108" end="14117" title="Vedic age" label="Vedic age"/>
<link wikidata="Q215262" start="14582" end="14594" title="Vedic period" label="Vedic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q132325" start="14664" end="14672" title="Ayurveda" label="Ayurveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q278748" start="14841" end="14848" title="Charaka" label="Charaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q383027" start="14853" end="14861" title="Sushruta" label="Sushruta"/>
<link wikidata="Q845300" start="15114" end="15124" title="nosology" label="nosologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="15243" end="15249" title="Buddha" label="Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q278748" start="15294" end="15301" title="Charaka" label="Charaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723566" start="15307" end="15321" title="Charaka Samhita" label="Charakasamhitā"/>
<link wikidata="Q383027" start="15425" end="15432" title="Sushruta" label="Suśruta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995239" start="15438" end="15452" title="Sushruta Samhita" label="Suśrutasamhitā"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995239" start="15688" end="15702" title="Sushruta Samhita" label="Suśrutasamhitā"/>
<link wikidata="Q840929" start="15779" end="15790" title="rhinoplasty" label="rhinoplasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q21714486" start="15831" end="15840" title="lithotomy" label="lithotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11180" start="16402" end="16419" title="internal medicine" label="internal medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="16454" end="16461" title="anatomy" label="anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123028" start="16533" end="16543" title="pediatrics" label="pediatrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284418" start="16549" end="16559" title="obstetrics" label="obstetrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221899" start="16564" end="16575" title="gynaecology" label="gynaecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7218" start="16638" end="16648" title="toxicology" label="toxicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q211420" start="16739" end="16750" title="aphrodisiac" label="aphrodisiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q101017" start="16925" end="16937" title="distillation" label="distillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="16980" end="16990" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q614304" start="17011" end="17019" title="pharmacy" label="pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q485742" start="17100" end="17107" title="alkalis" label="alkalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="17522" end="17538" title="pseudoscientific" label="pseudoscientific"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17840" end="17856" title="theory of humors" label="theory of humors"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="17997" end="18014" title="Galen of Pergamon" label="Galen of Pergamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="18526" end="18537" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="22021" end="22026" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="22040" end="22045" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q83223" start="22109" end="22118" title="Asklepios" label="Asklepios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071946" start="22145" end="22156" title="Podaleirius" label="Podaleirius"/>
<link wikidata="Q674319" start="22161" end="22168" title="Machaon (physician)" label="Machaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q186271" start="22192" end="22201" title="Patroclus" label="Patroclus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588440" start="22259" end="22268" title="Eurypylus (king of Thessaly)" label="Eurypylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131171" start="22454" end="22461" title="Imhotep" label="Imhotep"/>
<link wikidata="Q83223" start="22553" end="22562" title="Asclepius" label="Asclepius"/>
<link wikidata="Q731841" start="22579" end="22589" title="Asclepeion" label="Asclepieia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539770" start="22885" end="22895" title="Sleep temple" label="in a dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q233576" start="23090" end="23099" title="Epidaurus" label="Epidaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188332" start="23554" end="23572" title="Alcmaeon of Croton" label="Alcmaeon of Croton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="23773" end="23784" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q187027" start="23788" end="23791" title="Kos" label="Kos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135155" start="23854" end="23872" title="Hippocratic Corpus" label="Hippocratic Corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q134990" start="24047" end="24063" title="Hippocratic Oath" label="Hippocratic Oath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="24201" end="24212" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5782572" start="24299" end="24307" title="humorism" label="humorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340669" start="24583" end="24591" title="Nail clubbing" label="clubbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2186829" start="24690" end="24712" title="Cyanotic heart defect" label="cyanotic heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391637" start="24866" end="24882" title="Hippocratic face" label="Hippocratic face"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="24909" end="24920" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233109" start="24974" end="24982" title="Falstaff" label="Falstaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q495954" start="25027" end="25034" title="Henry V (play)" label="Henry V"/>
<link wikidata="Q557429" start="25087" end="25092" title="Acute (medical)" label="acute"/>
<link wikidata="Q383126" start="25094" end="25101" title="Chronic (medicine)" label="chronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q506680" start="25103" end="25110" title="Endemic (epidemiology)" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292472" start="25168" end="25175" title="relapse" label="relapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053948" start="25197" end="25205" title="paroxysm" label="paroxysm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891441" start="25217" end="25230" title="convalescence" label="convalescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="25248" end="25253" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q170267" start="27244" end="27260" title="Andreas Vesalius" label="Andreas Vesalius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233009" start="27378" end="27404" title="De humani corporis fabrica" label="De humani corporis fabrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="27512" end="27522" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q312500" start="27598" end="27621" title="Herophilus of Chalcedon" label="Herophilus of Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q377781" start="27626" end="27646" title="Erasistratus of Ceos" label="Erasistratus of Ceos"/>
<link wikidata="Q21714486" start="27706" end="27715" title="lithotomy" label="lithotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q133076" start="27717" end="27723" title="hernia" label="hernia"/>
<link wikidata="Q760348" start="27736" end="27754" title="ophthalmic surgery" label="ophthalmic surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q182442" start="27756" end="27771" title="plastic surgery" label="plastic surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q324921" start="27825" end="27836" title="tracheotomy" label="tracheotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2651366" start="27842" end="27850" title="mandrake" label="mandrake"/>
<link wikidata="Q4990531" start="27857" end="27868" title="anaesthetic" label="anaesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q312420" start="27910" end="27916" title="Aulus Cornelius Celsus" label="Celsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="27921" end="27926" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q312500" start="27941" end="27964" title="Herophilos" label="Herophilus of Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9609" start="28833" end="28837" title="vein" label="vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q9655" start="28843" end="28851" title="artery" label="arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q191733" start="28876" end="28881" title="pulse" label="pulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="28950" end="28960" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q377781" start="29152" end="29173" title="Erasistratus" label="Erasistratus of Chios"/>
<link wikidata="Q9620" start="29219" end="29224" title="nerve" label="nerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q83500" start="29478" end="29490" title="intelligence" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q377781" start="29650" end="29662" title="Erasistratus" label="Erasistratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="30010" end="30016" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074814" start="30035" end="30055" title="surgical instruments" label="surgical instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378235" start="30138" end="30145" title="forceps" label="forceps"/>
<link wikidata="Q207172" start="30147" end="30154" title="scalpel" label="scalpel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30157" end="30164" title="Cautery#History" label="cautery"/>
<link wikidata="Q40847" start="30166" end="30187" title="Scissors" label="cross-bladed scissors"/>
<link wikidata="Q619800" start="30193" end="30208" title="surgical needle" label="surgical needle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546569" start="30214" end="30219" title="Sound (medical instrument)" label="sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342422" start="30225" end="30233" title="Speculum (medical)" label="speculas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818260" start="30257" end="30273" title="cataract surgery" label="cataract surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q297776" start="30301" end="30312" title="Pedanius Dioscorides" label="Dioscorides"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704131" start="30396" end="30413" title="De Materia Medica" label="De Materia Medica"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="30832" end="30848" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q624029" start="31068" end="31084" title="Islamic medicine" label="Islamic medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q540679" start="31339" end="31372" title="Medical Compendium in Seven Books" label="Medical Compendium in Seven Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q540679" start="31407" end="31421" title="Paul of Aegina" label="Paul of Aegina"/>
<link wikidata="Q780067" start="31769" end="31775" title="triage" label="triage"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="31818" end="31832" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q216866" start="32014" end="32029" title="conjoined twins" label="conjoined twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="32195" end="32211" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="32242" end="32257" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Sassanid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q414464" start="32337" end="32359" title="Academy of Gondishapur" label="Academy of Gondeshapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200705" start="32485" end="32497" title="Cyril Elgood" label="Cyril Elgood"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="32766" end="32786" title="Islamic Golden Age" label="Islamic civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="32902" end="32909" title="anatomy" label="anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q161437" start="32911" end="32924" title="ophthalmology" label="ophthalmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q128406" start="32926" end="32938" title="pharmacology" label="pharmacology"/>
<link wikidata="Q614304" start="32940" end="32948" title="pharmacy" label="pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="32950" end="32960" title="physiology" label="physiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="33154" end="33171" title="Umayyad Caliphate" label="Umayyad Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="33422" end="33430" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q36788" start="33834" end="33857" title="Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan" label="Abd al-Malik ibn Marwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="34079" end="34096" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q745799" start="34718" end="34736" title="Islamic Golden Age" label="Islamic Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q131002" start="34958" end="34973" title="Harun al-Rashid" label="Harun al-Rashid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="35578" end="35583" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="35590" end="35601" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q503130" start="35716" end="35732" title="Hunayn ibn Ishaq" label="Hunayn ibn Ishaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q624029" start="35863" end="35879" title="Islamic medicine" label="Islamic medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="35917" end="35928" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Arab Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q169234" start="35988" end="36017" title="Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi" label="Muhammad ibn Zakarīya al-Rāzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="36022" end="36030" title="Avicenna" label="Avicenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="36235" end="36243" title="Avicenna" label="Avicenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q466060" start="36316" end="36337" title="The Canon of Medicine" label="The Canon of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q466060" start="36495" end="36516" title="The Canon of Medicine" label="The Canon of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q624029" start="36564" end="36611" title="Medicine in the medieval Islamic world" label="medical knowledge of the medieval Islamic world"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247627" start="36671" end="36691" title="Medicine in ancient Rome" label="Greco-Roman medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="36706" end="36711" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332452" start="36714" end="36730" title="Ancient Iranian medicine" label="Persian medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q200253" start="36732" end="36748" title="Traditional Chinese medicine" label="Chinese medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q132325" start="36753" end="36768" title="Ayurveda" label="Indian medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q169234" start="36788" end="36795" title="Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi" label="al-Rāzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5782572" start="36849" end="36857" title="humorism" label="humorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q624029" start="36937" end="36953" title="Islamic medicine" label="Islamic medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q123028" start="37229" end="37239" title="pediatrics" label="pediatrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q161437" start="37258" end="37271" title="ophthalmology" label="ophthalmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q166876" start="41817" end="41839" title="St. Isidore of Seville" label="St. Isidore of Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q157123" start="41908" end="41931" title="Carolingian Renaissance" label="Carolingian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q755709" start="42036" end="42067" title="Renaissance of the 12th century" label="Renaissance of the 12th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247917" start="42484" end="42500" title="Mondino de Luzzi" label="Mondino de Luzzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145271" start="42906" end="42931" title="Schola Medica Salernitana" label="Schola Medica Salernitana"/>
<link wikidata="Q50359711" start="43582" end="43591" title="Virdimura" label="Virdimura"/>
<link wikidata="Q131262" start="43744" end="43765" title="University of Bologna" label="University of Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7854974" start="44037" end="44046" title="Turisanus" label="Turisanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193510" start="44079" end="44098" title="University of Padua" label="University of Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q131262" start="44143" end="44164" title="University of Bologna" label="University of Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q170267" start="44651" end="44667" title="Andreas Vesalius" label="Andreas Vesalius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233009" start="44800" end="44826" title="De Humani Corporis Fabrica" label="De Humani Corporis Fabrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q776223" start="45264" end="45289" title="University of Montpellier" label="University of Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q193510" start="45317" end="45336" title="University of Padua" label="University of Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q131262" start="45341" end="45362" title="University of Bologna" label="University of Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q31519" start="45597" end="45615" title="Charles University" label="Charles University"/>
<link wikidata="Q189441" start="45649" end="45672" title="Jagiellonian University" label="Jagiellonian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="45676" end="45682" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q165980" start="45691" end="45711" title="University of Vienna" label="University of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q151510" start="45720" end="45741" title="Heidelberg University" label="Heidelberg University"/>
<link wikidata="Q165528" start="45753" end="45777" title="University of Greifswald" label="University of Greifswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q43522" start="47274" end="47297" title="Antonie van Leeuwenhoek" label="Antonie van Leeuwenhoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q93128" start="47477" end="47491" title="William Harvey" label="William Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11068" start="47557" end="47581" title="circulatory system" label="circulation of the blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232968" start="47595" end="47658" title="Exercitatio Anatomica de Motu Cordis et Sanguinis in Animalibus" label="Exercitatio Anatomica de Motu Cordis et Sanguinis in Animalibus"/>
<link wikidata="Q297776" start="47766" end="47777" title="Dioscorides" label="Dioscorides"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704131" start="47790" end="47807" title="De Materia Medica" label="De Materia Medica"/>
<link wikidata="Q117247" start="47817" end="47830" title="pharmacopoeia" label="pharmacopoeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10892" start="47882" end="47889" title="protist" label="protist"/>
<link wikidata="Q196538" start="47918" end="47928" title="microscope" label="microscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q43522" start="47932" end="47955" title="Antonie van Leeuwenhoek" label="Antonie van Leeuwenhoek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193" start="48000" end="48012" title="microbiology" label="microbiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q131262" start="48045" end="48066" title="University of Bologna" label="University of Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q126369" start="48158" end="48178" title="Julius Caesar Aranzi" label="Julius Caesar Aranzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q193003" start="48788" end="48801" title="hydrocephalus" label="hydrocephalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055111" start="48803" end="48814" title="nasal polyp" label="nasal polyp"/>
<link wikidata="Q165135" start="48816" end="48822" title="goitre" label="goitre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="48827" end="48834" title="tumor" label="tumours"/>
<link wikidata="Q382641" start="48838" end="48846" title="phimosis" label="phimosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193889" start="48848" end="48855" title="ascites" label="ascites"/>
<link wikidata="Q41478" start="48857" end="48869" title="hemorrhoid" label="haemorrhoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071131" start="48871" end="48883" title="anorectal abscess" label="anal abscess"/>
<link wikidata="Q189470" start="48888" end="48895" title="fistula" label="fistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520176" start="51050" end="51064" title="Unani medicine" label="Unani medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="51075" end="51083" title="Avicenna" label="Avicenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q466060" start="51097" end="51114" title="The Canon of Medicine" label="Canon of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="51291" end="51297" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900664" start="51987" end="51997" title="Bhavamishra" label="Bhāvamiśra"/>
<link wikidata="Q163095" start="52306" end="52316" title="Smilax china" label="china root"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361" start="52543" end="52552" title="Hyderabad, India" label="Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741444" start="52561" end="52566" title="History of Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="52720" end="52740" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635089" start="53305" end="53329" title="Edinburgh Medical School" label="Edinburgh Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="53465" end="53479" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q828435" start="53691" end="53727" title="Spanish conquest of the Aztec empire" label="Spanish conquest of the Aztec empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326" start="53785" end="53798" title="Hernán Cortés" label="Hernán Cortés"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="53823" end="53831" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q315628" start="53938" end="53948" title="Cuitlahuac" label="Cuitlahuac"/>
<link wikidata="Q372529" start="54080" end="54121" title="Royal and Pontifical University of Mexico" label="Royal and Pontifical University of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q31877" start="54864" end="54883" title="Virgin of Guadalupe" label="Virgin of Guadalupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106019" start="56268" end="56284" title="Florentine Codex" label="Florentine Codex"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="56359" end="56375" title="Franciscan friar" label="Franciscan friar"/>
<link wikidata="Q379972" start="56376" end="56397" title="Bernardino de Sahagún" label="Bernardino de Sahagún"/>
<link wikidata="Q826591" start="56441" end="56446" title="Nahuas" label="Nahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q950531" start="56607" end="56623" title="Nicolás Monardes" label="Nicolás Monardes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9004310" start="56776" end="56852" title="Historia medicinal de las cosas que se traen de nuestras Indias Occidentales" label="Historia medicinal de las cosas que se traen de nuestras Indias Occidentales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204297" start="57210" end="57250" title="Libellus de Medicinalibus Indorum Herbis" label="Libellus de Medicinalibus Indorum Herbis"/>
<link wikidata="Q441300" start="57494" end="57512" title="Antonio de Mendoza" label="Antonio de Mendoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q126412" start="59084" end="59114" title="Massachusetts General Hospital" label="Massachusetts General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q777039" start="59126" end="59145" title="Guy&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Guy&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525181" start="59262" end="59272" title="Thomas Guy" label="Thomas Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q164946" start="59298" end="59328" title="St Bartholomew&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="St Bartholomew&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143779" start="59333" end="59358" title="St Thomas&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="St Thomas&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412596" start="59504" end="59516" title="Samuel Sharp (surgeon)" label="Samuel Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q549582" start="59772" end="59787" title="Thomas Percival" label="Thomas Percival"/>
<link wikidata="Q59312336" start="59855" end="59972" title="Medical Ethics; or, a Code of Institutes and Precepts, Adapted to the Professional Conduct of Physicians and Surgeons" label="Medical Ethics; or, a Code of Institutes and Precepts, Adapted to the Professional Conduct of Physicians and Surgeons"/>
<link wikidata="Q395590" start="60117" end="60131" title="Agostino Bassi" label="Agostino Bassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328294" start="60160" end="60170" title="muscardine" label="muscardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q76745" start="60213" end="60228" title="Theodor Schwann" label="Theodor Schwann"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="60245" end="60254" title="ethanol" label="alcoholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41760" start="60255" end="60267" title="fermentation" label="fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="60271" end="60276" title="yeast" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q16571" start="60359" end="60376" title="Justus von Liebig" label="Justus von Liebig"/>
<link wikidata="Q11372" start="60393" end="60408" title="physical chemistry" label="physicochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q191631" start="60485" end="60493" title="vitalism" label="vitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q59736" start="60515" end="60531" title="Ignaz Semmelweis" label="Ignaz Semmelweis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419347" start="60604" end="60618" title="childbed fever" label="childbed fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q552461" start="60647" end="60664" title="hand washing" label="clean their hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q607329" start="60856" end="60863" title="Miasma theory" label="miasmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q529" start="60884" end="60897" title="Louis Pasteur" label="Louis Pasteur"/>
<link wikidata="Q76745" start="60908" end="60915" title="Theodor Schwann" label="Schwann"/>
<link wikidata="Q193213" start="61170" end="61182" title="butyric acid" label="butyric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047478" start="61210" end="61225" title="Casimir Davaine" label="Casimir Davaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q129104" start="61313" end="61320" title="anthrax" label="anthrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q155768" start="61404" end="61417" title="Joseph Lister, 1st Baron Lister" label="Joseph Lister"/>
<link wikidata="Q274493" start="61486" end="61496" title="antisepsis" label="antisepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q37193" start="61543" end="61554" title="Robert Koch" label="Robert Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q76774" start="61577" end="61591" title="Ferdinand Cohn" label="Ferdinand Cohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047478" start="61680" end="61687" title="Casimir Davaine" label="Davaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421165" start="61799" end="61821" title="experimental pathology" label="experimental pathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425837" start="61826" end="61848" title="germ theory of disease" label="germ theory of disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q130971" start="62089" end="62106" title="Mycobacterium tuberculosis" label="tubercle bacillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="62185" end="62192" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="62205" end="62222" title="Alexandria, Egypt" label="Alexandria, Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q160821" start="62412" end="62428" title="Vibrio cholerae" label="cholera pathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q44993" start="62498" end="62517" title="Max von Pettenkofer" label="Max von Pettenkofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q607329" start="62555" end="62571" title="miasmatic theory" label="miasmatic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="62851" end="62858" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="62927" end="62940" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q4007169" start="63095" end="63109" title="rabies vaccine" label="rabies vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40852" start="63145" end="63151" title="Edward Jenner" label="Jenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037810" start="63159" end="63171" title="smallpox vaccine" label="for smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q391083" start="63241" end="63258" title="Pasteur Institute" label="Pasteur Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q864601" start="63283" end="63293" title="biomedical" label="biomedical"/>
<link wikidata="Q77130" start="63552" end="63563" title="Jakob Henle" label="Jakob Henle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19047" start="63646" end="63668" title="Koch&amp;#x27;s postulates" label="Koch&amp;#x27;s postulates"/>
<link wikidata="Q29505" start="63722" end="63732" title="tuberculin" label="tuberculin"/>
<link wikidata="Q130971" start="63800" end="63816" title="Mycobacterium tuberculosis" label="involved species"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="63848" end="63885" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q598976" start="63926" end="63946" title="medical microbiology" label="medical microbiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q37103" start="64056" end="64076" title="Florence Nightingale" label="Florence Nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q77814" start="64247" end="64263" title="Theodor Fliedner" label="Theodor Fliedner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270176" start="64761" end="64808" title="Queen Alexandra&amp;#x27;s Royal Army Nursing Corps" label="Queen Alexandra&amp;#x27;s Royal Army Nursing Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q155203" start="64887" end="64913" title="Sophie, Countess of Wessex" label="Sophie, Countess of Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="64938" end="64956" title="Queen Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q356407" start="65758" end="65767" title="John Snow (physician)" label="John Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q37103" start="66198" end="66218" title="Florence Nightingale" label="Florence Nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q191026" start="66620" end="66634" title="Francis Galton" label="Francis Galton"/>
<link wikidata="Q310794" start="66636" end="66648" title="Karl Pearson" label="Karl Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q216723" start="66653" end="66666" title="Ronald Fisher" label="Ronald Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597419" start="67042" end="67060" title="John Shaw Billings" label="John Shaw Billings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542703" start="67122" end="67166" title="Library of the Surgeon General&amp;#x27;s Office" label="Library of the Surgeon General&amp;#x27;s Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q611833" start="67176" end="67204" title="National Library of Medicine" label="National Library of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192145" start="67510" end="67526" title="Herman Hollerith" label="Herman Hollerith"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="67682" end="67719" title="IBM" label="International Business Machines (IBM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q505619" start="67796" end="67802" title="insanity" label="insane"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="67904" end="67916" title="mental disorder" label="mentally ill"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="68292" end="68305" title="physiology" label="physiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947139" start="68514" end="68529" title="moral treatment" label="moral treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q311594" start="68566" end="68580" title="Philippe Pinel" label="Philippe Pinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15217751" start="68641" end="68657" title="Bicêtre Hospital" label="Bicêtre Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146269" start="68759" end="68766" title="The Retreat" label="Retreat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523778" start="69759" end="69773" title="Natural history of disease" label="natural course"/>
<link wikidata="Q559003" start="69935" end="69947" title="Social degeneration" label="degeneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q76828" start="70344" end="70358" title="Emil Kraepelin" label="Emil Kraepelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="70408" end="70422" title="mental illness" label="mental illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="70451" end="70462" title="psychiatry" label="psychiatric"/>
<link wikidata="Q4369741" start="70513" end="70542" title="Biopsychiatry controversy" label="pathology or underlying cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="70850" end="70860" title="surrealism" label="surrealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q131543" start="71041" end="71053" title="electroshock" label="electroshock"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="71055" end="71062" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207684" start="71116" end="71125" title="leucotomy" label="leucotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207684" start="71129" end="71137" title="lobotomy" label="lobotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572854" start="71311" end="71328" title="psychiatric drugs" label="psychiatric drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q407972" start="71356" end="71370" title="chlorpromazine" label="chlorpromazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546328" start="71556" end="71574" title="tardive dyskinesia" label="tardive dyskinesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035987" start="71836" end="71850" title="World Network of Users and Survivors of Psychiatry" label="user-led group"/>
<link wikidata="Q8396" start="71946" end="71958" title="masturbation" label="masturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="71976" end="71989" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q207684" start="72005" end="72013" title="Lobotomy" label="Lobotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="72048" end="72061" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q582667" start="72089" end="72105" title="anti-psychiatric" label="anti-psychiatric"/>
<link wikidata="Q234572" start="72235" end="72254" title="Elizabeth Blackwell (doctor)" label="Elizabeth Blackwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992420" start="72476" end="72494" title="Mary Putnam Jacobi" label="Mary Putnam Jacobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="72852" end="72864" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869031" start="73112" end="73137" title="London Missionary Society" label="London Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="73153" end="73169" title="Methodist Church" label="Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268181" start="73188" end="73212" title="Presbyterian Church in the United States" label="Presbyterian Church (US)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888825" start="73214" end="73229" title="Benjamin Hobson" label="Benjamin Hobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164603" start="73317" end="73358" title="Hong Kong College of Medicine for Chinese" label="Hong Kong College of Medicine for Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869031" start="73386" end="73411" title="London Missionary Society" label="London Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="73453" end="73464" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="73484" end="73509" title="Chinese Revolution (1911)" label="Chinese Revolution (1911)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164603" start="73515" end="73556" title="Hong Kong College of Medicine for Chinese" label="Hong Kong College of Medicine for Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q15568" start="73609" end="73632" title="University of Hong Kong" label="University of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793692" start="73854" end="73872" title="Mary Hannah Fulton" label="Mary Hannah Fulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="74298" end="74315" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q442225" start="75276" end="75296" title="Kitasato Shibasaburō" label="Kitasato Shibasaburō"/>
<link wikidata="Q37193" start="75347" end="75358" title="Robert Koch" label="Robert Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q123920" start="75504" end="75520" title="Alexandre Yersin" label="Alexandre Yersin"/>
<link wikidata="Q133805" start="77070" end="77082" title="epidemiology" label="epidemiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q243748" start="77122" end="77134" title="bacteriology" label="bacteriology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7215" start="77139" end="77147" title="virology" label="virology"/>
<link wikidata="Q708011" start="77957" end="77977" title="Jean-Antoine Chaptal" label="Jean-Antoine Chaptal"/>
<link wikidata="Q529" start="78107" end="78120" title="Louis Pasteur" label="Louis Pasteur"/>
<link wikidata="Q598976" start="78175" end="78195" title="medical microbiology" label="medical microbiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419347" start="78329" end="78344" title="puerperal fever" label="puerperal fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q134808" start="78371" end="78378" title="vaccine" label="vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q39222" start="78384" end="78390" title="rabies" label="rabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q129104" start="78395" end="78402" title="anthrax" label="anthrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425837" start="78434" end="78456" title="germ theory of disease" label="germ theory of disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q58148" start="78614" end="78628" title="pasteurization" label="pasteurization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193" start="78682" end="78694" title="microbiology" label="microbiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q76774" start="78710" end="78724" title="Ferdinand Cohn" label="Ferdinand Cohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q37193" start="78729" end="78740" title="Robert Koch" label="Robert Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q391083" start="78793" end="78810" title="Pasteur Institute" label="Pasteur Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354446" start="79040" end="79053" title="Emile Duclaux" label="Emile Duclaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193" start="79063" end="79075" title="microbiology" label="microbiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063929" start="79090" end="79109" title="Charles Chamberland" label="Charles Chamberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q162297" start="79139" end="79146" title="hygiene" label="hygiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q172254" start="79173" end="79194" title="Ilya Ilyich Mechnikov" label="Ilya Ilyich Mechnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157976" start="79248" end="79271" title="Jacques-Joseph Grancher" label="Jacques-Joseph Grancher"/>
<link wikidata="Q39222" start="79273" end="79279" title="rabies" label="rabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q286440" start="79285" end="79295" title="Emile Roux" label="Emile Roux"/>
<link wikidata="Q711132" start="79748" end="79766" title="Gerard van Swieten" label="Gerard van Swieten"/>
<link wikidata="Q180080" start="79969" end="79992" title="Vienna General Hospital" label="Vienna General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q78714" start="80615" end="80643" title="Carl Freiherr von Rokitansky" label="Carl Freiherr von Rokitansky"/>
<link wikidata="Q79165" start="80645" end="80656" title="Josef Škoda" label="Josef Škoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q93991" start="80658" end="80684" title="Ferdinand Ritter von Hebra" label="Ferdinand Ritter von Hebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q59736" start="80690" end="80714" title="Ignaz Philipp Semmelweis" label="Ignaz Philipp Semmelweis"/>
<link wikidata="Q171171" start="80799" end="80810" title="dermatology" label="dermatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q189553" start="80828" end="80849" title="ear, nose, and throat" label="ear, nose, and throat"/>
<link wikidata="Q161437" start="80954" end="80969" title="ophthalmologist" label="ophthalmologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q85099" start="80970" end="80987" title="Georg Joseph Beer" label="Georg Joseph Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q162684" start="81240" end="81247" title="Charité" label="Charité"/>
<link wikidata="Q76425" start="81380" end="81396" title="Emil von Behring" label="Emil von Behring"/>
<link wikidata="Q37193" start="81398" end="81409" title="Robert Koch" label="Robert Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q57089" start="81414" end="81426" title="Paul Ehrlich" label="Paul Ehrlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q614156" start="81527" end="81545" title="Bacillus anthracis" label="Bacillus anthracis"/>
<link wikidata="Q130971" start="81570" end="81591" title="Mycobacterium tuberculosis" label="Tuberculosis bacillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q160821" start="81615" end="81630" title="Vibrio cholerae" label="Vibrio cholerae"/>
<link wikidata="Q19047" start="81671" end="81693" title="Koch&amp;#x27;s postulates" label="Koch&amp;#x27;s postulates"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="81714" end="81751" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193" start="81822" end="81834" title="microbiology" label="microbiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="81839" end="81854" title="modern medicine" label="modern medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12187" start="81924" end="81934" title="antibiotic" label="antibiotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q410762" start="81936" end="81948" title="arsphenamine" label="arsphenamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q57192" start="81953" end="81967" title="Gerhard Domagk" label="Gerhard Domagk"/>
<link wikidata="Q418758" start="82026" end="82035" title="Prontosil" label="Prontosil"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="82115" end="82133" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="82344" end="82355" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q124072" start="82605" end="82627" title="rifles" label="Springfield Model 1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q921857" start="82781" end="82794" title="John Sedgwick" label="John Sedgwick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="82814" end="82835" title="George Pickett#Gettysburg and Pickett&amp;#x27;s Charge" label="Pickett&amp;#x27;s Charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q233343" start="82986" end="83011" title="Second Battle of Bull Run" label="Second Battle of Bull Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270448" start="83113" end="83122" title="debridement" label="debriding"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="83165" end="83188" title="Maggot therapy#History" label="surgical use of maggots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321035" start="84291" end="84324" title="United States Sanitary Commission" label="United States Sanitary Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889612" start="84446" end="84480" title="United States Christian Commission" label="United States Christian Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472068" start="84631" end="84653" title="Johns Hopkins Hospital" label="Johns Hopkins Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q256698" start="84727" end="84736" title="Residency (medicine)" label="residency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595262" start="84741" end="84747" title="Grand rounds" label="rounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q188010" start="84816" end="84838" title="ABO blood group system" label="ABO blood group system"/>
<link wikidata="Q84405" start="84865" end="84881" title="Karl Landsteiner" label="Karl Landsteiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q165980" start="84889" end="84909" title="University of Vienna" label="University of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q84405" start="84911" end="84922" title="Karl Landsteiner" label="Landsteiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q188010" start="85239" end="85241" title="ABO blood group system" label="AB"/>
<link wikidata="Q84405" start="85324" end="85335" title="Karl Landsteiner" label="Landsteiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q706543" start="85340" end="85359" title="Alexander S. Wiener" label="Alexander S. Wiener"/>
<link wikidata="Q156606" start="85474" end="85488" title="Rhesus macaque" label="rhesus monkeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q162112" start="85796" end="85810" title="Norman Bethune" label="Norman Bethune"/>
<link wikidata="Q183605" start="85836" end="85853" title="Blood transfusion" label="blood-transfusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="85894" end="85911" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="85960" end="85966" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794623" start="85998" end="86010" title="Arne Larsson (patient)" label="Arne Larsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q372713" start="86062" end="86090" title="artificial cardiac pacemaker" label="artificial cardiac pacemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575340" start="86197" end="86213" title="Cancer treatment" label="Cancer treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="86238" end="86250" title="radiotherapy" label="radiotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="86252" end="86264" title="chemotherapy" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545481" start="86269" end="86286" title="surgical oncology" label="surgical oncology"/>
<link wikidata="Q245341" start="86307" end="86320" title="Medical radiography" label="X-ray imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q931309" start="86343" end="86358" title="medical imaging" label="medical imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q234904" start="86370" end="86388" title="ultrasonic imaging" label="ultrasonic imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="86390" end="86401" title="CT scanning" label="CT scanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="86403" end="86414" title="MR scanning" label="MR scanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q181802" start="86482" end="86492" title="Prosthetic" label="Prosthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431093" start="86546" end="86563" title="neural prosthetic" label="neural prosthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381652" start="86624" end="86648" title="Oral rehydration therapy" label="Oral rehydration therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="86700" end="86707" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931388" start="86817" end="86832" title="cause of death" label="causes of death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="86864" end="86869" title="tumor" label="tumor"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="86875" end="86897" title="cardiovascular disease" label="cardiovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q163648" start="87058" end="87061" title="DDT" label="DDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q107994" start="87096" end="87109" title="insect vector" label="insect vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="87120" end="87127" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="87628" end="87653" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="88044" end="88067" title="Spanish flu" label="1918 influenza pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="88349" end="88360" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="88385" end="88398" title="Public health" label="Public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q178275" start="88449" end="88466" title="1918 flu pandemic" label="1918 flu pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573369" start="88539" end="88575" title="Spanish flu research" label="important case study in epidemiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q691640" start="89031" end="89054" title="Evidence-based medicine" label="Evidence-based medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q465467" start="89166" end="89183" title="sexual revolution" label="sexual revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q154136" start="89220" end="89235" title="human sexuality" label="human sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q870953" start="89262" end="89276" title="Kinsey reports" label="Kinsey reports"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292449" start="89291" end="89313" title="hormonal contraception" label="hormonal contraception"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280670" start="89386" end="89401" title="Family planning" label="Family planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q381763" start="89417" end="89439" title="demographic transition" label="demographic transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="89479" end="89510" title="sexually transmitted infections" label="sexually transmitted infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="89534" end="89555" title="barrier contraception" label="barrier contraception"/>
<link wikidata="Q583050" start="89617" end="89631" title="antiretroviral" label="antiretroviral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7212330" start="89661" end="89676" title="Tobacco smoking" label="Tobacco smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q235007" start="89817" end="89832" title="Cardiac surgery" label="Cardiac surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q192282" start="89936" end="89949" title="Joseph Murray" label="Joseph Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570442" start="89951" end="89971" title="J. Hartwell Harrison" label="J. Hartwell Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q740909" start="90006" end="90028" title="kidney transplantation" label="kidney transplantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q105196" start="90030" end="90046" title="organ transplant" label="Transplantations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519214" start="90169" end="90184" title="face transplant" label="face transplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484779" start="90272" end="90287" title="microtechnology" label="microtechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q977628" start="90343" end="90355" title="microsurgery" label="microsurgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="90378" end="90389" title="fiber optics" label="fiber-optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q675754" start="90473" end="90493" title="Laparoscopic surgery" label="Laparoscopic surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486937" start="90685" end="90690" title="medic" label="medic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402739" start="90696" end="90711" title="mobile hospital" label="mobile hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="90856" end="90874" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Mexican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q192278" start="90896" end="90908" title="Pancho Villa" label="Pancho Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q181802" start="91321" end="91336" title="prosthetic limb" label="prosthetic limb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4131496" start="91384" end="91406" title="reconstructive surgery" label="reconstructive surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q182442" start="91449" end="91465" title="cosmetic surgery" label="cosmetic surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354947" start="91485" end="91501" title="elective surgery" label="elective surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q470110" start="91565" end="91583" title="American Red Cross" label="American Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="92899" end="92915" title="second World War" label="second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q185777" start="92917" end="92930" title="Alexis Carrel" label="Alexis Carrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q904682" start="92935" end="92946" title="Henry Drysdale Dakin" label="Henry Dakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242281" start="92961" end="92980" title="Carrel-Dakin method" label="Carrel-Dakin method"/>
<link wikidata="Q274493" start="93045" end="93054" title="germicide" label="germicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q168805" start="93076" end="93084" title="gangrene" label="gangrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q35149" start="93116" end="93124" title="Wilhelm Röntgen" label="Roentgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="93132" end="93137" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q79785" start="93147" end="93165" title="electrocardiograph" label="electrocardiograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421432" start="93175" end="93185" title="monitoring (medicine)" label="monitoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q411398" start="93324" end="93330" title="sulpha" label="sulpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331083" start="93400" end="93422" title="human subject research" label="human subject research"/>
<link wikidata="Q31896" start="93500" end="93526" title="Nazi human experimentation" label="Nazi human experimentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q154494" start="93531" end="93540" title="Aktion T4" label="Aktion T4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="93548" end="93561" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q160721" start="93666" end="93685" title="Doctors&amp;#x27; Trial" label="Doctors&amp;#x27; Trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q237151" start="93715" end="93729" title="medical ethics" label="medical ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q697474" start="93743" end="93757" title="Nuremberg Code" label="Nuremberg Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q378835" start="93905" end="93913" title="Unit 731" label="Unit 731"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="94116" end="94141" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725393" start="94200" end="94213" title="global health" label="global health"/>
<link wikidata="Q188419" start="94237" end="94252" title="life expectancy" label="life expectancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347969" start="94346" end="94380" title="Eradication of infectious diseases" label="Eradication of infectious diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q134808" start="94425" end="94432" title="vaccine" label="vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="94508" end="94515" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q176741" start="94517" end="94522" title="mumps" label="mumps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="94543" end="94552" title="influenza" label="influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q184627" start="94557" end="94578" title="human papilloma virus" label="human papilloma virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="94611" end="94619" title="Smallpox" label="Smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q157008" start="94669" end="94679" title="Rinderpest" label="Rinderpest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209788" start="94703" end="94723" title="Eradication of polio" label="Eradication of polio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287622" start="94737" end="94751" title="Tissue culture" label="Tissue culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q846227" start="94867" end="94882" title="antiviral drugs" label="antiviral drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q103177" start="95039" end="95043" title="SARS" label="SARS"/>
<link wikidata="Q160122" start="95066" end="95096" title="Influenza A virus subtype H5N1" label="Influenza A virus subtype H5N1"/>
<link wikidata="Q15989108" start="95112" end="95147" title="Ebola virus epidemic in West Africa" label="Ebola virus epidemic in West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12190" start="95269" end="95279" title="penicillin" label="penicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37064" start="95303" end="95320" title="Alexander Fleming" label="Alexander Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575340" start="95613" end="95630" title="Treatment of cancer" label="cancer treatments"/>
<link wikidata="Q105196" start="95632" end="95649" title="Organ transplantation" label="organ transplants"/>
<link wikidata="Q235007" start="95654" end="95672" title="Cardiac surgery" label="open heart surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q912362" start="95809" end="95833" title="intensive animal farming" label="intensive animal farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q44048847" start="95865" end="95894" title="List of antibiotic-resistant bacteria" label="antibiotic resistant bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184" start="96154" end="96162" title="pandemic" label="pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q103177" start="96207" end="96211" title="SARS" label="SARS"/>
<link wikidata="Q834456" start="96225" end="96233" title="2002–2004 SARS outbreak" label="outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q103177" start="96510" end="96514" title="SARS" label="SARS"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="96543" end="96551" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="96605" end="96621" title="Influenza" label="influenza strain"/>
<link wikidata="Q161393" start="96623" end="96627" title="Influenza A virus subtype H1N1" label="H1N1"/>
<link wikidata="Q101452" start="96646" end="96676" title="2009 swine flu pandemic" label="pandemic between 2009 and 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077789" start="96816" end="96828" title="Epidemiology of HIV/AIDS" label="HIV pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q123585871" start="96945" end="96969" title="pre-exposure prophylaxis" label="pre-exposure prophylaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361206" start="96981" end="97006" title="post-exposure prophylaxis" label="post-exposure prophylaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q318529" start="97147" end="97155" title="safe sex" label="safe sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501817" start="97165" end="97188" title="Sexual and reproductive health" label="sexual health education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760326" start="97190" end="97205" title="Needle and syringe programmes" label="needle exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479804" start="97266" end="97277" title="HIV vaccine development" label="HIV vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512929" start="97296" end="97313" title="Health equity" label="health inequities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052281" start="97356" end="97367" title="Trans woman" label="trans women"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="97411" end="97429" title="sub-Saharan Africa" label="sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="97494" end="97513" title="Developed country" label="developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="97532" end="97540" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="97594" end="97611" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="97619" end="97622" title="World Health Organization" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q28877" start="97876" end="97881" title="goods" label="goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="97954" end="97966" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072214" start="98051" end="98072" title="Personalized medicine" label="personalised medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q380546" start="98297" end="98311" title="DNA sequencing" label="DNA sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q843863" start="98313" end="98328" title="Genetic linkage" label="genetic mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q213901" start="98330" end="98342" title="gene therapy" label="gene therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q471857" start="98363" end="98373" title="proteomics" label="proteomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533033" start="98375" end="98392" title="Stem-cell therapy" label="stem cell therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424305" start="98557" end="98571" title="Remote surgery" label="Remote surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354751" start="98626" end="98645" title="Lindbergh operation" label="Lindbergh operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q109667898" start="99000" end="99035" title="medical racism in the United States" label="medical racism in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000306" start="99037" end="99052" title="race and health" label="race and health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772910" start="99058" end="99075" title="scientific racism" label="scientific racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358017" start="99542" end="99574" title="Health care in the United States" label="Health care in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2155629" start="99577" end="99605" title="History of dental treatments" label="History of dental treatments"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156636" start="99608" end="99628" title="History of herbalism" label="History of herbalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136991" start="99631" end="99651" title="History of hospitals" label="History of hospitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q34080351" start="99654" end="99683" title="History of medicine in Canada" label="History of medicine in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163004" start="99686" end="99726" title="History of medicine in the United States" label="History of medicine in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516850" start="99729" end="99747" title="History of nursing" label="History of nursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868351" start="99750" end="99770" title="History of pathology" label="History of pathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q391148" start="99773" end="99792" title="History of pharmacy" label="History of pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556088" start="99795" end="99813" title="History of surgery" label="History of surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16255528" start="99816" end="99843" title="Timeline of nursing history" label="Timeline of nursing history"/>
<link wikidata="Q284464" start="99846" end="99889" title="Timeline of medicine and medical technology" label="Timeline of medicine and medical technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5867949" start="99892" end="99931" title="History of health care (disambiguation)" label="History of health care (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14196" wikidata="Q74269" url="?curid=14196" title="Hamoaze">
<text>The Hamoaze (; ) is an estuarine stretch of the English tidal River Tamar, between its confluence with the River Lynher and Plymouth Sound.

==Etymology==
The name first appears as &quot;ryver of Hamose&quot; in 1588. The first element is thought to refer to specifically to Ham in the parish of Weston Peverel, now a suburb of Plymouth (whose name in turn came from the Old English word , meaning &quot;water-meadow, land in the bend of a river&quot;). The second element is thought to derive from Old English meaning &quot;mud&quot; (as in &quot;ooze&quot;). Thus the name once meant &quot;mud-banks at Ham&quot;. The name originally probably applied only to a creek running past Ham, which perhaps consisted of mud-banks at low tide, north of the present-day Devonport Dockyard. The name later came to be used for the main channel of the estuary into which the creek drained.

==Geography==
The Hamoaze flows past Devonport Dockyard, which is one of three major bases of the Royal Navy today. The presence of large numbers of small watercraft is a challenge and hazard to the warships using the naval base and dockyard. Navigation on the waterway is controlled by the King&#x27;s Harbour Master for Plymouth.

Settlements on the banks of the Hamoaze are Saltash, Wilcove, Torpoint and Cremyll in Cornwall, as well as Devonport and Plymouth in Devon.

Two regular ferry services crossing the Hamoaze exist: the Torpoint Ferry (a chain ferry that takes vehicles) and the Cremyll Ferry (passengers and cyclists only).

A street in Torpoint bears the name Hamoaze Road, named after the stretch of river.

==See also==

*Tamar-Tavy Estuary

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q74269" start="4" end="11" title="Hamoaze" label="Hamoaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="23" end="32" title="estuary" label="estuarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q578127" start="62" end="73" title="River Tamar" label="River Tamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337612" start="107" end="119" title="River Lynher" label="River Lynher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333061" start="124" end="138" title="Plymouth Sound" label="Plymouth Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643817" start="275" end="278" title="Ham, Plymouth" label="Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7179524" start="296" end="310" title="Weston Peverel" label="Weston Peverel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="371" end="382" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207020" start="762" end="780" title="HMNB Devonport" label="Devonport Dockyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="978" end="988" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229765" start="1035" end="1045" title="watercraft" label="watercraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031121" start="1079" end="1086" title="warship" label="warship"/>
<link wikidata="Q17047789" start="1171" end="1197" title="King&amp;#x27;s Harbour Master" label="King&amp;#x27;s Harbour Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994597" start="1257" end="1264" title="Saltash" label="Saltash"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000303" start="1266" end="1273" title="Wilcove" label="Wilcove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041269" start="1275" end="1283" title="Torpoint" label="Torpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184123" start="1288" end="1295" title="Cremyll" label="Cremyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="1299" end="1307" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245018" start="1320" end="1329" title="Devonport, Devon" label="Devonport"/>
<link wikidata="Q43382" start="1334" end="1342" title="Plymouth" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="1346" end="1351" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826765" start="1413" end="1427" title="Torpoint Ferry" label="Torpoint Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287097" start="1431" end="1442" title="chain ferry" label="chain ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184122" start="1472" end="1485" title="Cremyll Ferry" label="Cremyll Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680927" start="1619" end="1637" title="Tamar-Tavy Estuary" label="Tamar-Tavy Estuary"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14197" wikidata="Q1715" url="?curid=14197" title="Hanover">
<text>Hanover ( ; ; ) is the capital and largest city of the German state of Lower Saxony. Its population of 535,932 (2021) makes it the 13th-largest city in Germany as well as the fourth-largest in northern Germany after Berlin, Hamburg and Bremen. Hanover&#x27;s urban area comprises the towns of Garbsen, Langenhagen and Laatzen and has a population of about 791,000 (2018). The Hanover Region has approximately 1.16 million inhabitants (2019) and is the largest in the Hanover–Braunschweig–Göttingen–Wolfsburg Metropolitan Region, the 17th biggest metropolitan area by GDP in the European Union.

Before it became the capital of Lower Saxony in 1946, Hanover was the capital of the Principality of Calenberg (1636–1692), the Electorate of Hanover (1692–1814), the Kingdom of Hanover (1814–1866), the Province of Hanover of the Kingdom of Prussia (1868–1918), the Province of Hanover of the Free State of Prussia (1918–1947) and of the State of Hanover (1946). From 1714 to 1837 Hanover was by personal union the family seat of the Hanoverian Kings of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, under their title of the dukes of Brunswick-Lüneburg (later described as the Elector of Hanover).

The city lies at the confluence of the River Leine and its tributary the Ihme, in the south of the North German Plain. The city is a major crossing point of railway lines and motorways (Autobahnen), connecting European main lines in both the east–west (Berlin–Ruhr area/Düsseldorf/Cologne) and north–south (Hamburg–Frankfurt/Stuttgart/Munich) directions. Hanover Airport lies north of the city, in Langenhagen, and is Germany&#x27;s ninth-busiest airport. The city&#x27;s most notable institutes of higher education are the Hanover Medical School (), one of Germany&#x27;s leading medical schools, with its university hospital , and the Leibniz University Hanover. The city is also home to International Neuroscience Institute.

The Hanover Fairground, owing to numerous extensions, especially for the Expo 2000, is the largest in the world. Hanover hosts annual commercial trade fairs such as the Hanover Fair and up to 2018 the CeBIT. It also hosts the biannual IAA Commercial Vehicles show, the world&#x27;s leading trade show for transport, logistics and mobility. Every year Hanover hosts the Schützenfest Hanover, the world&#x27;s largest marksmen&#x27;s festival, and the Oktoberfest Hanover.

== Etymology ==
The name of the city may derive from the German , literally &#x27;on the high (river) bank&#x27;.

Traditionally, the English spelling is . However, , the German spelling with a double-, has become more popular in English. Recent editions of Encyclopædia Britannica prefer the German spelling, and the local government uses the German spelling on their English webpages. The English pronunciation, with stress on the first syllable, is applied to both the German and English spellings, which is different from German pronunciation, with stress on the second syllable and a long second vowel. The traditional English spelling is still used in historical contexts, especially when referring to the British House of Hanover.

==History==

=== Early history ===
Hanover was founded in medieval times on the east bank of the Leine River. Its original name &quot;Honovere&quot; may mean &#x27;high river bank&#x27;, but that is debated. Hanover was a small village of ferrymen and fishermen that became a comparatively large town in the 13th century and received town privileges in 1241 because of its position at a natural crossroads. As overland travel was relatively difficult, its position on the upper navigable reaches of the river helped it grow from increasing trade. It was connected to the Hanseatic League city of Bremen by the Leine River and was situated near the southern edge of the wide North German Plain and northwest of the Harz mountains, so east–west traffic such as mule trains passed through it. Hanover was thus a gateway to the Rhine, Ruhr and Saar river valleys, and their industrial areas which grew up to the southwest and the plains regions to the east and north for overland traffic skirting the Harz between the Low Countries and Saxony or Thuringia.

In the 14th century, the main churches of Hanover were built, as well as a city wall with three city gates. The beginning of industrialization in Germany led to trade in iron and silver from the northern Harz Mountains, which increased the city&#x27;s importance.

In 1636 George, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg, ruler of the Brunswick-Lüneburg principality of Calenberg, moved his residence to Hanover. The Dukes of Brunswick-Lüneburg were elevated by the Holy Roman Emperor to the rank of Prince-Elector in 1692, which was confirmed by the Imperial Diet in 1708. Thus, the principality was upgraded to the Electorate of Brunswick-Lüneburg, colloquially known as the Electorate of Hanover after Calenberg&#x27;s capital (see also House of Hanover). Its electors later became monarchs of Great Britain (and from 1801 of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland). The first of them was George I Louis, who acceded to the British throne in 1714. The last British monarch who reigned in Hanover was William IV. Semi-Salic law, which required succession by the male line if possible, forbade the accession of Queen Victoria in Hanover. As a male-line descendant of George I, Queen Victoria was herself a member of the House of Hanover. Her descendants, however, bore her husband&#x27;s titular name of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha. Three kings of Great Britain, or the United Kingdom, were concurrently also Electoral Princes of Hanover.

During the time of the personal union of the crowns of the United Kingdom and Hanover (1714–1837), the monarchs rarely visited the city. In fact during the reigns of the last three joint rulers (1760–1837), there was only one short visit, by George IV in 1821. From 1816 to 1837, Viceroy Adolphus represented the monarch in Hanover.

During the Seven Years&#x27; War, the Battle of Hastenbeck was fought near the city on 26 July 1757. The French army defeated the Hanoverian Army of Observation, which led to the city&#x27;s occupation as part of the Invasion of Hanover. It was recaptured by Anglo-German forces, led by Ferdinand of Brunswick, the following year.

===19th century===
After Napoleon imposed the Convention of Artlenburg (treaty of the Elbe) on 5 July 1803, about 35,000 French soldiers occupied Hanover. The convention also required disbanding the Hanoverian Army. However, George III did not recognise the Convention of the Elbe, which resulted in a great number of soldiers from Hanover eventually emigrating to Great Britain, where the King&#x27;s German Legion was formed. It was only troops from Hanover and Brunswick who consistently opposed France throughout the Napoleonic Wars. The Legion later played an important role in the Peninsular War and the Battle of Waterloo in 1815. In 1814 the electorate became the Kingdom of Hanover.

In 1837, the personal union of the United Kingdom and Hanover ended because William IV&#x27;s heir in the United Kingdom was female (Queen Victoria). Hanover could be inherited only by male heirs. Thus, Hanover passed to William IV&#x27;s brother, Ernest Augustus, and remained a kingdom until 1866, when it was annexed by the Prussia during the Austro-Prussian war. Though Hanover was expected to defeat Prussia at the Battle of Langensalza in 1866, Prussia employed Moltke the Elder&#x27;s Kesselschlacht order of battle to and destroyed the Hanoverian Army. Thereafter the city of Hanover became the capital of the Prussian Province of Hanover.

In 1872, the first horse railway was inaugurated, and in 1893, an electric tram was installed.

A local newspaper, the &quot;Hanoverscher Kurier&quot;, was published in Hanover at this time.

===Nazi era===

After 1937 the lord mayor and the state commissioners of Hanover were members of the NSDAP (Nazi party). A large Jewish population then existed in Hanover. In October 1938, 484 Hanoverian Jews of Polish origin were expelled to Poland, including the Grynszpan family. However, Poland refused to accept them, leaving them stranded at the border with thousands of other Polish-Jewish deportees, fed only intermittently by the Polish Red Cross and Jewish welfare organisations. The Grynszpans&#x27; son Herschel Grynszpan was in Paris at the time. When he learned of what was happening, he drove to the German embassy in Paris and shot the German diplomat Eduard Ernst vom Rath, who died shortly afterwards.

The Nazis took this act as a pretext to stage a nationwide pogrom known as Kristallnacht (9 November 1938). On that day, the synagogue of Hanover, designed in 1870 by Edwin Oppler in neo-romantic style, was burnt by the Nazis.

====World War II====
In September 1941, through the &quot;Action Lauterbacher&quot; plan, a ghettoisation of the remaining Hanoverian Jewish families began. Even before the Wannsee Conference, on 15 December 1941, the first Jews from Hanover were deported to Riga. A total of 2,400 people were deported, and very few survived. During the war seven concentration camps were constructed in Hanover, in which many Jews were confined, but also Polish, French and Russian women. Of the approximately 4,800 Jews who had lived in Hanover in 1938, fewer than 100 were still in the city when troops of the United States Army arrived on 10 April 1945 to occupy Hanover at the end of the war. Today, a memorial at the Opera Square is a reminder of the persecution of the Jews in Hanover. 
After the war a large group of Orthodox Jewish survivors of the nearby Bergen-Belsen concentration camp settled in Hanover.

There was also a camp for Sinti and Romani people (see &quot;Romani Holocaust&quot;), and dozens of forced labour subcamps of the Stalag XI-B prisoner-of-war camp for Allied POWs.

As an important railway and road junction and production centre, Hanover was a major target for strategic bombing during World War II, including the Oil Campaign. Targets included the AFA (Stöcken), the Deurag-Nerag refinery (Misburg), the Continental plants (Vahrenwald and Limmer), the United light metal works (VLW) in Ricklingen and Laatzen (today Hanover fairground), the Hanover/Limmer rubber reclamation plant, the Hanomag factory (Linden) and the tank factory &quot;M.N.H. Maschinenfabrik Niedersachsen&quot; (Badenstedt). Residential areas were also targeted, and more than 6,000 civilians were killed by the Allied bombing raids. More than 90% of the city centre was destroyed in a total of 88 bombing raids. After the war, the Aegidienkirche was not rebuilt and its ruins were left as a war memorial. Today around 25% of the city consists of buildings from before 1950.

The Allied ground advance into Germany reached Hanover in April 1945. The US 84th Infantry Division captured the city on 10 April 1945.

===Post-war===
Hanover was in the British zone of occupation of Germany and became part of the new state (Land) of Lower Saxony in 1946. In 1947, Hanover established its relationship with Bristol, England in exchanges of goods, students and music. This would link the two cities as models for establishing programs and organizations like Sister Cities International. 

Today Hanover is a vice-president city of Mayors for Peace, an international mayoral organisation mobilising cities and citizens worldwide to abolish and eliminate nuclear weapons by 2020.

==Geography==

===Climate===
Hanover has an oceanic climate (Köppen: &quot;Cfb&quot;) independent of the isotherm. Although the city is not on a coastal location, the predominant air masses are still from the ocean, unlike other places further east or south-central Germany.

The Hanover weather station has recorded the following extreme values:
* Its highest temperature was on 20 July 2022.
* Its lowest temperature was on 22 January 1940.
* Its greatest annual precipitation was in 1981.
* Its least annual precipitation was in 1959.
* The longest annual sunshine was 1,971.6 hours in 1959.
* The shortest annual sunshine was 1,274.3 hours in 1998.

===Subdivisions===
The city of Hanover is divided into 13 boroughs (&quot;Stadtbezirke&quot;) and 53 quarters (&quot;Stadtteile&quot;).

====Boroughs====
# Mitte
# Vahrenwald-List
# Bothfeld-Vahrenheide
# Buchholz-Kleefeld
# Misburg-Anderten
# Kirchrode-Bemerode-Wülferode
# Südstadt-Bult
# Döhren-Wülfel
# Ricklingen
# Linden-Limmer
# Ahlem-Badenstedt-Davenstedt
# Herrenhausen-Stöcken
# Nord

====Quarters====
A selection of the 53 quarters:
* Nordstadt
* Südstadt
* Oststadt
* Zoo (for the zoo itself, see Hanover Zoo)
* Herrenhausen
* Waldheim
==Politics==
===Mayor===

The current mayor of Hanover is Belit Onay of Alliance 90/The Greens, elected in 2019. The most recent mayoral election was held on 17 October 2019, with a runoff held on 10 November, and the results were as follows:
! rowspan=2 colspan=2| Candidate
! rowspan=2| Party
! colspan=2| First round
! colspan=2| Second round
! Votes
! Votes
|-
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Belit Onay
| align=left| Alliance 90/The Greens
| 60,096
| 32.2
| 92,146
| 52.9
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Eckhard Scholz
| align=left| Independent (CDU)
| 60,046
| 32.2
| 82,116
| 47.1
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Marc Hansmann
| align=left| Social Democratic Party
| 43,727
| 23.5
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Joachim Wundrak
| align=left| Alternative for Germany
| 8,645
| 4.6
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Jessica Kaußen
| align=left| The Left
| 3,628
| 1.9
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Iyabo Kaczmarek
| align=left| Independent
| 3,593
| 1.9
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Catharina Gutwerk
| align=left| Die PARTEI
| 2,886
| 1.5
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Bruno Adam Wolf
| align=left| Pirate Party
| 2,382
| 1.3
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Ruth Esther Gilmore
| align=left| Independent
| 841
| 0.5
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Julian Klippert
| align=left| Independent
| 536
| 0.3
! colspan=3| Valid votes
! 186,380
! 99.7
! 174,262
! 99.6
! colspan=3| Invalid votes
! 647
! 0.3
! 769
! 0.4
! colspan=3| Total
! 187,027
! 100.0
! 175,031
! 100.0
! colspan=3| Electorate/voter turnout
! 401,847
! 46.5
! 402,129
! 43.5
| colspan=7| Source: City of Hanover (1st round , 2nd round )

===City council===

The Hanover city council governs the city alongside the mayor. The most recent city council election was held on 12 September 2021, and the results were as follows:
! colspan=2| Party
! Votes
! +/-
! Seats
|-
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Alliance 90/The Greens (Grüne)
| 165,105
| 27.8
| 11.5
| 18
| 8
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Social Democratic Party (SPD)
| 164,431
| 27.7
| 3.7
| 18
| 2
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Christian Democratic Union (CDU)
| 123,181
| 20.7
| 3.7
| 13
| 3
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Free Democratic Party (FDP)
| 35,917
| 6.0
| 0.9
| 4
| 1
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| The Left (Die Linke)
| 33,019
| 5.6
| 1.4
| 4
| 1
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Alternative for Germany (AfD)
| 25,302
| 4.3
| 4.3
| 3
| 3
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Die PARTEI (PARTEI)
| 13,853
| 2.3
| 0.6
| 1
| ±0
| 
| align=left| The Hanoverians (HAN)
| 7,044
| 1.2
| 1.6
| 1
| 1
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Pirate Party (Piraten)
| 7,089
| 1.2
| 0.9
| 1
| ±0
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Volt Germany (Volt)
| 10,135
| 1.7
| New
| 1
| New
| colspan=7 bgcolor=lightgrey| 
| 
| align=left| Climate Alliance Hanover
| 4,022
| 0.7
| New
| 0
| New
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Free Voters (FW)
| 3,126
| 0.5
| New
| 0
| New
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Grassroots Democratic Party (dieBasis)
| 1,981
| 0.3
| New
| 0
| New
| 
| align=left| Active for a Social Hanover (ASH)
| 260
| 0.0
| New
| 0
| New
! colspan=2| Total
! 594,465
! 100.0
! 
|-
! colspan=2| Valid votes
! 201,998
! 98.8
! 
|-
! colspan=2| Invalid votes
! 2,373
! 1.2
! 
|-
! colspan=2| Total
! 204,371
! 100.0
! 64
! ±0
! colspan=2| Electorate/voter turnout
! 398,328
! 51.3
! 0.2
! 
| colspan=7| Source: City of Hanover 

==Main sights==


There are around 5,500 buildings of major historic value within city limits. One of Hanover&#x27;s most grandiose sights is the Royal Gardens of Herrenhausen. Its Great Garden is an important European Baroque garden. The palace itself was largely destroyed by Allied bombing, but was reconstructed and reopened in 2013. Among its points of interest is the Grotto, with the interior designed by French artist Niki de Saint Phalle. The Great Garden consists of several parts and features Europe&#x27;s tallest garden fountain. The historic &quot;Garden Theatre&quot; has hosted the musicals of the German rock musician Heinz Rudolf Kunze.

Also at Herrenhausen, the &quot;Berggarten&quot; is a botanical garden with the most varied collection of orchids in Europe. Some points of interest are the &quot;Tropical House&quot;, the &quot;Cactus House&quot;, the &quot;Canary House&quot; and the &quot;Orchid House&quot;, and free-flying birds and butterflies. Near the entrance to the Berggarten is the historic &quot;Library Pavillon&quot;. The &quot;Mausoleum&quot; of the Guelphs is also in the Berggarten. Like the Great Garden, the Berggarten also consists of several parts, for example the &quot;Paradies&quot; and the &quot;Prairie Garden&quot;. The &quot;Georgengarten&quot; is an English landscape garden. The &quot;Leibniz Temple&quot; and the &quot;Georgen Palace&quot; are two points of interest there.The landmark of Hanover is the New Town Hall (). Inside the building are four scale models of the city. An elevator ascends to the observation deck at the top of the large dome along a variable angle of up to 17 degrees, thought to be unique in the world.

The &quot;Hanover Zoo&quot; received the Park Scout Award for the fourth year running in 2009–10, placing it among the best zoos in Germany. The zoo consists of several theme areas: Sambesi, Meyers Farm, Gorilla-Mountain, Jungle-Palace, and Mullewapp. Some smaller areas are Australia, the wooded area for wolves, and the so-called swimming area with many seabirds. There is also a tropical house, a jungle house, and a show arena. The new Canadian-themed area, Yukon Bay, opened in 2010. In 2010 the Hanover Zoo had over 1.6 million visitors. There is also the &quot;Sea Life Centre Hanover&quot;, which is the first tropical aquarium in Germany.

Another point of interest is the &quot;Old Town&quot;. In the centre are the large &quot;Marktkirche&quot; (Church , preaching venue of the bishop of the Lutheran Landeskirche Hanovers), and the 15th century &quot;Old Town Hall&quot;, heavily damaged by Allied bombing in 1943, and reconstructed after World War II. Nearby are the &quot;Leibniz House&quot;, the &quot;Nolte House&quot;, and the &quot;Beguine Tower&quot;. The &quot;Kreuz-Church-Quarter&quot; around the &quot;Kreuz Church&quot; contains many little lanes. Nearby is the old royal sports hall, now called the &quot;Ballhof&quot; theatre. On the edge of the Old Town are the &quot;Market Hall&quot;, the &quot;Leine Palace&quot;, and the ruin of the &quot;Aegidien Church&quot; which is now a monument to the victims of war and violence. Through the &quot;Marstall Gate&quot; the bank of the river &quot;Leine&quot; can be reached; the &quot;Nanas&quot; of Niki de Saint Phalle are there. They are part of the &quot;Sculpture Mile&quot;, which starts at &quot;Trammplatz&quot;, runs along the river bank, crosses &quot;Königsworther Square&quot;, and ends at the entrance of the &quot;Georgengarten&quot;. Near the Old Town is the district of Calenberger Neustadt where the Catholic St. Clement&#x27;s Basilica, the &quot;Reformed Church&quot; and the Lutheran Neustädter Hof- und Stadtkirche St. Johannis stand.

Some other popular sights are the &quot;Waterloo Column&quot;, the &quot;Laves House&quot;, the &quot;Wangenheim Palace&quot;, the &quot;Lower Saxony State Archives&quot;, the &quot;Hanover Playhouse&quot;, the &quot;Kröpcke Clock&quot;, the &quot;Anzeiger Tower Block&quot;, the &quot;Administration Building of the NORD/LB&quot;, the &quot;Cupola Hall&quot; of the Congress Centre, the &quot;Lower Saxony Stock&quot;, the &quot;Ministry of Finance&quot;, the &quot;Garten Church&quot;, the &quot;Luther Church&quot;, the &quot;Gehry Tower&quot; (designed by the American architect Frank O. Gehry), the specially designed &quot;Bus Stops&quot;, the &quot;Opera House&quot;, the &quot;Hanover Central Station&quot;, the &quot;Maschsee&quot; lake and the city forest &quot;Eilenriede&quot;, which is one of the largest of its kind in Europe. For recreation, Hanover has 40 parks, forests and gardens, a couple of lakes, two rivers and a canal.

The historic &quot;Leibniz Letters&quot;, which can be viewed in the &quot;Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Library&quot;, have been on UNESCO&#x27;s Memory of the World Register since 2007.

Outside the city centre is the &quot;Hanover Fairground&quot;, which was the site of EXPO 2000 fair. Some points of interest are the &quot;Planet M.&quot;, the former &quot;German Pavillon&quot;, some nations&#x27; vacant pavilions, the &quot;Expowale&quot;, the &quot;EXPO-Plaza&quot; and the &quot;EXPO-Gardens&quot; (Parc Agricole, EXPO-Park South and the Gardens of change). The fairground can be reached by the &quot;Exponale&quot;, one of the largest pedestrian bridges in Europe.

The &quot;Hanover Fairground&quot; is the largest exhibition centre in the world.
It provides of covered indoor space, of open-air space, 27 halls and pavilions. Many of the Exhibition Centre&#x27;s halls are architectural highlights. Furthermore, it offers the Convention Center with its 35 function rooms, glassed-in areas between halls, grassy park-like recreation zones and its own heliport. Two important sights on the fairground are the &quot;Hermes Tower&quot; ( high) and the &quot;EXPO Roof&quot;, the largest wooden roof in the world.

In the district of Anderten is the &quot;European Cheese Centre&quot;, termed a &quot;Cheese Experience Centre.&quot; Another tourist sight in Anderten is the &quot;Hindenburg Lock&quot;, which was the biggest lock in Europe when it was constructed in 1928. The &quot;Tiergarten&quot; in the district of Kirchrode is a forest originally used for deer and other game for the king&#x27;s table.

The &quot;Telemax&quot; communications tower, the tallest building in Lower Saxony and the highest television tower in northern Germany, lies in the district of Groß-Buchholz. Some other notable towers are the &quot;VW-Tower&quot; in the city centre and the old towers of the former middle-age defence belt: &quot;Döhrener Tower&quot;, &quot;Lister Tower&quot; and the &quot;Horse Tower&quot;.

The 36 most significant sights of the city centre are connected by a walking trail called the &quot;Red Thread&quot; that is literally painted onto the pavement with red paint. It starts at the Tourist Information Office and ends on the Ernst-August-Square, both in front of the central train station. There is also a guided sightseeing bus tour through the city.

==Population==

Hanover has a population of about 540,000. It is the largest city in Lower Saxony and is the 13th largest city in Germany. The Hanover Region, a district that surrounds the city of Hanover and cities like Langenhagen, Garbsen and Laatzen has a population of about 1,160,000 and is the largest District (Landkreis) in Germany. Hanover metropolitan region, which includes also cities like Braunschweig, Hildesheim and Göttingen, has a population of about 3,850,000 and is the 8th largest metropolitan area in Germany. Hanover passed a population of 100,000 in 1875, and Hanover&#x27;s population has grown since 1946, when Hanover became the capital of Lower Saxony state and it grew rapidly in 1950s and 60s due to West German Wirtschaftswunder. This also saw the growth of a large migrant population, drawn largely from Turkey, Greece and Italy. Hanover has also one of the largest Vietnamese communities in former West Germany due to its proximity to former East Germany. The Viên Giác pagoda in Mittelfeld, southern district of Hanover is the largest Vietnamese pagoda in Germany and one of the largest in Europe. Hanover is one of the liveable cities due to its good location and good population size.

It is the fifth-largest city in the Low German dialect area after Hamburg, Dortmund, Essen and Bremen.

==Society and culture==
===Religious life===
Hanover is headquarters for several Protestant organizations, including the World Communion of Reformed Churches, the Protestant Church in Germany, the Reformed Alliance, the United Evangelical Lutheran Church of Germany, and the Independent Evangelical-Lutheran Church.

In 2015, 31.1% of the population were Protestant and 13.4% were Roman Catholic. The majority 55.5% were irreligious or other religion.

===Museums and galleries===

The Historisches Museum Hanover (Historic museum) describes the history of Hanover, from the medieval settlement &quot;Honovere&quot; to the city of today. The museum focuses on the period from 1714 to 1834 when Hanover had a strong relationship with the British royal family of that period.

With more than 4,000 members, the Kestnergesellschaft is the largest art society in Germany. The museum hosts exhibitions from classical modernist art to contemporary art. Emphasis is placed on film, video, contemporary music and architecture, room installments and presentations of contemporary paintings, sculptures and video art.

The Kestner-Museum is located in the &quot;House of 5,000 windows&quot;. The museum is named after August Kestner and exhibits 6,000 years of applied art in four areas: Ancient cultures, ancient Egypt, applied art and a valuable collection of historic coins.

The KUBUS is a forum for contemporary art. It features mostly exhibitions and projects of artists from Hanover.

The Kunstverein Hannover (Art Society Hanover) shows contemporary art and was established in 1832 as one of the first art societies in Germany. It is located in the &quot;Künstlerhaus&quot; (House of artists). There are around seven international exhibitions each year.

The Landesmuseum Hanover is the largest museum in Hanover. The art gallery shows European art from the 11th to the 20th century, the nature department shows the zoology, geology, botanic, geology and a &quot;vivarium&quot; with fish, insects, reptiles and amphibians. The primeval department shows the primeval history of Lower Saxony, and the folklore department shows cultures from all over the world.

The Sprengel Museum shows the art of the 20th century. It is one of the most notable art museums in Germany. The focus is put on the classical modernist art with the collection of &quot;Kurt Schwitters&quot;, works of German expressionism, and French cubism, the cabinet of abstracts, the graphics and the department of photography and media. Furthermore, the museum shows the works of the French artist Niki de Saint-Phalle.

The Theatre Museum shows an exhibition of the history of the theatre in Hanover from the 17th century up to now: opera, concert, drama and ballet. The museum also hosts several touring exhibitions during the year.

The Wilhelm Busch Museum is the &quot;German Museum of Caricature and Critical Graphic Arts&quot;. The collection of the works of Wilhelm Busch and the extensive collection of cartoons and critical graphics is unique in Germany. Furthermore, the museum hosts several exhibitions of national and international artists during the year.

A cabinet of coins is the Münzkabinett der TUI-AG. The &quot;Polizeigeschichtliche Sammlung Niedersachsen&quot; is the largest police museum in Germany. Textiles from all over the world can be visited in the &quot;Museum for textile art&quot;. The &quot;EXPOseeum&quot; is the museum of the world-exhibition &quot;EXPO 2000 Hanover&quot;. Carpets and objects from the orient can be visited in the &quot;Oriental Carpet Museum&quot;. The &quot;Museum for the visually impaired&quot; is a rarity in Germany, there is only one other of its kind in Berlin. The &quot;Museum of veterinary medicine&quot; is unique in Germany. The &quot;Museum for Energy History&quot; describes the 150 years old history of the application of energy. The &quot;Heimat-Museum Ahlem&quot; shows the history of the district of Ahlem. The &quot;Mahn- und Gedenkstätte Ahlem&quot; describes the history of the Jewish people in Hanover and the &quot;Stiftung Ahlers Pro Arte / Kestner Pro Arte&quot; shows modern art. Modern art is also the main topic of the &quot;Kunsthalle Faust&quot;, the &quot;Nord/LB Art Gallery&quot; and of the &quot;Foro Artistico / Eisfabrik&quot;.

Some leading art events in Hanover are the &quot;Long Night of the Museums&quot; and the &quot;Zinnober Kunstvolkslauf&quot; which features all the galleries in Hanover.

People who are interested in astronomy should visit the &quot;Observatory Geschwister Herschel&quot; on the Lindener Mountain or the small planetarium inside of the Bismarck School.

===Theatre, cabaret and musical===
Around 40 theatres are located in Hanover. The &quot;Opera House&quot;, the &quot;Schauspielhaus&quot; (Play House), the &quot;Ballhof eins&quot;, the &quot;Ballhof zwei&quot; and the &quot;Cumberlandsche Galerie&quot; belong to the &quot;Lower Saxony State Theatre&quot;. The Theater am Aegi is Hanover&#x27;s principal theatre for musicals, shows and guest performances. The &quot;Neues Theater&quot; (New Theatre) is the boulevard theatre of Hanover. The &quot;Theater für Niedersachsen&quot; is another large theatre in Hanover, which also has an own musical company. Some of the most important musical productions are the rock musicals of the German rock musician Heinz Rudolph Kunze, which take place at the &quot;Garden-Theatre&quot; in the Great Garden.

Some important theatre events are the &quot;Tanztheater International&quot;, the &quot;Long Night of the Theatres&quot;, the &quot;Festival Theaterformen&quot; and the &quot;International Competition for Choreographers&quot;.

Hanover&#x27;s leading cabaret stage is the &quot;GOP Variety theatre&quot; which is located in the &quot;Georgs Palace&quot;. Some other cabaret-stages are the &quot;Variety Marlene&quot;, the &quot;Uhu-Theatre&quot;. the theatre &quot;Die Hinterbühne&quot;, the &quot;Rampenlich Variety&quot; and the revue-stage &quot;TAK&quot;. The most important cabaret event is the &quot;Kleines Fest im Großen Garten&quot; (Little Festival in the Great Garden) which is the most successful cabaret festival in Germany. It features artists from around the world. Some other important events are the &quot;Calenberger Cabaret Weeks&quot;, the &quot;Hanover Cabaret Festival&quot; and the &quot;Wintervariety&quot;.

===Music===

====Classical music====
Hanover has two symphony orchestras: The Lower Saxon State Orchestra Hanover and the NDR Radiophilharmonie (North German Radio Philharmonic Orchestra). Two notable choirs have their homes in Hanover: the Mädchenchor Hanover (girls&#x27; choir) and the Knabenchor Hanover (boys&#x27; choir).

There are two major international competitions for classical music in Hanover:
* Hanover International Violin Competition (since 1991)
* Classica Nova International Music Competition (since 1997); the non-profit association Classica Nova exists in Hanover with the aim of continuing the Classica Nova competition

====Popular music====

The rock bands Scorpions and Fury in the Slaughterhouse are originally from Hanover. Acclaimed DJ Mousse T also has his main recording studio in the area. Rick J. Jordan, member of the band Scooter was born here in 1968. Lena, winner of the 2010 Eurovision Song Contest, is also from Hanover.

===Sport===
Hanover 96 (nicknamed , literally &#x27;the Reds&#x27;) is the top local football team that currently plays in the 2. Bundesliga. Home games are played at the Niedersachsenstadion (&quot;Lower Saxony Stadium&quot;), which hosted matches in the 1974 and 2006 World Cups and the Euro 1988. Their reserve team Hanover 96 II plays in the fourth league. Their home games were played in the traditional Eilenriedestadion until they moved to the HDI Arena due to DFL directives. Arminia Hanover is another traditional football team in Hanover that has played in the second division (then 2. Liga Nord) for years and plays now in the Niedersachsen-West Liga (Lower Saxony League West). Home matches are played in the Rudolf-Kalweit-Stadium.

The Hanover Indians are the local ice hockey team. They play in the third tier. Their home games are played at the traditional Eisstadion am Pferdeturm. The Hanover Scorpions played in Hanover in Germany&#x27;s top league until 2013 when they sold their license and moved to Langenhagen.

Hanover was one of the rugby union capitals in Germany. The first German rugby team was founded in Hanover in 1878. Hanover-based teams dominated the German rugby scene for a long time. DSV 78 Hanover, SC Germania List, and SV Odin Hanover plays in the first division, and DRC Hanover as well as SG 78/08 Hanover play in the second division.

Hanover has traditionally been one of Germany&#x27;s hubs in Water sports and especially in Water polo. The SG Waspo&#x27;98 Hanover won the Deutsche Wasserball-Liga in 2020 and 2021. In total, clubs from Hanover have won the German championship 11 times. Thanks to the Maschsee lake, the rivers Ihme and Leine and to the Mittellandkanal canal, Hanover hosts sailing schools, yacht schools, waterski clubs, rowing clubs, canoe clubs and paddle clubs.

The first German fencing club was founded in Hanover in 1862. Today there are three additional fencing clubs in Hanover.

The Hanover Korbjäger are the city&#x27;s top basketball team. They play their home games at the IGS Linden.

The Hanover Regents play in the third Bundesliga (baseball) division. The Hanover Grizzlies, Armina Spartans and Hanover Stampeders are the local American football teams.

The Hanover Marathon is the biggest running event in Hanover with more than 11,000 participants and usually around 200,000 spectators. Some other important running events are the Gilde Stadtstaffel (a relay event), the Sport-Check Nachtlauf (a night running event), the &quot;Herrenhäuser Team-Challenge&quot;, the &quot;Hannoversche Firmenlauf&quot; (a company running event) and the Silvesterlauf (New Year&#x27;s running event).

Hanover also hosts an important international cycle race, the &quot;Nacht von Hannover&quot; (&quot;Night of Hanover&quot;). The race takes place around the market hall.

The lake Maschsee hosts international dragon boat races and canoe olo tournaments. Many regattas take place during the year. &quot;Head of the river Leine&quot; on the river Leine is one of the biggest rowing regattas in Hanover. One of Germany&#x27;s most successful dragon boat teams, the All Sports Team Hanover, which has won since its foundation in year 2000 more than 100 medals on national and international competitions, regularly trains on the local Maschsee lake.

Some other important sport events include the Lower Saxony beach volleyball tournament, the international horse show &quot;German Classics&quot; and the international ice hockey tournament Nations Cup.

===Regular events===

Hanover is one of the leading exhibition cities in the world. It hosts more than 60 international and national exhibitions every year. The most popular ones are the &quot;CeBIT&quot;, the &quot;Hanover Fair&quot;, the &quot;Domotex&quot;, the &quot;Ligna&quot;, the &quot;IAA Nutzfahrzeuge&quot; and the &quot;Agritechnica&quot;. Hanover also hosts a huge number of congresses and symposiums like the &quot;International Symposium on Society and Resource Management.&quot;

Hanover is also host to the &quot;Schützenfest Hannover,&quot; the largest marksmen&#x27;s fun fair in the world which takes place once a year from late June to early July. Founded in 1529, it consists of more than 260 rides and inns, five large beer tents and a large entertainment programme. The highlight of this fun fair is the &quot;Parade of the Marksmen&quot; with more than 12,000 participants from all over the world, including around 5,000 marksmen, 128 bands, and more than 70 wagons, carriages, and other festival vehicles. This makes it the longest procession in Europe. Around 2 million people visit this fun fair every year. The landmark of this event is one of the largest transportable Ferris wheels in the world, with a height of about .

Hanover also hosts one of the two largest spring festivals in Europe, with around 180 rides and inns, 2 large beer tents, and around 1.5 million visitors each year. The Oktoberfest Hanover is the second largest Oktoberfest in the world with around 160 rides and inns, two large beer tents and around 1 million visitors each year.

The &quot;Maschsee Festival&quot; takes place around the Maschsee Lake. Each year around 2 million visitors come to enjoy live music, comedy, cabaret, and much more. It is the largest Volksfest of its kind in Northern Germany. The Great Garden hosts every year the &quot;International Fireworks Competition&quot;, and the &quot;International Festival Weeks Herrenhausen,&quot; with music and cabaret performances. The &quot;Carnival Procession&quot; is around long and consists of 3,000 participants, around 30 festival vehicles and around 20 bands and takes place every year.

Other festivals include the Festival &quot;Feuer und Flamme&quot; (Fire and Flames), the &quot;Gartenfestival&quot; (Garden Festival), the &quot;Herbstfestival&quot; (Autumn Festival), the &quot;Harley Days&quot;, the &quot;Steintor Festival&quot; (Steintor is a party area in the city centre) and the &quot;Lister-Meile-Festival&quot; (Lister Meile is a large pedestrian area).

Hanover also hosts food-oriented festivals including the &quot;Wine Festival&quot; and the &quot;Gourmet Festival&quot;. It also hosts some special markets like the &quot;Old Town Flea Market&quot; and the &quot;Market for Art and Trade&quot;. Some other major markets include the &quot;Christmas Markets of the City of Hanover&quot; in the Old Town and city centre, and the Lister Meile.

===Tourism===

Hanover is an attractive tourist place due to its many sights and famous events. Hanover had about 580,000 visitors in 2021, predominantly from the Netherlands and the United Kingdom. Famous sights in Hanover are New Town Hall, Herrenhausen Gardens and Hanover Zoo, which is one of the largest zoos in Germany. 

The annual trade fair &quot;Hannover Messe&quot; usually attracts between 100,000 and 200,000 visitors. First held in 1947, it is dedicated to the topic of industry development and is one of the world&#x27;s largest trade fairs.

==Transport==

===Rail===
The city&#x27;s central station, Hanover Hauptbahnhof, is a hub of the German high-speed ICE network. It is the starting point of the Hanover-Würzburg high-speed rail line and also the central hub for the Hanover S-Bahn. It offers many international and national connections.

===Air===
Hanover and its area is served by Hanover Airport (IATA code: HAJ; ICAO code: EDDV) in Langenhagen.

===Road===
Hanover is also an important hub of Germany&#x27;s autobahn network; the junction of two major autobahns, the A 2 and A 7 is at &quot;Kreuz Hanover-Ost&quot;, at the northeastern edge of the city.

Local autobahns are A 352 (a shortcut between A7 and A2, also known as the &quot;Airport autobahn&quot; because it passes Hanover Airport), and the A 37.

The expressway () system, a number of Bundesstraße roads, forms a structure loosely resembling a large ring road together with A2 and A7. The roads are B 3, B 6 and B 65, called &quot;Westschnellweg&quot; (B6 on the northern part, B3 on the southern part), &quot;Messeschnellweg&quot; (B3, becomes A37 near Burgdorf, crosses A2, becomes B3 again, changes to B6 at &quot;Seelhorster Kreuz&quot;, then passes the Hanover fairground as B6 and becomes A37 again before merging into A7) and &quot;Südschnellweg&quot; (starts out as B65, becomes B3/B6/B65 upon crossing Westschnellweg, then becomes B65 again at Seelhorster Kreuz).

===Bus and light rail===

Hanover has an extensive Stadtbahn and bus system, operated by üstra. The city uses designer buses and tramways, the TW 6000 and TW 2000 trams being examples.

===Bicycle===
Bicycle paths are very common in the city centre. At off-peak hours bikes can be taken on a tram or bus.

==Economy==

Various industrial businesses are located in Hanover. The Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles Transporter (VWN) factory at Hanover-Stöcken is the biggest employer in the region and operates a large plant at the northern edge of town adjoining the canal Mittellandkanal and the autobahn A2. Volkswagen shares a coal-burning power plant with a factory of German tire and automobile parts manufacturer Continental AG. Continental, founded in Hanover in 1871, is one of the city&#x27;s major companies. Since 2008 a take-over has been in progress: the Schaeffler Group from Herzogenaurach (Bavaria) holds the majority of Continental&#x27;s stock but were required due to the financial crisis to deposit the options as securities at banks.

The audio equipment company Sennheiser and the travel group TUI AG are both based in Hanover. Hanover is home to many insurance companies including Talanx, VHV Group, and Concordia Insurance. The major global reinsurance company Hannover Re also has its headquarters east of the city centre.

===List of largest employers in Hanover===
===Key figures===
In 2012, the city generated a GDP of €29.5 billion, which is equivalent to €74,822 per employee. The gross value of production in 2012 was €26.4 billion, which is equivalent to €66,822 per employee.

Around 300,000 employees were counted in 2014. Of these, 189,000 had their primary residence in Hanover, while 164,892 commute into the city every day.

In 2014 the city was home to 34,198 businesses, of which 9,342 were registered in the German Trade Register and 24,856 counted as small businesses. Hence, more than half of the metropolitan area&#x27;s businesses in the German Trade Register are located in Hanover (17,485 total).

==Business development==
Hannoverimpuls GMBH is a joint business development company from the city and region of Hanover. The company was founded in 2003 and supports the start-up, growth and relocation of businesses in the Hanover Region. The focus is on thirteen sectors, which stand for sustainable economic growth: Automotive, Energy Solutions, Information and Communications Technology, Life Sciences, Optical Technologies, Creative Industries and Production Engineering.

A range of programmes supports companies from the key industries in their expansion plans in Hanover or abroad. Three regional centres specifically promote international economic relations with Russia, India and Turkey.

The Institut für Integrierte Produktion Hannover is a spin-off from Leibniz University Hanover in the field of production technology that promotes transfer of scientific knowledge to business.

==Education==
The Leibniz University Hanover is the largest funded institution in Hanover for providing higher education to students from around the world. Below are the names of the universities and some of the important schools, including newly opened Hannover Medical Research School in 2003 for attracting the students from biology background from around the world.

There are several universities in Hanover:
* Leibniz University Hannover, host institution to the Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics
* Hochschule für Musik, Theater und Medien Hannover
* Hannover Medical School
* School of Veterinary Medicine Hanover (&quot;Tierärztliche Hochschule Hannover&quot;)
* GISMA Business School, part of the for-profit education company Global University Systems.
There is one University of Applied Science and Arts in Hanover:
* Hochschule Hannover (the former Fachhochschule)

The &quot;Schulbiologiezentrum Hannover&quot; maintains practical biology schools in four locations (Botanischer Schulgarten Burg, Freiluftschule Burg, Zooschule Hannover, and Botanischer Schulgarten Linden). The University of Veterinary Medicine Hanover also maintains its own botanical garden specializing in medicinal and poisonous plants, the Heil- und Giftpflanzengarten der Tierärztlichen Hochschule Hannover.

Hannover have several vocational schools like Berufsbildende Schulen (BBS) ME - Metalltechnik und Elektrotechnik
Specializes in metal and electrical engineering and BBS Cora Berliner specializes in business administration, the leisure and the trading industry.

== In popular culture ==
* In the &quot;Problem Dog&quot; episode of American crime drama Breaking Bad, viewers learn that Madrigall Electromotive GmbH, the parent company of Los Pollos Hermanos, is located in Hanover.

==Notable people==


* Hannah Arendt (1906–1975), American political theorist
* Erdoğan Atalay (born 1966), actor
* Rudolf Augstein (1923–2002), journalist, founder of the weekly journal Der Spiegel
* Moritz Baier-Lentz (born 1986), German-American venture capitalist
* Hermann Bahlsen (1859–1919), businessman, inventor of the Leibniz-Keks
* Marc Bator (born 1972), journalist
* Rudolf von Bennigsen (1824–1902), liberal politician
* Klaus Bernbacher (born 1931), conductor, music event manager, broadcasting manager and academic teacher
* Count Johann Hartwig Ernst von Bernstorff (1712–1772) a German-Danish statesman
* Andreas Peter Bernstorff (1735–1797), Danish diplomat and Foreign Minister
* Gero von Boehm (born 1954), director, journalist and television presenter
* Emil Berliner (1851–1929), inventor of the phonograph
* Anke Blume (born 1969), engineering technology professor, works on silica and silane chemistry.
* Walter Bruch (1908–1990), inventor of the PAL color television system
* Wilhelm Busch (1832–1908), caricaturist, painter and poet
* Laurent Chappuzeau, (ca.1652-??), clockmaker to the Elector of Hanover 1689–1701
* Frederick Dielman (1847–1935), German-American portrait and figure painter
* Albert Christoph Dies (1755–1822), German painter, engraver and biographer
* Champion Jack Dupree (1910–1992), American Born Blues Musician
* Frederick, Prince of Wales (1707–1751), eldest son and heir apparent of King George II of Great Britain
* Gustav Fröhlich (1902–1987), actor and film director
* Oskar Garvens (1874–1951), sculptor and caricaturist
* George I, (1660–1727), King of Great Britain and Ireland, prince elector of Hanover
* George II, (1683–1760), King of Great Britain and Ireland, prince elector of Hanover
* George III, (1738–1820), King of Great Britain and Ireland, prince elector of Hanover
* George William Frederick Charles, duke of Cambridge (1819–1904), Prince George
* Gerhard Glogowski (born 1943), politician (SPD)
* Georg Friedrich Grotefend (1775–1853), epigraphist and philologist
* Robin E. Haak (born 1986), political scientist.
* Fritz Haarmann (1870–1925), prolific serial killer and rapist
* Julia Hamburg (born 1986), politician
* Conrad Wilhelm Hase, (1818–1902), architect, founder of the Hanover school of architecture
* Johann Friedrich Ludwig Hausmann (1782–1859) German mineralogist
* Caroline Herschel (1750–1848) and William Herschel (1738–1822), astronomers
* Wyn Hoop (born 1936), singer
* Alfred Hugenberg (1865–1951), businessman and politician (DNVP)
* August Wilhelm Iffland (1759–1814), German actor and dramatic author
* Manfred Kohrs (born 1957), tattooist, conceptual artist and Master of Economics
* Dr. Gindi (born 1965), contemporary sculptor
* Georg Ludwig Friedrich Laves (1788–1864), architect
* Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716), philosopher, mathematician, developed differential and integral calculus
* Klaus Meine (born 1948), rock musician, vocalist of the rock band Scorpions
* Georg Meissner (1829–1905), anatomist and physiologist 
* Otto Fritz Meyerhof (1884–1951), recipient of the Nobel prize in medicine, 1922
* Lena Meyer-Landrut (born 1991), winner of the Eurovision Song Contest 2010
* Reiner E. Moritz (born 1938), film director and producer
* Georg Heinrich Pertz (1795–1876), German historian.
* Oliver Pocher (born 1978), comedian and television presenter
* Rudolf Erich Raspe (1736–1794), German librarian, writer and scientist
* Else Raydt (1883–1931), fashion designer
* Waldemar R. Röhrbein (1935–2014), historian, director of Historisches Museum Hannover 
* Wilhelm Georg Friedrich Roscher (1817–1894), German economist
* Dirk Rossmann (born 1946), businessman
* Dieter Roth (1930–1998), artist, print-maker, author, poet and world renowned composer
* Niki de Saint Phalle (1930–2002), sculptor, painter and film maker
* Friedrich Schlegel (1772–1829), poet, literary critic, philosopher and Indologist
* Gerhard Schröder (born 1944), politician (SPD) (former Chancellor of Germany)
* Helga Schuchardt (born 1939), politician and engineer
* Kurt Schumacher (1895–1952), politician, re-organiser of the SPD after World War II
* Kurt Schwitters (1887–1948), artist
* Alexander Moritz Simon (1837–1905), Jewish philanthropist, banker and American vice consul
* Uli Stein (1954–2020), artist, cartoonist
* Charles Wachsmuth (1829–1896), German-American paleontologist and businessman
* Gustav Wagemann (1885–1933), German lawyer, judge and civil servant
* Hans Wehrmann (born 1964), entrepreneur, economist, inventor, author and racing driver
* Phylicia Whitney (born 1950), journalist and public speaker
* Christian Wulff (born 1959), politician (CDU), former President of Germany
* Shlomo Zev Zweigenhaft (1915–2005), Chief Rabbi of Hanover and Lower Saxony
=== Sport ===

* Johannes Dietwald (born 1985), footballer
* Hilal El-Helwe (born 1994), German-Lebanese football player
* Niclas Füllkrug (born 1993), footballer
* Stina Johannes (born 2000), footballer, goalkeeper for the Germany women&#x27;s national football team
* Niklas Mackschin (born 1994), racing driver
* Jan Martín (born 1984), German-Israeli-Spanish basketball player
* Arnd Meier (born 1973), racing driver
* Per Mertesacker (born 1984), footballer
* Daniel Reiss (born 1982), professional ice hockey player
* Dirk Werner (born 1981), racing driver

==Twin towns – sister cities==

Hanover is twinned with:

* Blantyre, Malawi (1968)
* Bristol, England, United Kingdom (1947)
* Hiroshima, Japan (1983)
* Leipzig, Germany (1987)
* Perpignan, France (1960)
* Poznań, Poland (1979)
* Rouen, France (1966)
Hanover also cooperates with:
* Mykolaiv, Ukraine (2022)

==See also==

* CeBIT (CeBIT Computer Messe)
* Expo 2000
* Hanover Fair (Hannover Messe)
* History of the Jews in Hanover
* Metropolitan region Hanover-Braunschweig-Göttingen-Wolfsburg
* Schützenfest Hanover

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
==External links==
* Official website for tourism, holiday and leisure in Lower Saxony and Hanover </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="0" end="7" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="55" end="67" title="States of Germany" label="German state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197" start="71" end="83" title="Lower Saxony" label="Lower Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242225" start="131" end="148" title="List of cities in Germany by population" label="13th-largest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="152" end="159" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q46613" start="193" end="209" title="northern Germany" label="northern Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="216" end="222" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="224" end="231" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="236" end="242" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q702492" start="259" end="269" title="urban area" label="urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4001" start="293" end="300" title="Garbsen" label="Garbsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4158" start="302" end="313" title="Langenhagen" label="Langenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14856" start="318" end="325" title="Laatzen" label="Laatzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5963" start="376" end="390" title="Hanover Region" label="Hanover Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q315065" start="467" end="527" title="Hannover–Braunschweig–Göttingen–Wolfsburg Metropolitan Region" label="Hanover–Braunschweig–Göttingen–Wolfsburg Metropolitan Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628433" start="533" end="592" title="List of EU metropolitan areas by GDP" label="17th biggest metropolitan area by GDP in the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q565812" start="680" end="705" title="Principality of Calenberg" label="Principality of Calenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q706018" start="723" end="744" title="Electorate of Hanover" label="Electorate of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q164079" start="762" end="780" title="Kingdom of Hanover" label="Kingdom of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q819125" start="798" end="817" title="Province of Hannover" label="Province of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="825" end="843" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q819125" start="861" end="880" title="Province of Hannover" label="Province of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q161036" start="888" end="909" title="Free State of Prussia" label="Free State of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q641116" start="933" end="949" title="State of Hanover" label="State of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="991" end="1005" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q157217" start="1029" end="1096" title="House of Hanover" label="Hanoverian Kings of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q556263" start="1132" end="1150" title="Duchy of Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="Brunswick-Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q706018" start="1175" end="1193" title="Electorate of Hanover" label="Elector of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q723748" start="1218" end="1228" title="confluence" label="confluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q161051" start="1236" end="1247" title="River Leine" label="River Leine"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="1256" end="1265" title="tributary" label="tributary"/>
<link wikidata="Q464568" start="1270" end="1274" title="Ihme" label="Ihme"/>
<link wikidata="Q166004" start="1296" end="1314" title="North German Plain" label="North German Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q313301" start="1383" end="1391" title="Autobahn" label="Autobahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="1450" end="1456" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q151993" start="1457" end="1466" title="Ruhr" label="Ruhr area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="1467" end="1477" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="1478" end="1485" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="1512" end="1521" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="1522" end="1531" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="1532" end="1538" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q170169" start="1552" end="1567" title="Hannover Airport" label="Hanover Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4158" start="1595" end="1606" title="Langenhagen" label="Langenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q911561" start="1721" end="1743" title="Hannover Medical School" label="Hanover Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q494230" start="1778" end="1792" title="medical school" label="medical school"/>
<link wikidata="Q678982" start="1834" end="1860" title="Leibniz University Hannover" label="Leibniz University Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666786" start="1887" end="1923" title="International Neuroscience Institute" label="International Neuroscience Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q29893" start="1930" end="1948" title="Hanover Fairground" label="Hanover Fairground"/>
<link wikidata="Q734463" start="1999" end="2008" title="Expo 2000" label="Expo 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q172754" start="2071" end="2082" title="World&amp;#x27;s fair" label="trade fairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q640826" start="2095" end="2107" title="Hannover Fair" label="Hanover Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q159599" start="2127" end="2132" title="CeBIT" label="CeBIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711312" start="2295" end="2315" title="Schützenfest Hannover" label="Schützenfest Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2376" end="2395" title="Oktoberfest celebrations#Hannover" label="Oktoberfest Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="2656" end="2679" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q181767" start="2817" end="2823" title="Stress (linguistics)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q157217" start="3118" end="3134" title="House of Hanover" label="House of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q161051" start="3234" end="3239" title="Leine" label="Leine"/>
<link wikidata="Q28942" start="3471" end="3486" title="town privileges" label="town privileges"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="3708" end="3724" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="3733" end="3739" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q166004" start="3811" end="3829" title="North German Plain" label="North German Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186" start="3851" end="3855" title="Harz" label="Harz"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="3961" end="3966" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664" start="3968" end="3972" title="Ruhr (river)" label="Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q153972" start="3977" end="3981" title="Saar (river)" label="Saar"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="4151" end="4164" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q156199" start="4169" end="4175" title="Electorate of Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205" start="4179" end="4188" title="Thuringia" label="Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970" start="4221" end="4229" title="church (building)" label="churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q57346" start="4266" end="4275" title="defensive wall" label="city wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186" start="4395" end="4409" title="Harz Mountains" label="Harz Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q61829" start="4464" end="4498" title="George, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="George, Duke of Brunswick-Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q556263" start="4513" end="4531" title="Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="Brunswick-Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q565812" start="4532" end="4557" title="principality of Calenberg" label="principality of Calenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="4644" end="4662" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q22722" start="4678" end="4692" title="Prince-Elector" label="Prince-Elector"/>
<link wikidata="Q669970" start="4729" end="4742" title="Imperial Diet (Holy Roman Empire)" label="Imperial Diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q706018" start="4795" end="4827" title="Electorate of Brunswick-Lüneburg" label="Electorate of Brunswick-Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q706018" start="4855" end="4876" title="Electorate of Hanover" label="Electorate of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q157217" start="4918" end="4934" title="House of Hanover" label="House of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="4975" end="4988" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="5011" end="5054" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="5079" end="5093" title="George I of Great Britain" label="George I Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q130822" start="5190" end="5200" title="William IV of the United Kingdom" label="William IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q152507" start="5202" end="5216" title="Semi-Salic law" label="Semi-Salic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="5299" end="5313" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462133" start="5492" end="5509" title="Saxe-Coburg-Gotha" label="Saxe-Coburg-Gotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q22722" start="5587" end="5604" title="prince-elector" label="Electoral Princes"/>
<link wikidata="Q130586" start="5860" end="5869" title="George IV of the United Kingdom" label="George IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="5898" end="5905" title="Viceroy" label="Viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q313771" start="5906" end="5914" title="Prince Adolphus, Duke of Cambridge" label="Adolphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="5963" end="5984" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q677959" start="5990" end="6010" title="Battle of Hastenbeck" label="Battle of Hastenbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q15940490" start="6082" end="6112" title="Hanoverian Army of Observation" label="Hanoverian Army of Observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13638353" start="6169" end="6188" title="Invasion of Hanover (1757)" label="Invasion of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q215480" start="6239" end="6261" title="Duke Ferdinand of Brunswick" label="Ferdinand of Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="6309" end="6317" title="Napoleon I" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783439" start="6330" end="6354" title="Convention of Artlenburg" label="Convention of Artlenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q97623079" start="6483" end="6498" title="Hanoverian Army" label="Hanoverian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="6509" end="6519" title="George III of the United Kingdom" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q495729" start="6674" end="6699" title="King&amp;#x27;s German Legion" label="King&amp;#x27;s German Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q472253" start="6748" end="6757" title="Black Brunswickers" label="Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="6871" end="6885" title="Peninsular War" label="Peninsular War"/>
<link wikidata="Q48314" start="6894" end="6912" title="Battle of Waterloo" label="Battle of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q164079" start="6956" end="6974" title="Kingdom of Hanover" label="Kingdom of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q188800" start="6990" end="7004" title="personal union" label="personal union"/>
<link wikidata="Q130822" start="7053" end="7063" title="William IV of the United Kingdom" label="William IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="7110" end="7124" title="Victoria of the United Kingdom" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q162302" start="7225" end="7240" title="Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover" label="Ernest Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="7304" end="7311" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153650" start="7323" end="7342" title="Austro-Prussian War" label="Austro-Prussian war"/>
<link wikidata="Q535811" start="7397" end="7418" title="Battle of Langensalza (1866)" label="Battle of Langensalza"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7445" end="7499" title="Prussian Army#Moltke the Elder" label="Moltke the Elder&amp;#x27;s Kesselschlacht order of battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q819125" start="7604" end="7623" title="Province of Hanover" label="Province of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q832003" start="7645" end="7658" title="Horsecar" label="horse railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="7701" end="7705" title="tram" label="tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q177529" start="7849" end="7859" title="Oberbürgermeister" label="lord mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="7919" end="7924" title="Nazi Party" label="NSDAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330" start="7947" end="7964" title="German Jews" label="Jewish population"/>
<link wikidata="Q313863" start="8083" end="8099" title="Herschel Grynszpan" label="Grynszpan family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="8264" end="8273" title="International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q313863" start="8333" end="8351" title="Herschel Grynszpan" label="Herschel Grynszpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q76883" start="8493" end="8507" title="Ernst vom Rath" label="Ernst vom Rath"/>
<link wikidata="Q36756" start="8614" end="8627" title="Kristallnacht" label="Kristallnacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q34627" start="8664" end="8673" title="synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q120832" start="8706" end="8718" title="Edwin Oppler" label="Edwin Oppler"/>
<link wikidata="Q397469" start="8722" end="8734" title="Neo-romanticism" label="neo-romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q152018" start="8859" end="8865" title="ghetto" label="ghetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q152120" start="8940" end="8958" title="Wannsee Conference" label="Wannsee Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="9026" end="9030" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q152081" start="9115" end="9134" title="concentration camps" label="concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="9207" end="9213" title="Polish people" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="9215" end="9221" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="9226" end="9233" title="Russians" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="9576" end="9591" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332" start="9616" end="9648" title="Bergen-Belsen concentration camp" label="Bergen-Belsen concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q840648" start="9696" end="9701" title="Sinti" label="Sinti"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="9706" end="9719" title="Romani people" label="Romani people"/>
<link wikidata="Q117571" start="9731" end="9747" title="Romani Holocaust" label="Romani Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="9770" end="9783" title="Forced labour under German rule during World War II" label="forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496419" start="9800" end="9811" title="Stalag XI-B" label="Stalag XI-B"/>
<link wikidata="Q321177" start="9812" end="9832" title="German prisoner-of-war camps in World War II" label="prisoner-of-war camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="9837" end="9843" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788454" start="9879" end="9892" title="Junction (road)" label="road junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q715695" start="9947" end="9984" title="strategic bombing during World War II" label="strategic bombing during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909622" start="10000" end="10012" title="Oil Campaign of World War II" label="Oil Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q695251" start="10035" end="10038" title="VARTA" label="AFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q470577" start="10040" end="10047" title="Herrenhausen" label="Stöcken"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909622" start="10054" end="10066" title="Oil Campaign of World War II" label="Deurag-Nerag"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10077" end="10084" title="Misburg" label="Misburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q163241" start="10091" end="10102" title="Continental AG" label="Continental"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10111" end="10121" title="Vahrenwald" label="Vahrenwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826001" start="10126" end="10132" title="Linden-Limmer" label="Limmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417763" start="10173" end="10183" title="Ricklingen" label="Ricklingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14856" start="10188" end="10195" title="Laatzen" label="Laatzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q29893" start="10203" end="10221" title="Hanover fairground" label="Hanover fairground"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10224" end="10267" title="Oil Campaign of World War II#References" label="the Hanover/Limmer rubber reclamation plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q29041" start="10273" end="10280" title="Hanomag" label="Hanomag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826001" start="10290" end="10296" title="Linden-Limmer" label="Linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q380599" start="10589" end="10603" title="Aegidienkirche, Hanover" label="Aegidienkirche"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818506" start="10810" end="10832" title="84th Infantry Division (United States)" label="84th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="10969" end="10981" title="States of Germany" label="state (Land)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197" start="10985" end="10997" title="Lower Saxony" label="Lower Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="11058" end="11074" title="Bristol" label="Bristol, England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639784" start="11208" end="11235" title="Sister Cities International" label="Sister Cities International"/>
<link wikidata="Q747279" start="11281" end="11297" title="Mayors for Peace" label="Mayors for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="11473" end="11488" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="11490" end="11496" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q216823" start="11608" end="11616" title="air mass" label="air mass"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11809" end="11821" title="2022_European_heatwaves#July_heatwave_2" label="20 July 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740635" start="12157" end="12168" title="Stadtbezirk" label="Stadtbezirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983893" start="12200" end="12209" title="Stadtteil" label="Stadtteil"/>
<link wikidata="Q883803" start="12239" end="12244" title="Hanover-Mitte" label="Mitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q915149" start="12247" end="12262" title="Vahrenwald-List" label="Vahrenwald-List"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12265" end="12285" title="Bothfeld-Vahrenheide" label="Bothfeld-Vahrenheide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="12288" end="12305" title="Buchholz-Kleefeld" label="Buchholz-Kleefeld"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12308" end="12324" title="Misburg-Anderten" label="Misburg-Anderten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743368" start="12327" end="12355" title="Kirchrode-Bemerode-Wülferode" label="Kirchrode-Bemerode-Wülferode"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12358" end="12371" title="Südstadt-Bult" label="Südstadt-Bult"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12374" end="12387" title="Döhren-Wülfel" label="Döhren-Wülfel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417763" start="12390" end="12400" title="Ricklingen" label="Ricklingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826001" start="12403" end="12416" title="Linden-Limmer" label="Linden-Limmer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12419" end="12446" title="Ahlem-Badenstedt-Davenstedt" label="Ahlem-Badenstedt-Davenstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q470577" start="12449" end="12469" title="Herrenhausen-Stöcken" label="Herrenhausen-Stöcken"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12472" end="12476" title="Hanover-Nord" label="Nord"/>
<link wikidata="Q97762617" start="12529" end="12538" title="Hannover-Nordstadt" label="Nordstadt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12541" end="12549" title="Hannover-Südstadt" label="Südstadt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12552" end="12560" title="Hannover-Oststadt" label="Oststadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5649223" start="12563" end="12566" title="Hannover-Zoo" label="Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q220033" start="12592" end="12603" title="Hanover Zoo" label="Hanover Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q470577" start="12607" end="12619" title="Herrenhausen" label="Herrenhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961512" start="12622" end="12630" title="Waldheim (Hanover)" label="Waldheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787522" start="12689" end="12699" title="Belit Onay" label="Belit Onay"/>
<link wikidata="Q49766" start="12703" end="12725" title="Alliance 90/The Greens" label="Alliance 90/The Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787522" start="13023" end="13033" title="Belit Onay" label="Belit Onay"/>
<link wikidata="Q49766" start="13048" end="13070" title="Alliance 90/The Greens" label="Alliance 90/The Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="13159" end="13170" title="Independent politician" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q49762" start="13172" end="13175" title="Christian Democratic Union of Germany" label="CDU"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="13264" end="13287" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721203" start="13361" end="13384" title="Alternative for Germany" label="Alternative for Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q49764" start="13455" end="13463" title="The Left (Germany)" label="The Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="13535" end="13546" title="Independent politician" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q22748" start="13620" end="13630" title="Die PARTEI" label="Die PARTEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q13129" start="13702" end="13714" title="Pirate Party Germany" label="Pirate Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="13790" end="13801" title="Independent politician" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="13871" end="13882" title="Independent politician" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q49766" start="14451" end="14473" title="Alliance 90/The Greens" label="Alliance 90/The Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="14542" end="14565" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49762" start="14631" end="14657" title="Christian Democratic Union of Germany" label="Christian Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q13124" start="14723" end="14744" title="Free Democratic Party (Germany)" label="Free Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49764" start="14807" end="14815" title="The Left (Germany)" label="The Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721203" start="14884" end="14907" title="Alternative for Germany" label="Alternative for Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q22748" start="14970" end="14980" title="Die PARTEI" label="Die PARTEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q13129" start="15114" end="15126" title="Pirate Party Germany" label="Pirate Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q106205950" start="15193" end="15205" title="Volt Germany" label="Volt Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q327389" start="15375" end="15386" title="Free Voters" label="Free Voters"/>
<link wikidata="Q101243970" start="15449" end="15476" title="Grassroots Democratic Party of Germany" label="Grassroots Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q574773" start="16031" end="16060" title="Herrenhausen Gardens" label="Royal Gardens of Herrenhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14454362" start="16104" end="16118" title="Baroque garden" label="Baroque garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q168704" start="16311" end="16331" title="Niki de Saint Phalle" label="Niki de Saint Phalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q87699" start="16520" end="16538" title="Heinz Rudolf Kunze" label="Heinz Rudolf Kunze"/>
<link wikidata="Q819663" start="16573" end="16583" title="Berggarten" label="Berggarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508723" start="17161" end="17174" title="Georgengarten" label="Georgengarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q573618" start="17343" end="17356" title="New City Hall (Hanover)" label="New Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q220033" start="17579" end="17590" title="Hanover Zoo" label="Hanover Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q664334" start="18137" end="18152" title="Sea Life Centres" label="Sea Life Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q895585" start="18307" end="18318" title="Marktkirche, Hanover" label="Marktkirche"/>
<link wikidata="Q510254" start="18381" end="18402" title="Evangelical Lutheran State Church of Hanover" label="Landeskirche Hanovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q439391" start="18432" end="18445" title="Old Town Hall (Hanover)" label="Old Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="18472" end="18478" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q450982" start="18893" end="18905" title="Leineschloss" label="Leine Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q168704" start="19140" end="19160" title="Niki de Saint Phalle" label="Niki de Saint Phalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q810108" start="19466" end="19493" title="St. Clement&amp;#x27;s Basilica, Hanover" label="St. Clement&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981782" start="19544" end="19588" title="Neustädter Kirche, Hannover" label="Neustädter Hof- und Stadtkirche St. Johannis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506821" start="19637" end="19652" title="Waterloo Column" label="Waterloo Column"/>
<link wikidata="Q91343" start="19670" end="19675" title="Georg Ludwig Friedrich Laves" label="Laves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548325" start="19699" end="19716" title="Wangenheim Palace" label="Wangenheim Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576239" start="19939" end="19950" title="Stadthalle Hannover" label="Cupola Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q661168" start="20126" end="20137" title="Gehry Tower" label="Gehry Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q180374" start="20180" end="20194" title="Frank Gehry" label="Frank O. Gehry"/>
<link wikidata="Q703918" start="20282" end="20305" title="Hannover Hauptbahnhof" label="Hanover Central Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q315045" start="20323" end="20331" title="Maschsee" label="Maschsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304028" start="20369" end="20379" title="Eilenriede" label="Eilenriede"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="20616" end="20641" title="Gottfried Leibniz" label="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="20670" end="20676" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q473858" start="20684" end="20712" title="Memory of the World Register" label="Memory of the World Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q29893" start="20763" end="20781" title="Hanover Fairground" label="Hanover Fairground"/>
<link wikidata="Q734463" start="20811" end="20820" title="Expo 2000" label="EXPO 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q451592" start="22164" end="22171" title="Telemax (tower)" label="Telemax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2168375" start="22643" end="22665" title="Roter Faden" label="&amp;quot;Red Thread&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242225" start="22983" end="22995" title="List of cities in Germany by population" label="largest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197" start="22999" end="23011" title="Lower Saxony" label="Lower Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q5963" start="23057" end="23071" title="Hanover Region" label="Hanover Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q4158" start="23135" end="23146" title="Langenhagen" label="Langenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4001" start="23148" end="23155" title="Garbsen" label="Garbsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q14856" start="23160" end="23167" title="Laatzen" label="Laatzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q106658" start="23223" end="23243" title="Districts of Germany" label="District (Landkreis)"/>
<link wikidata="Q315065" start="23256" end="23283" title="Hannover–Braunschweig–Göttingen–Wolfsburg Metropolitan Region" label="Hanover metropolitan region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2773" start="23317" end="23329" title="Braunschweig" label="Braunschweig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185" start="23331" end="23341" title="Hildesheim" label="Hildesheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033" start="23346" end="23355" title="Göttingen" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="23416" end="23433" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197" start="23581" end="23593" title="Lower Saxony" label="Lower Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q312390" start="23656" end="23673" title="Wirtschaftswunder" label="Wirtschaftswunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="23750" end="23756" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="23758" end="23764" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="23769" end="23774" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q143231" start="23812" end="23834" title="Vietnamese people in Germany" label="Vietnamese communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="23845" end="23857" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="23889" end="23901" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q199451" start="23917" end="23923" title="pagoda" label="pagoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q25433" start="24172" end="24182" title="Low German" label="Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295" start="24211" end="24219" title="Dortmund" label="Dortmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066" start="24221" end="24226" title="Essen" label="Essen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="24321" end="24331" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246720" start="24361" end="24397" title="World Communion of Reformed Churches" label="World Communion of Reformed Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q170111" start="24403" end="24431" title="Protestant Church in Germany" label="Protestant Church in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q25226658" start="24437" end="24454" title="Reformed Alliance" label="Reformed Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q452444" start="24460" end="24505" title="United Evangelical Lutheran Church of Germany" label="United Evangelical Lutheran Church of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q700036" start="24515" end="24554" title="Independent Evangelical-Lutheran Church" label="Independent Evangelical-Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="24595" end="24605" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="24621" end="24635" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="24661" end="24672" title="irreligious" label="irreligious"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614375" start="24726" end="24753" title="Historisches Museum Hannover" label="Historisches Museum Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q565375" start="25049" end="25068" title="Kestnergesellschaft" label="Kestnergesellschaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q457671" start="25353" end="25367" title="Kestner-Museum" label="Kestner-Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q97466" start="25448" end="25462" title="August Kestner" label="August Kestner"/>
<link wikidata="Q314082" start="25997" end="26017" title="Landesmuseum Hannover" label="Landesmuseum Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q510144" start="26402" end="26417" title="Sprengel Museum" label="Sprengel Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q316005" start="27044" end="27064" title="Wilhelm Busch Museum" label="Wilhelm Busch Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685494" start="29190" end="29205" title="Theater am Aegi" label="Theater am Aegi"/>
<link wikidata="Q830510" start="30730" end="30751" title="NDR Radiophilharmonie" label="NDR Radiophilharmonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957165" start="30849" end="30868" title="Mädchenchor Hannover" label="Mädchenchor Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q662009" start="30897" end="30915" title="Knabenchor Hannover" label="Knabenchor Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q124147" start="31289" end="31298" title="Scorpions (band)" label="Scorpions"/>
<link wikidata="Q314029" start="31303" end="31329" title="Fury in the Slaughterhouse" label="Fury in the Slaughterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q521051" start="31372" end="31380" title="Mousse T." label="Mousse T"/>
<link wikidata="Q457846" start="31429" end="31443" title="Rick J. Jordan" label="Rick J. Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q156255" start="31464" end="31471" title="Scooter (band)" label="Scooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013" start="31495" end="31499" title="Lena Meyer-Landrut" label="Lena"/>
<link wikidata="Q10158" start="31515" end="31543" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2010" label="2010 Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q33748" start="31580" end="31590" title="Hannover 96" label="Hanover 96"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="31653" end="31661" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q152665" start="31695" end="31708" title="2. Bundesliga" label="2. Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q152633" start="31739" end="31759" title="Niedersachsenstadion" label="Niedersachsenstadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q166121" start="31824" end="31828" title="1974 FIFA World Cup" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q37285" start="31833" end="31837" title="2006 FIFA World Cup" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="31838" end="31848" title="FIFA World Cup" label="World Cups"/>
<link wikidata="Q151867" start="31857" end="31866" title="UEFA Euro 1988" label="Euro 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q919493" start="31977" end="31994" title="Eilenriedestadion" label="Eilenriedestadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q639482" start="32052" end="32067" title="Arminia Hannover" label="Arminia Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q325596" start="32318" end="32333" title="Hannover Indians" label="Hanover Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q743911" start="32441" end="32465" title="Eisstadion am Pferdeturm" label="Eisstadion am Pferdeturm"/>
<link wikidata="Q688101" start="32471" end="32488" title="Hannover Scorpions" label="Hanover Scorpions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4158" start="32589" end="32600" title="Langenhagen" label="Langenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="32626" end="32637" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q833432" start="32789" end="32803" title="DSV 78 Hannover" label="DSV 78 Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q822616" start="32805" end="32821" title="SC Germania List" label="SC Germania List"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208598" start="32827" end="32842" title="SV Odin Hannover" label="SV Odin Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q561845" start="32856" end="32870" title="Rugby-Bundesliga" label="first division"/>
<link wikidata="Q831529" start="32876" end="32887" title="DRC Hannover" label="DRC Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q61065" start="33007" end="33019" title="Water sports" label="Water sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q7707" start="33038" end="33048" title="Water polo" label="Water polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q81662842" start="33054" end="33078" title="SG Waspo&amp;#x27;98 Hannover" label="SG Waspo&amp;#x27;98 Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q471251" start="33087" end="33111" title="Deutsche Wasserball-Liga" label="Deutsche Wasserball-Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q12100" start="33415" end="33422" title="fencing" label="fencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q24959831" start="33524" end="33541" title="Hannover Korbjäger" label="Hanover Korbjäger"/>
<link wikidata="Q520163" start="33668" end="33689" title="Bundesliga (baseball)" label="Bundesliga (baseball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q40244" start="33814" end="33822" title="Marathon" label="Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215841" start="34281" end="34291" title="cycle race" label="cycle race"/>
<link wikidata="Q57589" start="34444" end="34455" title="Dragon Boat" label="dragon boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q690676" start="34466" end="34475" title="Canoe Polo" label="canoe olo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344830" start="34494" end="34501" title="regatta" label="regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305231" start="34697" end="34720" title="All Sports Team Hannover" label="All Sports Team Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="34946" end="34956" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752292" start="34987" end="34997" title="horse show" label="horse show"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="35048" end="35058" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q159599" start="35277" end="35282" title="CeBIT" label="CeBIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q202570" start="36283" end="36295" title="Ferris wheel" label="Ferris wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082674" start="36506" end="36525" title="Oktoberfest Hannover" label="Oktoberfest Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="38179" end="38190" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="38199" end="38213" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q573618" start="38244" end="38257" title="New Town Hall (Hanover)" label="New Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q574773" start="38259" end="38279" title="Herrenhausen Gardens" label="Herrenhausen Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q220033" start="38284" end="38295" title="Hanover Zoo" label="Hanover Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q640826" start="38372" end="38386" title="Hannover Messe" label="Hannover Messe"/>
<link wikidata="Q57305" start="38560" end="38571" title="trade fairs" label="trade fairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q703918" start="38633" end="38653" title="Hannover Hauptbahnhof" label="Hanover Hauptbahnhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q129172" start="38689" end="38692" title="Intercity-Express" label="ICE"/>
<link wikidata="Q819045" start="38734" end="38771" title="Hanover–Würzburg high-speed railway" label="Hanover-Würzburg high-speed rail line"/>
<link wikidata="Q481504" start="38805" end="38819" title="Hanover S-Bahn" label="Hanover S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q170169" start="38921" end="38936" title="Hannover Airport" label="Hanover Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q19742991" start="38938" end="38947" title="IATA code" label="IATA code"/>
<link wikidata="Q207529" start="38954" end="38963" title="International Civil Aviation Organization airport code" label="ICAO code"/>
<link wikidata="Q313301" start="39050" end="39058" title="autobahn" label="autobahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9010" start="39109" end="39112" title="Bundesautobahn 2" label="A 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q9018" start="39117" end="39120" title="Bundesautobahn 7" label="A 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q17044" start="39217" end="39222" title="Bundesautobahn 352" label="A 352"/>
<link wikidata="Q10803" start="39345" end="39349" title="Bundesautobahn 37" label="A 37"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875255" start="39356" end="39366" title="limited-access road" label="expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q561431" start="39390" end="39402" title="Bundesstraße" label="Bundesstraße"/>
<link wikidata="Q510662" start="39455" end="39464" title="Beltway" label="ring road"/>
<link wikidata="Q34444" start="39504" end="39507" title="Bundesstraße 3" label="B 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q34454" start="39509" end="39512" title="Bundesstraße 6" label="B 6"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39517" end="39521" title="Bundesstraße 65" label="B 65"/>
<link wikidata="Q555618" start="39659" end="39667" title="Burgdorf, Hanover" label="Burgdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q29893" start="39763" end="39781" title="Hanover fairground" label="Hanover fairground"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140646" start="40030" end="40039" title="Stadtbahn" label="Stadtbahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q265625" start="40068" end="40073" title="üstra" label="üstra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322166" start="40089" end="40097" title="designer" label="designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q282191" start="40122" end="40129" title="TW 6000" label="TW 6000"/>
<link wikidata="Q575777" start="40134" end="40141" title="TW 2000" label="TW 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q699709" start="40356" end="40386" title="Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles" label="Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3222834" start="40387" end="40398" title="Volkswagen Transporter (T4)" label="Transporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q163241" start="40692" end="40706" title="Continental AG" label="Continental AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q459367" start="40841" end="40857" title="Schaeffler Group" label="Schaeffler Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615401" start="40863" end="40877" title="Herzogenaurach" label="Herzogenaurach"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="40879" end="40886" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q167221" start="41057" end="41067" title="Sennheiser" label="Sennheiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q573103" start="41089" end="41095" title="TUI AG" label="TUI AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389856" start="41177" end="41183" title="Talanx" label="Talanx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1560366" start="41185" end="41194" title="VHV Group" label="VHV Group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41200" end="41219" title="Concordia Insurance" label="Concordia Insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q657359" start="41258" end="41269" title="Hannover Re" label="Hannover Re"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="41413" end="41416" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q994873" start="41484" end="41495" title="Gross value added" label="gross value"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243161" start="41658" end="41675" title="primary residence" label="primary residence"/>
<link wikidata="Q457703" start="41822" end="41843" title="German Trade Register" label="German Trade Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109680" start="41866" end="41880" title="small business" label="small business"/>
<link wikidata="Q457703" start="41956" end="41977" title="German Trade Register" label="German Trade Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001711" start="42074" end="42102" title="business development company" label="business development company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5963" start="42121" end="42138" title="Hanover Region" label="region of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q190117" start="42337" end="42347" title="Automotive" label="Automotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376884" start="42349" end="42365" title="Energy Solutions" label="Energy Solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="42367" end="42408" title="Information and Communications Technology" label="Information and Communications Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q864928" start="42410" end="42423" title="Life sciences" label="Life Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q640621" start="42425" end="42445" title="Optical technology" label="Optical Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q969040" start="42447" end="42466" title="Creative Industries" label="Creative Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q11049265" start="42471" end="42493" title="Production engineering" label="Production Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384234" start="42570" end="42585" title="Economic expansion" label="expansion plans"/>
<link wikidata="Q658900" start="42721" end="42765" title="Institut für Integrierte Produktion Hannover" label="Institut für Integrierte Produktion Hannover"/>
<link wikidata="Q678982" start="42929" end="42955" title="Leibniz University Hannover" label="Leibniz University Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q911561" start="43165" end="43197" title="Hannover Medical School" label="Hannover Medical Research School"/>
<link wikidata="Q678982" start="43327" end="43354" title="Leibniz University Hannover" label="Leibniz University Hannover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778415" start="43380" end="43426" title="Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics" label="Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q455331" start="43429" end="43478" title="Hochschule für Musik, Theater und Medien Hannover" label="Hochschule für Musik, Theater und Medien Hannover"/>
<link wikidata="Q911561" start="43481" end="43504" title="Hannover Medical School" label="Hannover Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607255" start="43507" end="43544" title="University of Veterinary Medicine Hanover" label="School of Veterinary Medicine Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485676" start="43595" end="43616" title="GISMA Business School" label="GISMA Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q24911819" start="43659" end="43684" title="Global University Systems" label="Global University Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q224514" start="43752" end="43771" title="Hochschule Hannover" label="Hochschule Hannover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365560" start="43784" end="43798" title="Fachhochschule" label="Fachhochschule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296160" start="43902" end="43930" title="Botanischer Schulgarten Burg" label="Botanischer Schulgarten Burg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607255" start="44014" end="44055" title="University of Veterinary Medicine Hanover" label="University of Veterinary Medicine Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q167346" start="44079" end="44095" title="botanical garden" label="botanical garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5699399" start="44148" end="44215" title="Heil- und Giftpflanzengarten der Tierärztlichen Hochschule Hannover" label="Heil- und Giftpflanzengarten der Tierärztlichen Hochschule Hannover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246949" start="44520" end="44531" title="Problem Dog" label="Problem Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079" start="44570" end="44582" title="Breaking Bad" label="Breaking Bad"/>
<link wikidata="Q96390820" start="44655" end="44674" title="Los Pollos Hermanos" label="Los Pollos Hermanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q60025" start="44723" end="44736" title="Hannah Arendt" label="Hannah Arendt"/>
<link wikidata="Q58747" start="44780" end="44794" title="Erdoğan Atalay" label="Erdoğan Atalay"/>
<link wikidata="Q62414" start="44816" end="44831" title="Rudolf Augstein" label="Rudolf Augstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q131478" start="44887" end="44898" title="Der Spiegel" label="Der Spiegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382978" start="44901" end="44919" title="Moritz Baier-Lentz" label="Moritz Baier-Lentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236346" start="44970" end="44985" title="Hermann Bahlsen" label="Hermann Bahlsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094559" start="45028" end="45040" title="Leibniz-Keks" label="Leibniz-Keks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892539" start="45043" end="45053" title="Marc Bator" label="Marc Bator"/>
<link wikidata="Q69395" start="45080" end="45100" title="Rudolf von Bennigsen" label="Rudolf von Bennigsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19958980" start="45135" end="45151" title="Klaus Bernbacher" label="Klaus Bernbacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q70887" start="45241" end="45282" title="Count Johann Hartwig Ernst von Bernstorff" label="Count Johann Hartwig Ernst von Bernstorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q65248" start="45323" end="45347" title="Andreas Peter Bernstorff" label="Andreas Peter Bernstorff"/>
<link wikidata="Q118304" start="45400" end="45414" title="Gero von Boehm" label="Gero von Boehm"/>
<link wikidata="Q71004" start="45476" end="45489" title="Emil Berliner" label="Emil Berliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="45519" end="45529" title="phonograph" label="phonograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q116760996" start="45532" end="45542" title="Anke Blume" label="Anke Blume"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="45599" end="45605" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q410572" start="45610" end="45616" title="silane" label="silane"/>
<link wikidata="Q63236" start="45630" end="45642" title="Walter Bruch" label="Walter Bruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q105973" start="45672" end="45675" title="PAL" label="PAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q849194" start="45676" end="45692" title="color television" label="color television"/>
<link wikidata="Q109540" start="45702" end="45715" title="Wilhelm Busch" label="Wilhelm Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245515" start="45762" end="45780" title="Laurent Chappuzeau" label="Laurent Chappuzeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497657" start="45845" end="45862" title="Frederick Dielman" label="Frederick Dielman"/>
<link wikidata="Q87596" start="45922" end="45943" title="Albert Christoph Dies" label="Albert Christoph Dies"/>
<link wikidata="Q161805" start="45999" end="46019" title="Champion Jack Dupree" label="Champion Jack Dupree"/>
<link wikidata="Q165349" start="46064" end="46090" title="Frederick, Prince of Wales" label="Frederick, Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="46141" end="46167" title="George II of Great Britain" label="George II of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q65496" start="46170" end="46185" title="Gustav Fröhlich" label="Gustav Fröhlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q27148642" start="46225" end="46238" title="Oskar Garvens" label="Oskar Garvens"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="46280" end="46288" title="George I of Great Britain" label="George I"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="46366" end="46375" title="George II of Great Britain" label="George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="46453" end="46463" title="George III" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46541" end="46592" title="Duke of Cambridge#Fourth creation, 1801" label="George William Frederick Charles, duke of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q87640" start="46622" end="46639" title="Gerhard Glogowski" label="Gerhard Glogowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q57855" start="46672" end="46697" title="Georg Friedrich Grotefend" label="Georg Friedrich Grotefend"/>
<link wikidata="Q181260" start="46711" end="46722" title="epigraphist" label="epigraphist"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="46727" end="46738" title="philologist" label="philologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q78170454" start="46741" end="46754" title="Robin E. Haak" label="Robin E. Haak"/>
<link wikidata="Q61887" start="46791" end="46805" title="Fritz Haarmann" label="Fritz Haarmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6477808" start="46855" end="46868" title="Julia Hamburg" label="Julia Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q95970" start="46895" end="46914" title="Conrad Wilhelm Hase" label="Conrad Wilhelm Hase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576263" start="46955" end="46985" title="Hanover school of architecture" label="Hanover school of architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q73070" start="46988" end="47020" title="Johann Friedrich Ludwig Hausmann" label="Johann Friedrich Ludwig Hausmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q76948" start="47055" end="47072" title="Caroline Herschel" label="Caroline Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14277" start="47089" end="47105" title="William Herschel" label="William Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q70480" start="47133" end="47141" title="Wyn Hoop" label="Wyn Hoop"/>
<link wikidata="Q65121" start="47164" end="47180" title="Alfred Hugenberg" label="Alfred Hugenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q215115" start="47230" end="47252" title="August Wilhelm Iffland" label="August Wilhelm Iffland"/>
<link wikidata="Q119960" start="47301" end="47314" title="Manfred Kohrs" label="Manfred Kohrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q113882797" start="47383" end="47392" title="Dr. Gindi" label="Dr. Gindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q91343" start="47430" end="47458" title="Georg Ludwig Friedrich Laves" label="Georg Ludwig Friedrich Laves"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="47484" end="47509" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz" label="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q154978" start="47598" end="47609" title="Klaus Meine" label="Klaus Meine"/>
<link wikidata="Q124147" start="47664" end="47673" title="Scorpions (band)" label="Scorpions"/>
<link wikidata="Q65840" start="47676" end="47690" title="Georg Meissner" label="Georg Meissner"/>
<link wikidata="Q57132" start="47734" end="47753" title="Otto Fritz Meyerhof" label="Otto Fritz Meyerhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013" start="47816" end="47834" title="Lena Meyer-Landrut" label="Lena Meyer-Landrut"/>
<link wikidata="Q10158" start="47862" end="47890" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2010" label="Eurovision Song Contest 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q21495910" start="47893" end="47909" title="Reiner E. Moritz" label="Reiner E. Moritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q68383" start="47952" end="47972" title="Georg Heinrich Pertz" label="Georg Heinrich Pertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q70912" start="48006" end="48019" title="Oliver Pocher" label="Oliver Pocher"/>
<link wikidata="Q213543" start="48069" end="48087" title="Rudolf Erich Raspe" label="Rudolf Erich Raspe"/>
<link wikidata="Q109806698" start="48142" end="48152" title="Else Raydt" label="Else Raydt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588894" start="48185" end="48205" title="Waldemar R. Röhrbein" label="Waldemar R. Röhrbein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614375" start="48242" end="48270" title="Historisches Museum Hannover" label="Historisches Museum Hannover"/>
<link wikidata="Q62842" start="48274" end="48305" title="Wilhelm Georg Friedrich Roscher" label="Wilhelm Georg Friedrich Roscher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228038" start="48338" end="48351" title="Dirk Rossmann" label="Dirk Rossmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q25591768" start="48379" end="48390" title="Dieter Roth" label="Dieter Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q168704" start="48468" end="48488" title="Niki de Saint Phalle" label="Niki de Saint Phalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q157271" start="48537" end="48555" title="Friedrich Schlegel" label="Friedrich Schlegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530" start="48621" end="48637" title="Gerhard Schröder" label="Gerhard Schröder"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="48676" end="48697" title="Chancellor of Germany" label="Chancellor of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602291" start="48701" end="48717" title="Helga Schuchardt" label="Helga Schuchardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q57465" start="48757" end="48772" title="Kurt Schumacher" label="Kurt Schumacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="48818" end="48821" title="SPD" label="SPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q155158" start="48843" end="48858" title="Kurt Schwitters" label="Kurt Schwitters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170875" start="48881" end="48903" title="Alexander Moritz Simon" label="Alexander Moritz Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q99908" start="48974" end="48983" title="Uli Stein (artist)" label="Uli Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083284" start="49018" end="49035" title="Charles Wachsmuth" label="Charles Wachsmuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q51041110" start="49098" end="49113" title="Gustav Wagemann" label="Gustav Wagemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q98337" start="49168" end="49181" title="Hans Wehrmann" label="Hans Wehrmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908516" start="49195" end="49207" title="entrepreneur" label="entrepreneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q188094" start="49209" end="49218" title="economist" label="economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q14208553" start="49220" end="49228" title="inventor" label="inventor"/>
<link wikidata="Q27887764" start="49257" end="49273" title="Phylicia Whitney" label="Phylicia Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540" start="49319" end="49334" title="Christian Wulff" label="Christian Wulff"/>
<link wikidata="Q25223" start="49373" end="49393" title="President of Germany" label="President of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q97128955" start="49396" end="49418" title="Shlomo Zev Zweigenhaft" label="Shlomo Zev Zweigenhaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1697413" start="49489" end="49506" title="Johannes Dietwald" label="Johannes Dietwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q21621466" start="49533" end="49547" title="Hilal El-Helwe" label="Hilal El-Helwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q326159" start="49595" end="49610" title="Niclas Füllkrug" label="Niclas Füllkrug"/>
<link wikidata="Q29946400" start="49637" end="49651" title="Stina Johannes" label="Stina Johannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q154408" start="49696" end="49739" title="Germany women&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Germany women&amp;#x27;s national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q23772420" start="49742" end="49758" title="Niklas Mackschin" label="Niklas Mackschin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896341" start="49788" end="49798" title="Jan Martín" label="Jan Martín"/>
<link wikidata="Q87495" start="49855" end="49865" title="Arnd Meier" label="Arnd Meier"/>
<link wikidata="Q70550" start="49895" end="49910" title="Per Mertesacker" label="Per Mertesacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162290" start="49937" end="49949" title="Daniel Reiss" label="Daniel Reiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q85185" start="49996" end="50007" title="Dirk Werner" label="Dirk Werner"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="50079" end="50086" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q188693" start="50096" end="50104" title="Blantyre" label="Blantyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="50122" end="50129" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q34664" start="50164" end="50173" title="Hiroshima" label="Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="50190" end="50197" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730" start="50216" end="50225" title="Perpignan" label="Perpignan"/>
<link wikidata="Q268" start="50243" end="50249" title="Poznań" label="Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="50267" end="50272" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q41572" start="50320" end="50328" title="Mykolaiv" label="Mykolaiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q159599" start="50362" end="50367" title="CeBIT" label="CeBIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q734463" start="50393" end="50402" title="Expo 2000" label="Expo 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q640826" start="50405" end="50417" title="Hanover Fair" label="Hanover Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398245" start="50437" end="50467" title="History of the Jews in Hannover" label="History of the Jews in Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q315065" start="50470" end="50530" title="Hannover–Braunschweig–Göttingen–Wolfsburg Metropolitan Region" label="Metropolitan region Hanover-Braunschweig-Göttingen-Wolfsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711312" start="50533" end="50553" title="Schützenfest Hannover" label="Schützenfest Hanover"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14199" wikidata="Q941818" url="?curid=14199" title="Handheld game console">
<text>A handheld game console, or simply handheld console, is a small, portable self-contained video game console with a built-in screen, game controls and speakers. Handheld game consoles are smaller than home video game consoles and contain the console, screen, speakers, and controls in one unit, allowing players to carry them and play them at any time or place.

In 1976, Mattel introduced the first handheld electronic game with the release of &quot;Auto Race&quot;. Later, several companies—including Coleco and Milton Bradley—made their own single-game, lightweight table-top or handheld electronic game devices. The first commercial successful handheld console was Merlin from 1978, which sold more than 5 million units. The first handheld game console with interchangeable cartridges is the Milton Bradley Microvision in 1979.

Nintendo is credited with popularizing the handheld console concept with the release of the Game Boy in 1989 and continues to dominate the handheld console market. The first internet-enabled handheld console and the first with a touchscreen was the Game.com released by Tiger Electronics in 1997. The Nintendo DS, released in 2004, introduced touchscreen controls and wireless online gaming to a wider audience, becoming the best-selling handheld console with over units sold worldwide.

== History ==
=== Timeline ===
This table describes handheld games consoles by generation, with over 1 million sales. No handheld achieved this prior to the fourth generation of game consoles. This list does not include dedicated consoles, such as LCD games and the Tamagotchi.

=== Origins ===

The origins of handheld game consoles are found in handheld and tabletop electronic game devices of the 1970s and early 1980s. These electronic devices are capable of playing only a single game, they fit in the palm of the hand or on a tabletop, and they may make use of a variety of video displays such as LED, VFD, or LCD. In 1978, handheld electronic games were described by &quot;Popular Electronics&quot; magazine as &quot;nonvideo electronic games&quot; and &quot;non-TV games&quot; as distinct from devices that required use of a television screen. Handheld electronic games, in turn, find their origins in the synthesis of previous handheld and tabletop electro-mechanical devices such as Waco&#x27;s &quot;Electronic Tic-Tac-Toe&quot; (1972) Cragstan&#x27;s &quot;Periscope-Firing Range&quot; (1951), and the emerging optoelectronic-display-driven calculator market of the early 1970s. This synthesis happened in 1976, when &quot;Mattel began work on a line of calculator-sized sports games that became the world&#x27;s first handheld electronic games. The project began when Michael Katz, Mattel&#x27;s new product category marketing director, told the engineers in the electronics group to design a game the size of a calculator, using LED (light-emitting diode) technology.&quot;

::our big success was something that I conceptualized—the first handheld game. I asked the design group to see if they could come up with a game that was electronic that was the same size as a calculator.
:::—Michael Katz, former marketing director, Mattel Toys.
The result was the 1976 release of &quot;Auto Race&quot;. Followed by &quot;Football&quot; later in 1977, the two games were so successful that according to Katz, &quot;these simple electronic handheld games turned into a &#x27;$400 million category.&#x27;&quot; Mattel would later win the honor of being recognized by the industry for innovation in handheld game device displays. Soon, other manufacturers including Coleco, Parker Brothers, Milton Bradley, Entex, and Bandai began following up with their own tabletop and handheld electronic games.

In 1979 the LCD-based Microvision, designed by Smith Engineering and distributed by Milton-Bradley, became the first handheld game console and the first to use interchangeable game cartridges. The Microvision game &quot;Cosmic Hunter&quot; (1981) also introduced the concept of a directional pad on handheld gaming devices, and is operated by using the thumb to manipulate the on-screen character in any of four directions.

In 1979, Gunpei Yokoi, traveling on a bullet train, saw a bored businessman playing with an LCD calculator by pressing the buttons. Yokoi then thought of an idea for a watch that doubled as a miniature game machine for killing time. Starting in 1980, Nintendo began to release a series of electronic games designed by Yokoi called the Game &amp; Watch games. Taking advantage of the technology used in the credit-card-sized calculators that had appeared on the market, Yokoi designed the series of LCD-based games to include a digital time display in the corner of the screen. For later, more complicated Game &amp; Watch games, Yokoi invented a cross shaped directional pad or &quot;D-pad&quot; for control of on-screen characters. Yokoi also included his directional pad on the NES controllers, and the cross-shaped thumb controller soon became standard on game console controllers and ubiquitous across the video game industry since. When Yokoi began designing Nintendo&#x27;s first handheld game console, he came up with a device that married the elements of his Game &amp; Watch devices and the Famicom console, including both items&#x27; D-pad controller. The result was the Nintendo Game Boy.

In 1982, the Bandai LCD Solarpower was the first solar-powered gaming device. Some of its games, such as the horror-themed game &quot;Terror House&quot;, features two LCD panels, one stacked on the other, for an early 3D effect. In 1983, Takara Tomy&#x27;s Tomytronic 3D simulates 3D by having two LCD panels that were lit by external light through a window on top of the device, making it the first dedicated home video 3D hardware.

=== Beginnings ===
The late 1980s and early 1990s saw the beginnings of the modern-day handheld game console industry, after the demise of the Microvision. As backlit LCD game consoles with color graphics consume a lot of power, they were not battery-friendly like the non-backlit original Game Boy whose monochrome graphics allowed longer battery life. By this point, rechargeable battery technology had not yet matured and so the more advanced game consoles of the time such as the Sega Game Gear and Atari Lynx did not have nearly as much success as the Game Boy.

Even though third-party rechargeable batteries were available for the battery-hungry alternatives to the Game Boy, these batteries employed a nickel-cadmium process and had to be completely discharged before being recharged to ensure maximum efficiency; lead-acid batteries could be used with automobile circuit limiters (cigarette lighter plug devices); but the batteries had mediocre portability. The later NiMH batteries, which do not share this requirement for maximum efficiency, were not released until the late 1990s, years after the Game Gear, Atari Lynx, and original Game Boy had been discontinued. During the time when technologically superior handhelds had strict technical limitations, batteries had a very low mAh rating since batteries with heavy power density were not yet available.

Modern game systems such as the Nintendo DS and PlayStation Portable have rechargeable Lithium-Ion batteries with proprietary shapes. Other seventh-generation consoles, such as the GP2X, use standard alkaline batteries. Because the mAh rating of alkaline batteries has increased since the 1990s, the power needed for handhelds like the GP2X may be supplied by relatively few batteries.

==== Game Boy ====
Nintendo released the Game Boy on April 21, 1989 (September 1990 for the UK). The design team headed by Gunpei Yokoi had also been responsible for the Game &amp; Watch system, as well as the Nintendo Entertainment System games &quot;Metroid&quot; and &quot;Kid Icarus&quot;. The Game Boy came under scrutiny by Nintendo president Hiroshi Yamauchi, saying that the monochrome screen was too small, and the processing power was inadequate. The design team had felt that low initial cost and battery economy were more important concerns, and when compared to the Microvision, the Game Boy was a huge leap forward.

Yokoi recognized that the Game Boy needed a killer app—at least one game that would define the console, and persuade customers to buy it. In June 1988, Minoru Arakawa, then-CEO of Nintendo of America saw a demonstration of the game &quot;Tetris&quot; at a trade show. Nintendo purchased the rights for the game, and packaged it with the Game Boy system as a launch title. It was almost an immediate hit. By the end of the year more than a million units were sold in the US. As of March 31, 2005, the Game Boy and Game Boy Color combined to sell over 118 million units worldwide.

==== Atari Lynx ====
In 1987, Epyx created the Handy Game; a device that would become the Atari Lynx in 1989. It is the first color handheld console ever made, as well as the first with a backlit screen. It also features networking support with up to 17 other players, and advanced hardware that allows the zooming and scaling of sprites. The Lynx can also be turned upside down to accommodate left-handed players. However, all these features came at a very high price point, which drove consumers to seek cheaper alternatives. The Lynx is also very unwieldy, consumes batteries very quickly, and lacked the third-party support enjoyed by its competitors. Due to its high price, short battery life, production shortages, a dearth of compelling games, and Nintendo&#x27;s aggressive marketing campaign, and despite a redesign in 1991, the Lynx became a commercial failure. Despite this, companies like Telegames helped to keep the system alive long past its commercial relevance, and when new owner Hasbro released the rights to develop for the public domain, independent developers like Songbird have managed to release new commercial games for the system every year until 2004&#x27;s &quot;Winter Games&quot;.

==== TurboExpress ====
The TurboExpress is a portable version of the TurboGrafx, released in 1990 for $249.99. Its Japanese equivalent is the PC Engine GT.

It is the most advanced handheld of its time and can play all the TurboGrafx-16&#x27;s games (which are on a small, credit-card sized media called HuCards). It has a 66 mm (2.6 in.) screen, the same as the original Game Boy, but in a much higher resolution, and can display 64 sprites at once, 16 per scanline, in 512 colors. Although the hardware can only handle 481 simultaneous colors. It has 8 kilobytes of RAM. The Turbo runs the HuC6820 CPU at 1.79 or 7.16 MHz.

The optional &quot;TurboVision&quot; TV tuner includes RCA audio/video input, allowing users to use TurboExpress as a video monitor. The &quot;TurboLink&quot; allowed two-player play. &quot;Falcon&quot;, a flight simulator, included a &quot;head-to-head&quot; dogfight mode that can only be accessed via TurboLink. However, very few TG-16 games offered co-op play modes especially designed with the TurboExpress in mind.

==== Bitcorp Gamate ====
The Bitcorp Gamate is one of the first handheld game systems created in response to the Nintendo Game Boy. It was released in Asia in 1990 and distributed worldwide by 1991.

Like the Sega Game Gear, it was horizontal in orientation and like the Game Boy, required 4 AA batteries. Unlike many later Game Boy clones, its internal components were professionally assembled (no &quot;glop-top&quot; chips). Unfortunately the system&#x27;s fatal flaw is its screen. Even by the standards of the day, its screen is rather difficult to use, suffering from similar ghosting problems that were common complaints with the first generation Game Boys. Likely because of this fact sales were quite poor, and Bitcorp closed by 1992. However, new games continued to be published for the Asian market, possibly as late as 1994. The total number of games released for the system remains unknown.

Gamate games were designed for stereo sound, but the console is only equipped with a mono speaker. 

==== Game Gear ====

The Game Gear is the third color handheld console, after the Lynx and the TurboExpress; produced by Sega. Released in Japan in 1990 and in North America and Europe in 1991, it is based on the Master System, which gave Sega the ability to quickly create Game Gear games from its large library of games for the Master System. While never reaching the level of success enjoyed by Nintendo, the Game Gear proved to be a fairly durable competitor, lasting longer than any other Game Boy rivals.

While the Game Gear is most frequently seen in black or navy blue, it was also released in a variety of additional colors: red, light blue, yellow, clear, and violet. All of these variations were released in small quantities and frequently only in the Asian market.

Following Sega&#x27;s success with the Game Gear, they began development on a successor during the early 1990s, which was intended to feature a touchscreen interface, many years before the Nintendo DS. However, such a technology was very expensive at the time, and the handheld itself was estimated to have cost around $289 were it to be released. Sega eventually chose to shelve the idea and instead release the Genesis Nomad, a handheld version of the Genesis, as the successor.

==== Watara Supervision ====
The Watara Supervision was released in 1992 in an attempt to compete with the Nintendo Game Boy. The first model was designed very much like a Game Boy, but it is grey in color and has a slightly larger screen. The second model was made with a hinge across the center and can be bent slightly to provide greater comfort for the user. While the system did enjoy a modest degree of success, it never impacted the sales of Nintendo or Sega. The Supervision was redesigned a final time as &quot;The Magnum&quot;. Released in limited quantities it was roughly equivalent to the Game Boy Pocket. It was available in three colors: yellow, green and grey. Watara designed many of the games themselves, but did receive some third party support, most notably from Sachen.

A TV adapter was available in both PAL and NTSC formats that could transfer the Supervision&#x27;s black-and-white palette to 4 colors, similar in some regards to the Super Game Boy from Nintendo.

==== Hartung Game Master ====
The Hartung Game Master is an obscure handheld released at an unknown point in the early 1990s. Its graphics fidelity was much lower than most of its contemporaries, displaying just 64x64 pixels. It was available in black, white, and purple, and was frequently rebranded by its distributors, such as Delplay, Videojet and Systema.

The exact number of games released is not known, but is likely around 20. The system most frequently turns up in Europe and Australia.

=== Late 1990s ===
By this time, the lack of significant development in Nintendo&#x27;s product line began allowing more advanced systems such as the Neo Geo Pocket Color and the WonderSwan Color to be developed.

==== Sega Nomad ====
The Nomad was released in October 1995 in North America only. The release was six years into the market span of the Genesis, with an existing library of more than 500 Genesis games. According to former Sega of America research and development head Joe Miller, the Nomad was not intended to be the Game Gear&#x27;s replacement; he believed that there was little planning from Sega of Japan for the new handheld. Sega was supporting five different consoles: Saturn, Genesis, Game Gear, Pico, and the Master System, as well as the Sega CD and 32X add-ons. In Japan, the Mega Drive had never been successful and the Saturn was more successful than Sony&#x27;s PlayStation, so Sega Enterprises CEO Hayao Nakayama decided to focus on the Saturn. By 1999, the Nomad was being sold at less than a third of its original price.

==== Game Boy Pocket ====
The Game Boy Pocket is a redesigned version of the original Game Boy having the same features. It was released in 1996. Notably, this variation is smaller and lighter. It comes in seven different colors; red, yellow, green, black, clear, silver, blue, and pink. It has space for two AAA batteries, which provide approximately 10 hours of game play. The screen was changed to a true black-and-white display, rather than the &quot;pea soup&quot; monochromatic display of the original Game Boy. Although, like its predecessor, the Game Boy Pocket has no backlight to allow play in a darkened area, it did notably improve visibility and pixel response-time (mostly eliminating ghosting).

The first model of the Game Boy Pocket did not have an LED to show battery levels, but the feature was added due to public demand. The Game Boy Pocket was not a new software platform and played the same software as the original Game Boy model.

==== Game.com ====
The Game.com (pronounced in TV commercials as &quot;game com&quot;, not &quot;game dot com&quot;, and not capitalized in marketing material) is a handheld game console released by Tiger Electronics in September 1997. It featured many new ideas for handheld consoles and was aimed at an older target audience, sporting PDA-style features and functions such as a touch screen and stylus. However, Tiger hoped it would also challenge Nintendo&#x27;s Game Boy and gain a following among younger gamers too. Unlike other handheld game consoles, the first game.com consoles included two slots for game cartridges, which would not happen again until the Tapwave Zodiac, the DS and DS Lite, and could be connected to a 14.4 kbit/s modem. Later models had only a single cartridge slot.

==== Game Boy Color ====
The Game Boy Color (also referred to as GBC or CGB) is Nintendo&#x27;s successor to the Game Boy and was released on October 21, 1998, in Japan and in November of the same year in the United States. It features a color screen, and is slightly bigger than the Game Boy Pocket. The processor is twice as fast as a Game Boy&#x27;s and has twice as much memory. It also had an infrared communications port for wireless linking which did not appear in later versions of the Game Boy, such as the Game Boy Advance.

The Game Boy Color was a response to pressure from game developers for a new system, as they felt that the Game Boy, even in its latest incarnation, the Game Boy Pocket, was insufficient. The resulting product was backward compatible, a first for a handheld console system, and leveraged the large library of games and great installed base of the predecessor system. This became a major feature of the Game Boy line, since it allowed each new launch to begin with a significantly larger library than any of its competitors. As of March 31, 2005, the Game Boy and Game Boy Color combined to sell 118.69 million units worldwide.

The console is capable of displaying up to 56 different colors simultaneously on screen from its palette of 32,768, and can add basic four-color shading to games that had been developed for the original Game Boy. It can also give the sprites and backgrounds separate colors, for a total of more than four colors.

==== Neo Geo Pocket Color ====
The Neo Geo Pocket Color (or NGPC) was released in 1999 in Japan, and later that year in the United States and Europe. It is a 16-bit color handheld game console designed by SNK, the maker of the Neo Geo home console and arcade machine. It came after SNK&#x27;s original Neo Geo Pocket monochrome handheld, which debuted in 1998 in Japan.

In 2000 following SNK&#x27;s purchase by Japanese Pachinko manufacturer Aruze, the Neo Geo Pocket Color was dropped from both the US and European markets, purportedly due to commercial failure.

The system seemed well on its way to being a success in the U.S. It was more successful than any Game Boy competitor since Sega&#x27;s Game Gear, but was hurt by several factors, such as SNK&#x27;s infamous lack of communication with third-party developers, and anticipation of the Game Boy Advance. The decision to ship U.S. games in cardboard boxes in a cost-cutting move rather than hard plastic cases that Japanese and European releases were shipped in may have also hurt US sales.

==== Wonderswan Color ====
The WonderSwan Color is a handheld game console designed by Bandai. It was released on December 9, 2000, in Japan, Although the WonderSwan Color was slightly larger and heavier (7 mm and 2 g) compared to the original WonderSwan, the color version featured 512 KB of RAM and a larger color LCD screen. In addition, the WonderSwan Color is compatible with the original WonderSwan library of games.

Prior to WonderSwan&#x27;s release, Nintendo had virtually a monopoly in the Japanese video game handheld market. After the release of the WonderSwan Color, Bandai took approximately 8% of the market share in Japan partly due to its low price of 6800 yen (approximately US$65). Another reason for the WonderSwan&#x27;s success in Japan was the fact that Bandai managed to get a deal with Square to port over the original Famicom &quot;Final Fantasy&quot; games with improved graphics and controls. However, with the popularity of the Game Boy Advance and the reconciliation between Square and Nintendo, the WonderSwan Color and its successor, the SwanCrystal quickly lost its competitive advantage.

=== Early 2000s ===
The 2000s saw a major leap in innovation, particularly in the second half with the release of the DS and PSP.

==== Game Boy Advance ====
In 2001, Nintendo released the Game Boy Advance (GBA or AGB), which added two shoulder buttons, a larger screen, and more computing power than the Game Boy Color.

The design was revised two years later when the Game Boy Advance SP (GBA SP), a more compact version, was released. The SP features a &quot;clamshell&quot; design (folding open and closed, like a laptop computer), as well as a frontlit color display and rechargeable battery. Despite the smaller form factor, the screen remained the same size as that of the original. In 2005, the Game Boy Micro was released. This revision sacrificed screen size and backwards compatibility with previous Game Boys for a dramatic reduction in total size and a brighter backlit screen. A new SP model with a backlit screen was released in some regions around the same time.

Along with the GameCube, the GBA also introduced the concept of &quot;connectivity&quot;: using a handheld system as a console controller. A handful of games use this feature, most notably &quot;Animal Crossing&quot;, &quot;Pac-Man Vs.&quot;, &quot;Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles&quot;, &quot;The Legend of Zelda: Four Swords Adventures&quot;, &quot;The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker&quot;, &quot;Metroid Prime&quot;, and &quot;Sonic Adventure 2: Battle&quot;.

As of December 31, 2007, the GBA, GBA SP, and the Game Boy Micro combined have sold 80.72 million units worldwide.

==== Game Park 32 ====
The original GP32 was released in 2001 by the South Korean company Game Park a few months after the launch of the Game Boy Advance. It featured a 32-bit CPU, 133 MHz processor, MP3 and Divx player, and e-book reader. SmartMedia cards were used for storage, and could hold up to 128mb of anything downloaded through a USB cable from a PC. The GP32 was redesigned in 2003. A front-lit screen was added and the new version was called GP32 FLU (Front Light Unit). In summer 2004, another redesign, the GP32 BLU, was made, and added a backlit screen. This version of the handheld was planned for release outside South Korea; in Europe, and it was released for example in Spain (VirginPlay was the distributor). While not a commercial success on a level with mainstream handhelds (only 30,000 units were sold), it ended up being used mainly as a platform for user-made applications and emulators of other systems, being popular with developers and more technically adept users.

==== N-Gage ====

Nokia released the N-Gage in 2003. It was designed as a combination MP3 player, cellphone, PDA, radio, and gaming device. The system received much criticism alleging defects in its physical design and layout, including its vertically oriented screen and requirement of removing the battery to change game cartridges. The most well known of these was &quot;sidetalking&quot;, or the act of placing the phone speaker and receiver on an edge of the device instead of one of the flat sides, causing the user to appear as if they are speaking into a taco.

The N-Gage QD was later released to address the design flaws of the original. However, certain features available in the original N-Gage, including MP3 playback, FM radio reception, and USB connectivity were removed.

Second generation of N-Gage launched on April 3, 2008 in the form of a service for selected Nokia Smartphones.

==== Tapwave Zodiac ====

In 2003, Tapwave released the Zodiac. It was designed to be a PDA-handheld game console hybrid. It supported photos, movies, music, Internet, and documents. The Zodiac used a special version Palm OS 5, 5.2T, that supported the special gaming buttons and graphics chip. Two versions were available, Zodiac 1 and 2, differing in memory and looks. The Zodiac line ended in July 2005 when Tapwave declared bankruptcy.

=== Mid 2000s ===

==== Nintendo DS ====
The Nintendo DS was released in November 2004. Among its new features were the incorporation of two screens, a touchscreen, wireless connectivity, and a microphone port. As with the Game Boy Advance SP, the DS features a clamshell design, with the two screens aligned vertically on either side of the hinge.

The DS&#x27;s lower screen is touch sensitive, designed to be pressed with a stylus, a user&#x27;s finger or a special &quot;thumb pad&quot; (a small plastic pad attached to the console&#x27;s wrist strap, which can be affixed to the thumb to simulate an analog stick). More traditional controls include four face buttons, two shoulder buttons, a D-pad, and &quot;Start&quot; and &quot;Select&quot; buttons. The console also features online capabilities via the Nintendo Wi-Fi Connection and ad-hoc wireless networking for multiplayer games with up to sixteen players. It is backwards-compatible with all Game Boy Advance games, but like the Game Boy Micro, it is not compatible with games designed for the Game Boy or Game Boy Color.

In January 2006, Nintendo revealed an updated version of the DS: the Nintendo DS Lite (released on March 2, 2006, in Japan) with an updated, smaller form factor (42% smaller and 21% lighter than the original Nintendo DS), a cleaner design, longer battery life, and brighter, higher-quality displays, with adjustable brightness. It is also able to connect wirelessly with Nintendo&#x27;s Wii console.

On October 2, 2008, Nintendo announced the Nintendo DSi, with larger, 3.25-inch screens and two integrated cameras. It has an SD card storage slot in place of the Game Boy Advance slot, plus internal flash memory for storing downloaded games. It was released on November 1, 2008, in Japan, April 2, 2009, in Australia, April 3, 2009, in Europe, and April 5, 2009, in North America. On October 29, 2009, Nintendo announced a larger version of the DSi, called the DSi XL, which was released on November 21, 2009, in Japan, March 5, 2010, in Europe, March 28, 2010, in North America, and April 15, 2010, in Australia.

As of December 31, 2009, the Nintendo DS, Nintendo DS Lite, and Nintendo DSi combined have sold 125.13 million units worldwide.

==== Game King ====
The GameKing is a handheld game console released by the Chinese company TimeTop in 2004. The first model while original in design owes a large debt to Nintendo&#x27;s Game Boy Advance. The second model, the GameKing 2, is believed to be inspired by Sony&#x27;s PSP. This model also was upgraded with a backlit screen, with a distracting background transparency (which can be removed by opening up the console). A color model, the GameKing 3 apparently exists, but was only made for a brief time and was difficult to purchase outside of Asia. Whether intentionally or not, the GameKing has the most primitive graphics of any handheld released since the Game Boy of 1989. 

As many of the games have an &quot;old school&quot; simplicity, the device has developed a small cult following. The Gameking&#x27;s speaker is quite loud and the cartridges&#x27; sophisticated looping soundtracks (sampled from other sources) are seemingly at odds with its primitive graphics.

TimeTop made at least one additional device sometimes labeled as &quot;GameKing&quot;, but while it seems to possess more advanced graphics, is essentially an emulator that plays a handful of multi-carts (like the GB Station Light II). Outside of Asia (especially China) however the Gameking remains relatively unheard of due to the enduring popularity of Japanese handhelds such as those manufactured by Nintendo and Sony.

==== PlayStation Portable ====
The PlayStation Portable (officially abbreviated PSP) is a handheld game console manufactured and marketed by Sony Computer Entertainment. Development of the console was first announced during E3 2003, and it was unveiled on May 11, 2004, at a Sony press conference before E3 2004. The system was released in Japan on December 12, 2004, in North America on March 24, 2005, and in the PAL region on September 1, 2005.

The PlayStation Portable is the first handheld video game console to use an optical disc format, Universal Media Disc (UMD), for distribution of its games. UMD Video discs with movies and television shows were also released. The PSP utilized the Sony/SanDisk Memory Stick Pro Duo format as its primary storage medium. Other distinguishing features of the console include its large viewing screen, multi-media capabilities, and connectivity with the PlayStation 3, other PSPs, and the Internet.

==== Gizmondo ====
Tiger&#x27;s Gizmondo came out in the UK during March 2005 and it was released in the U.S. during October 2005. It is designed to play music, movies, and games, have a camera for taking and storing photos, and have GPS functions. It also has Internet capabilities. It has a phone for sending text and multimedia messages. Email was promised at launch, but was never released before Gizmondo, and ultimately Tiger Telematics&#x27;, downfall in early 2006. Users obtained a second service pack, unreleased, hoping to find such functionality. However, Service Pack B did not activate the e-mail functionality.

==== GP2X Series ====
The GP2X is an open-source, Linux-based handheld video game console and media player created by GamePark Holdings of South Korea, designed for homebrew developers as well as commercial developers. It is commonly used to run emulators for game consoles such as Neo-Geo, Genesis, Master System, Game Gear, Amstrad CPC, Commodore 64, Nintendo Entertainment System, TurboGrafx-16, MAME and others.

A new version called the &quot;F200&quot; was released October 30, 2007, and features a touchscreen, among other changes. Followed by GP2X Wiz (2009) and GP2X Caanoo (2010).

=== Late 2000s ===

==== Dingoo ====
The Dingoo A320 is a micro-sized gaming handheld that resembles the Game Boy Micro and is open to game development. It also supports music, radio, emulators (8 bit and 16 bit) and video playing capabilities with its own interface much like the PSP. There is also an onboard radio and recording program. It is currently available in two colors — white and black. Other similar products from the same manufacturer are the Dingoo A330 (also known as Geimi), Dingoo A360, Dingoo A380, and Dingoo A320E.

==== PSP Go ====
The PSP Go is a version of the PlayStation Portable handheld game console manufactured by Sony. It was released on October 1, 2009, in American and European territories, and on November 1 in Japan. It was revealed prior to E3 2009 through Sony&#x27;s Qore VOD service. Although its design is significantly different from other PSPs, it is not intended to replace the PSP 3000, which Sony continued to manufacture, sell, and support. On April 20, 2011, the manufacturer announced that the PSP Go would be discontinued so that they may concentrate on the PlayStation Vita. Sony later said that only the European and Japanese versions were being cut, and that the console would still be available in the US.
Unlike previous PSP models, the PSP Go does not feature a UMD drive, but instead has 16 GB of internal flash memory to store games, video, pictures, and other media. This can be extended by up to 32 GB with the use of a Memory Stick Micro (M2) flash card. Also unlike previous PSP models, the PSP Go&#x27;s rechargeable battery is not removable or replaceable by the user. The unit is 43% lighter and 56% smaller than the original PSP-1000, and 16% lighter and 35% smaller than the PSP-3000. It has a 3.8&quot; 480 × 272 LCD (compared to the larger 4.3&quot; 480 × 272 pixel LCD on previous PSP models). The screen slides up to reveal the main controls. The overall shape and sliding mechanism are similar to that of Sony&#x27;s mylo COM-2 internet device.

==== Pandora ====
The Pandora is a handheld game console/UMPC/PDA hybrid designed to take advantage of existing open source software and to be a target for home-brew development. It runs a full distribution of Linux, and in functionality is like a small PC with gaming controls. It is developed by OpenPandora, which is made up of former distributors and community members of the GP32 and GP2X handhelds.

OpenPandora began taking pre-orders for one batch of 4000 devices in November 2008 and after manufacturing delays, began shipping to customers on May 21, 2010.
==== FC-16 Go ====
The FC-16 Go is a portable Super NES hardware clone manufactured by Yobo Gameware in 2009. It features a 3.5-inch display, two wireless controllers, and CRT cables that allow cartridges to be played on a television screen. Unlike other Super NES clone consoles, it has region tabs that only allow NTSC North American cartridges to be played. Later revisions feature stereo sound output, larger shoulder buttons, and a slightly re-arranged button, power, and A/V output layout.

=== 2010s ===

==== Nintendo 3DS ====
The Nintendo 3DS is the successor to Nintendo&#x27;s DS handheld. The autostereoscopic device is able to project stereoscopic three-dimensional effects without requirement of active shutter or passive polarized glasses, which are required by most current 3D televisions to display the 3D effect. The 3DS was released in Japan on February 26, 2011; in Europe on March 25, 2011; in North America on March 27, 2011, and in Australia on March 31, 2011. The system features backward compatibility with Nintendo DS series software, including Nintendo DSi software except those that require the Game Boy Advance slot. It also features an online service called the Nintendo eShop, launched on June 6, 2011, in North America and June 7, 2011, in Europe and Japan, which allows owners to download games, demos, applications and information on upcoming film and game releases. On November 24, 2011, a limited edition &quot;Legend of Zelda 25th Anniversary 3DS&quot; was released that contained a unique Cosmo Black unit decorated with gold Legend of Zelda related imagery, along with a copy of &quot;The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time 3D&quot;.

There are also other models including the Nintendo 2DS and the New Nintendo 3DS, the latter with a larger (XL/LL) variant, like the original Nintendo 3DS, as well as the New Nintendo 2DS XL.
==== Xperia Play ====
The Sony Ericsson Xperia PLAY is a handheld game console smartphone produced by Sony Ericsson under the Xperia smartphone brand. The device runs Android 2.3 Gingerbread, and is the first to be part of the PlayStation Certified program which means that it can play PlayStation Suite games. The device is a horizontally sliding phone with its original form resembling the Xperia X10 while the slider below resembles the slider of the PSP Go. The slider features a D-pad on the left side, a set of standard PlayStation buttons (, , and ) on the right, a long rectangular touchpad in the middle, start and select buttons on the bottom right corner, a menu button on the bottom left corner, and two shoulder buttons (L and R) on the back of the device. It is powered by a 1 GHz Qualcomm Snapdragon processor, a Qualcomm Adreno 205 GPU, and features a display measuring 4.0 inches (100 mm) (854 × 480), an 8-megapixel camera, 512 MB RAM, 8 GB internal storage, and a micro-USB connector. It supports microSD cards, versus the Memory Stick variants used in PSP consoles. The device was revealed officially for the first time in a Super Bowl ad on Sunday, February 6, 2011. On February 13, 2011, at Mobile World Congress (MWC) 2011, it was announced that the device would be shipping globally in March 2011, with a launch lineup of around 50 software titles.
==== PlayStation Vita ====
The PlayStation Vita is the successor to Sony&#x27;s PlayStation Portable (PSP) Handheld series. It was released in Japan on December 17, 2011, and in Europe, Australia, North, and South America on February 22, 2012.

The handheld includes two analog sticks, a 5-inch (130 mm) OLED/LCD multi-touch capacitive touchscreen, and supports Bluetooth, Wi-Fi and optional 3G. Internally, the PS Vita features a 4 core ARM Cortex-A9 MPCore processor and a 4 core SGX543MP4+ graphics processing unit, as well as LiveArea software as its main user interface, which succeeds the XrossMediaBar.

The device is fully backwards-compatible with PlayStation Portable games digitally released on the PlayStation Network via the PlayStation Store. However, PSone Classics and PS2 titles were not compatible at the time of the primary public release in Japan. The Vita&#x27;s dual analog sticks will be supported on selected PSP games. The graphics for PSP releases will be up-scaled, with a smoothing filter to reduce pixelation.

On September 20, 2018, Sony announced at Tokyo Game Show 2018 that the Vita would be discontinued in 2019, ending its hardware production. Production of Vita hardware officially ended on March 1, 2019.
==== Razer Switchblade ====
The Razer Switchblade was a prototype pocket-sized like a Nintendo DSi XL designed to run Windows 7, featured a multi-touch LCD screen and an adaptive keyboard that changed keys depending on the game the user would play. It also was to feature a full mouse.

It was first unveiled on January 5, 2011, on the Consumer Electronics Show (CES). The Switchblade won The Best of CES 2011 People&#x27;s Voice award. It has since been in development and the release date is still unknown. The device has likely been suspended indefinitely.
==== Nvidia Shield ====
Project Shield is a handheld system developed by Nvidia announced at CES 2013. It runs on Android 4.2 and uses Nvidia Tegra 4 SoC. The hardware includes a 5-inches multitouch screen with support for HD graphics (720p). The console allows for the streaming of games running on a compatible desktop PC, or laptop.

Nvidia Shield Portable has received mixed reception from critics. Generally, reviewers praised the performance of the device, but criticized the cost and lack of worthwhile games. Engadget&#x27;s review noted the system&#x27;s &quot;extremely impressive PC gaming&quot;, but also that due to its high price, the device was &quot;a hard sell as a portable game console&quot;, especially when compared to similar handhelds on the market. CNET&#x27;s Eric Franklin states in his review of the device that &quot;The Nvidia Shield is an extremely well made device, with performance that pretty much obliterates any mobile product before it; but like most new console launches, there is currently a lack of available games worth your time.&quot; Eurogamer&#x27;s comprehensive review of the device provides a detailed account of the device and its features; concluded by saying: &quot;In the here and now, the first-gen Shield Portable is a gloriously niche, luxury product - the most powerful Android system on the market by a clear stretch and possessing a unique link to PC gaming that&#x27;s seriously impressive in beta form, and can only get better.&quot;

==== Nintendo Switch ====
The Nintendo Switch is a hybrid console that can either be used in a handheld form, or inserted into a docking station attached to a television to play on a bigger screen. The Switch features two detachable wireless controllers, called Joy-Con, which can be used individually or attached to a grip to provide a traditional gamepad form. A handheld-only revision named Nintendo Switch Lite was released on September 20, 2019.

The Switch Lite had sold about 1.95 million units worldwide by September 30, 2019, only 10 days after its launch.
=== 2020s ===
==== Evercade ====

Evercade is a handheld game console developed and manufactured by UK company Blaze Entertainment. It focuses on retrogaming with ROM cartridges that each contain a number of emulated games. Development began in 2018, and the console was released in May 2020, after a few delays. Upon its launch, the console offered 10 game cartridges with a combined total of 122 games.

Arc System Works, Atari, Data East, Interplay Entertainment, Bandai Namco Entertainment and Piko Interactive have released emulated versions of their games for the Evercade. Pre-existing homebrew games have also been re-released for the console by Mega Cat Studios. The Evercade is capable of playing games originally released for the Atari 2600, the Atari 7800, the Atari Lynx, the NES, the SNES, and the Sega Genesis/Mega Drive.
==== Analogue Pocket ====

The Analogue Pocket is a FPGA-based handheld game console designed and manufactured by Analogue, It is designed to play games designed for handhelds of the fourth, fifth and sixth generation of video game consoles. The console features a design reminiscent of the Game Boy, with additional buttons for the supported platforms. It features a 3.5&quot; 1600x1440 LTPS LCD display, an SD card port, and a link cable port compatible with Game Boy link cables. The Analogue Pocket uses an Altera Cyclone V processor, and is compatible with the original Game Boy, Game Boy Color and Game Boy Advance cartridges out of the box. With cartridge adapters (sold separately) the Analogue Pocket can play Game Gear, Neo Geo Pocket, Neo Geo Pocket Color and Atari Lynx game cartridges. The Analogue Pocket includes an additional FPGA, allowing 3rd party FPGA development. The Analogue Pocket was released in December 2021.
==== Steam Deck ====
The Steam Deck is a handheld computer device, developed by Valve, which runs SteamOS 3.0, a tailored distro of Arch Linux and includes support for Proton, a compatibility layer that allows most Microsoft Windows games to be played on the Linux-based operating system. This device and other similar ones generally are not referred to as &quot;consoles&quot; but more commonly as handheld style gaming computers due to effectively being IBM PC–compatible like contemporary desktop and laptop gaming PCs. In terms of hardware, the Deck includes a custom AMD APU based on their Zen 2 and RDNA 2 architectures, with the CPU running a four-core/eight-thread unit and the GPU running on eight compute units with a total estimated performance of 1.6 TFLOPS. Both the CPU and GPU use variable timing frequencies, with the CPU running between 2.4 and 3.5 GHz and the GPU between 1.0 and 1.6 GHz based on current processor needs. Valve stated that the CPU has comparable performance to Ryzen 3000 desktop computer processors and the GPU performance to the Radeon RX 6000 series. The Deck includes 16 GB of LPDDR5 RAM in a quad channel configuration.

Valve revealed the Steam Deck on July 15, 2021, with pre-orders being made option the next day. The Deck was expected to ship in December 2021 to the US, Canada, the EU and the UK but was delayed to February 2022, with other regions to follow in 2022. Pre-orders were limited to those with Steam accounts opened before June 2021 to prevent resellers from controlling access to the device. Pre-orders reservations on July 16, 2021, through the Steam storefront briefly crashed the servers due to the demand. While initial shipments are still planned by February 2022, Valve has reported to new purchasers that wider availability will be later, with the 64 GB model and 256 GB NVMe model due in Q2 2022, and the 512 GB NVMe model by Q3 2022. Steam Deck was released on February 25, 2022.

== See also ==
* List of handheld game consoles
* Video game console emulator
* Handheld electronic game
* Handheld television
* Video games and Linux
* Cloud gaming
* Mobile game

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q941818" start="2" end="23" title="Handheld game console" label="handheld game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q941818" start="35" end="51" title="Handheld game console" label="handheld console"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076" start="89" end="107" title="video game console" label="video game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q17589470" start="200" end="223" title="home video game console" label="home video game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q596139" start="371" end="377" title="Mattel" label="Mattel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797918" start="399" end="423" title="handheld electronic game" label="handheld electronic game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827177" start="450" end="459" title="Mattel Auto Race" label="Auto Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q954124" start="502" end="508" title="Coleco" label="Coleco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150493" start="513" end="527" title="Milton Bradley Company" label="Milton Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q458660" start="668" end="674" title="Merlin (console)" label="Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q633454" start="777" end="787" title="ROM cartridge" label="cartridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475303" start="810" end="821" title="Microvision" label="Microvision"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="832" end="840" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q186437" start="924" end="932" title="Game Boy" label="Game Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="1006" end="1014" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q165970" start="1061" end="1072" title="touchscreen" label="touchscreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498396" start="1081" end="1089" title="Game.com" label="Game.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q119267" start="1102" end="1119" title="Tiger Electronics" label="Tiger Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="1133" end="1144" title="Nintendo DS" label="Nintendo DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q249" start="1200" end="1208" title="wireless" label="wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q116634" start="1209" end="1222" title="Online game" label="online gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119235" start="1257" end="1286" title="List of best-selling game consoles" label="best-selling handheld console"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249798" start="1540" end="1558" title="dedicated consoles" label="dedicated consoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797918" start="1568" end="1577" title="Handheld electronic game" label="LCD games"/>
<link wikidata="Q207786" start="1586" end="1596" title="Tamagotchi" label="Tamagotchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="1923" end="1926" title="Light-emitting diode" label="LED"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277396" start="1928" end="1931" title="Vacuum fluorescent display" label="VFD"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="1936" end="1939" title="Liquid crystal display" label="LCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263882" start="2000" end="2019" title="Popular Electronics" label="Popular Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q533188" start="2278" end="2296" title="Electromechanics" label="electro-mechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958837" start="2313" end="2317" title="Waco (toymaker)" label="Waco"/>
<link wikidata="Q193091" start="2443" end="2457" title="Optoelectronics" label="optoelectronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q954124" start="3589" end="3595" title="Coleco" label="Coleco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501379" start="3597" end="3612" title="Parker Brothers" label="Parker Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2150493" start="3614" end="3628" title="Milton Bradley Company" label="Milton Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380509" start="3630" end="3635" title="Entex Industries" label="Entex"/>
<link wikidata="Q507269" start="3641" end="3647" title="Bandai" label="Bandai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475303" start="3745" end="3756" title="Microvision" label="Microvision"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445850" start="4003" end="4018" title="D-pad" label="directional pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q366261" start="4157" end="4169" title="Gunpei Yokoi" label="Gunpei Yokoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q164338" start="4186" end="4198" title="Shinkansen" label="bullet train"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="4240" end="4243" title="LCD" label="LCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q31087" start="4244" end="4254" title="calculator" label="calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="4399" end="4407" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q215034" start="4483" end="4499" title="Game &amp;amp; Watch" label="Game &amp;amp; Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="4928" end="4931" title="Nintendo Entertainment System" label="NES"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797918" start="5362" end="5383" title="Bandai LCD Solarpower" label="Bandai LCD Solarpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q40015" start="5398" end="5411" title="solar energy" label="solar-powered"/>
<link wikidata="Q333967" start="5458" end="5464" title="Survival horror" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="5516" end="5525" title="LCD panel" label="LCD panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q35158" start="5567" end="5576" title="Stereoscopy" label="3D effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335998" start="5587" end="5598" title="Takara Tomy" label="Takara Tomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820422" start="5606" end="5619" title="Tomytronic 3D" label="Tomytronic 3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q189177" start="5630" end="5632" title="3D computer graphics" label="3D"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="5647" end="5650" title="LCD" label="LCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q574291" start="5943" end="5950" title="backlit" label="backlit"/>
<link wikidata="Q187510" start="6153" end="6173" title="rechargeable battery" label="rechargeable battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q751719" start="6268" end="6282" title="Sega Game Gear" label="Sega Game Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q753657" start="6287" end="6297" title="Atari Lynx" label="Atari Lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q898377" start="6494" end="6508" title="Nickel-cadmium battery" label="nickel-cadmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q308567" start="6761" end="6765" title="Nickel-metal hydride battery" label="NiMH"/>
<link wikidata="Q212120" start="7076" end="7079" title="ampere hour" label="mAh"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="7185" end="7196" title="Nintendo DS" label="Nintendo DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q170325" start="7201" end="7221" title="PlayStation Portable" label="PlayStation Portable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822895" start="7240" end="7251" title="Lithium-ion battery" label="Lithium-Ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q907531" start="7334" end="7338" title="GP2X" label="GP2X"/>
<link wikidata="Q861345" start="7353" end="7371" title="Alkaline battery" label="alkaline batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="7559" end="7567" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q366261" start="7663" end="7675" title="Gunpei Yokoi" label="Gunpei Yokoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q215034" start="7710" end="7726" title="Game &amp;amp; Watch" label="Game &amp;amp; Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="7750" end="7779" title="Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Nintendo Entertainment System"/>
<link wikidata="Q12397" start="7792" end="7799" title="Metroid" label="Metroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142493" start="7816" end="7826" title="Kid Icarus" label="Kid Icarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q354768" start="7889" end="7905" title="Hiroshi Yamauchi" label="Hiroshi Yamauchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047507" start="8215" end="8225" title="Killer application" label="killer app"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853652" start="8323" end="8337" title="Minoru Arakawa" label="Minoru Arakawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q71910" start="8409" end="8415" title="Tetris" label="Tetris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8529" end="8541" title="Glossary of video game terms#Launch title" label="launch title"/>
<link wikidata="Q203992" start="8684" end="8698" title="Game Boy Color" label="Game Boy Color"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347787" start="8781" end="8785" title="Epyx" label="Epyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q574291" start="8939" end="8946" title="backlight" label="backlit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421902" start="9145" end="9156" title="Left-handedness" label="left-handed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612014" start="9603" end="9621" title="List of commercial failures in video gaming" label="commercial failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q966193" start="10105" end="10117" title="TurboExpress" label="PC Engine GT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057377" start="10186" end="10199" title="TurboGrafx-16" label="TurboGrafx-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190785" start="10267" end="10273" title="HuCard" label="HuCard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333015" start="10397" end="10404" title="Sprite (computer graphics)" label="sprites"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="10531" end="10534" title="Random-access memory" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="10563" end="10566" title="Central processing unit" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="10583" end="10586" title="Hertz" label="MHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002263" start="11593" end="11601" title="Image persistence" label="ghosting"/>
<link wikidata="Q209868" start="12230" end="12243" title="Master System" label="Master System"/>
<link wikidata="Q165970" start="12940" end="12951" title="touchscreen" label="touchscreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="12985" end="12996" title="Nintendo DS" label="Nintendo DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q540868" start="13209" end="13222" title="Genesis Nomad" label="Genesis Nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q10676" start="13250" end="13257" title="Sega Genesis" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q186437" start="13880" end="13895" title="Game Boy Pocket" label="Game Boy Pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784257" start="14061" end="14067" title="Thin Chen Enterprise" label="Sachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="14838" end="14846" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977455" start="14916" end="14936" title="Neo Geo Pocket Color" label="Neo Geo Pocket Color"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065792" start="14945" end="14961" title="WonderSwan Color" label="WonderSwan Color"/>
<link wikidata="Q200912" start="15457" end="15463" title="Sega Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q751719" start="15474" end="15483" title="Game Gear" label="Game Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374482" start="15485" end="15489" title="Sega Pico" label="Pico"/>
<link wikidata="Q209868" start="15499" end="15512" title="Master System" label="Master System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047516" start="15529" end="15536" title="Sega CD" label="Sega CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063978" start="15541" end="15544" title="32X" label="32X"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="15657" end="15668" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686016" start="15694" end="15708" title="Hayao Nakayama" label="Hayao Nakayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1839187" start="16129" end="16142" title="AAA battery" label="AAA batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002263" start="16519" end="16527" title="Image persistence" label="ghosting"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="16586" end="16589" title="Light-emitting diode" label="LED"/>
<link wikidata="Q119267" start="16975" end="16992" title="Tiger Electronics" label="Tiger Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q186437" start="17857" end="17872" title="Game Boy Pocket" label="Game Boy Pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="17971" end="17979" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q203992" start="18671" end="18685" title="Game Boy Color" label="Game Boy Color"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073880" start="19255" end="19258" title="SNK Playmore" label="SNK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054350" start="19277" end="19284" title="Neo Geo (console)" label="Neo Geo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977455" start="19352" end="19366" title="Neo Geo Pocket" label="Neo Geo Pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q836661" start="19471" end="19479" title="Pachinko" label="Pachinko"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="19739" end="19743" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q751719" start="19751" end="19760" title="Sega Game Gear" label="Game Gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q507269" start="20190" end="20196" title="Bandai" label="Bandai"/>
<link wikidata="Q79726" start="20390" end="20392" title="kilobyte" label="KB"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="20396" end="20399" title="Random-access memory" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="20797" end="20800" title="United States dollar" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q739552" start="20915" end="20921" title="Square (video game company)" label="Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="20948" end="20955" title="Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Famicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12391356" start="20962" end="20975" title="Final Fantasy" label="Final Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065792" start="21174" end="21185" title="SwanCrystal" label="SwanCrystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150207" start="21203" end="21224" title="competitive advantage" label="competitive advantage"/>
<link wikidata="Q170325" start="21352" end="21355" title="PlayStation Portable" label="PSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q842836" start="21597" end="21616" title="Game Boy Advance SP" label="Game Boy Advance SP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511295" start="21689" end="21698" title="Bivalve shell" label="clamshell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506078" start="21776" end="21784" title="Frontlight" label="frontlit"/>
<link wikidata="Q865012" start="21930" end="21944" title="Game Boy Micro" label="Game Boy Micro"/>
<link wikidata="Q574291" start="22102" end="22109" title="Backlight" label="backlit"/>
<link wikidata="Q182172" start="22222" end="22230" title="GameCube" label="GameCube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139803" start="22402" end="22417" title="Animal Crossing" label="Animal Crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282474" start="22431" end="22442" title="Pac-Man Vs." label="Pac-Man Vs."/>
<link wikidata="Q2584287" start="22456" end="22488" title="Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles" label="Final Fantasy Crystal Chronicles"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22502" end="22545" title="The Legend of Zelda: Four Swords Adventures" label="The Legend of Zelda: Four Swords Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22559" end="22594" title="The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker" label="The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765733" start="22608" end="22621" title="Metroid Prime" label="Metroid Prime"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22639" end="22664" title="Sonic Adventure 2: Battle" label="Sonic Adventure 2: Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q490480" start="22879" end="22888" title="Game Park" label="Game Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051763" start="23029" end="23039" title="SmartMedia" label="SmartMedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418" start="23803" end="23808" title="Nokia" label="Nokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q336434" start="24159" end="24170" title="N-Gage (device)" label="sidetalking"/>
<link wikidata="Q191655" start="24348" end="24352" title="taco" label="taco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447314" start="24573" end="24600" title="N-Gage (service)" label="Second generation of N-Gage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418" start="24665" end="24670" title="Nokia" label="Nokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="24671" end="24681" title="Smartphone" label="Smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q162768" start="24773" end="24776" title="Personal digital assistant" label="PDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="24843" end="24851" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q165970" start="25278" end="25289" title="touchscreen" label="touchscreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445850" start="25823" end="25828" title="D-pad" label="D-pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053784" start="25938" end="25963" title="Nintendo Wi-Fi Connection" label="Nintendo Wi-Fi Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q170323" start="26281" end="26297" title="Nintendo DS Lite" label="Nintendo DS Lite"/>
<link wikidata="Q637178" start="26656" end="26668" title="Nintendo DSi" label="Nintendo DSi"/>
<link wikidata="Q466977" start="26739" end="26746" title="Secure Digital" label="SD card"/>
<link wikidata="Q188642" start="26776" end="26792" title="Game Boy Advance" label="Game Boy Advance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27075" end="27081" title="Nintendo DSi#Larger model" label="DSi XL"/>
<link wikidata="Q18594" start="28911" end="28938" title="Sony Computer Entertainment" label="Sony Computer Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="29141" end="29154" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q105973" start="29185" end="29195" title="PAL region" label="PAL region"/>
<link wikidata="Q270309" start="29316" end="29336" title="Universal Media Disc" label="Universal Media Disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q260833" start="29470" end="29477" title="SanDisk" label="SanDisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q733906" start="29478" end="29498" title="Memory Stick PRO Duo" label="Memory Stick Pro Duo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10683" start="29668" end="29681" title="PlayStation 3" label="PlayStation 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="29703" end="29711" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q286401" start="30140" end="30156" title="Tiger Telematics" label="Tiger Telematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q626084" start="30459" end="30476" title="GamePark Holdings" label="GamePark Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q930260" start="30892" end="30900" title="GP2X Wiz" label="GP2X Wiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132204" start="30912" end="30923" title="GP2X Caanoo" label="GP2X Caanoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="33062" end="33082" title="open source software" label="open source software"/>
<link wikidata="Q598205" start="33106" end="33127" title="Homebrew (video games)" label="home-brew development"/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="33562" end="33571" title="Super Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Super NES"/>
<link wikidata="Q14743726" start="35230" end="35242" title="Nintendo 2DS" label="Nintendo 2DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q17679679" start="35251" end="35267" title="New Nintendo 3DS" label="New Nintendo 3DS"/>
<link wikidata="Q29583519" start="35358" end="35377" title="New Nintendo 2DS XL" label="New Nintendo 2DS XL"/>
<link wikidata="Q376692" start="35481" end="35494" title="Sony Ericsson" label="Sony Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103710" start="37282" end="37290" title="LiveArea" label="LiveArea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464743" start="37347" end="37360" title="XrossMediaBar" label="XrossMediaBar"/>
<link wikidata="Q683877" start="37833" end="37848" title="Tokyo Game Show" label="Tokyo Game Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q637178" start="38080" end="38095" title="Nintendo DSi XL" label="Nintendo DSi XL"/>
<link wikidata="Q11215" start="38112" end="38121" title="Windows 7" label="Windows 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q182477" start="38627" end="38633" title="Nvidia" label="Nvidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061159" start="38696" end="38703" title="Tegra 4" label="Tegra 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q196105" start="39071" end="39079" title="Engadget" label="Engadget"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544247" start="39327" end="39331" title="CNET" label="CNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q281243" start="39631" end="39640" title="Eurogamer" label="Eurogamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19610114" start="40442" end="40462" title="Nintendo Switch Lite" label="Nintendo Switch Lite"/>
<link wikidata="Q190411" start="41503" end="41507" title="Field-programmable gate array" label="FPGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401435" start="41565" end="41573" title="Analogue (company)" label="Analogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q129585" start="41634" end="41640" title="Fourth generation of video game consoles" label="fourth"/>
<link wikidata="Q129728" start="41642" end="41647" title="Fifth generation of video game consoles" label="fifth"/>
<link wikidata="Q129784" start="41652" end="41657" title="Sixth generation of video game consoles" label="sixth"/>
<link wikidata="Q193559" start="42467" end="42472" title="Valve Corporation" label="Valve"/>
<link wikidata="Q14944085" start="42485" end="42496" title="SteamOS" label="SteamOS 3.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q131669" start="42509" end="42515" title="linux distro" label="distro"/>
<link wikidata="Q185576" start="42519" end="42529" title="Arch Linux" label="Arch Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q60982120" start="42555" end="42561" title="Proton (software)" label="Proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="42602" end="42619" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082128" start="42786" end="42794" title="handheld" label="handheld"/>
<link wikidata="Q185270" start="42801" end="42817" title="gaming computers" label="gaming computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q751046" start="42843" end="42860" title="IBM PC–compatible" label="IBM PC–compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q294956" start="42959" end="42966" title="AMD APU" label="AMD APU"/>
<link wikidata="Q25021818" start="42982" end="42987" title="Zen 2" label="Zen 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q101542263" start="42992" end="42998" title="RDNA 2" label="RDNA 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q183484" start="43094" end="43106" title="compute unit" label="compute unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q28845729" start="43383" end="43393" title="Ryzen 3000" label="Ryzen 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q100887313" start="43453" end="43474" title="Radeon RX 6000 series" label="Radeon RX 6000 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q869101" start="43503" end="43509" title="LPDDR5" label="LPDDR5"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="43510" end="43513" title="RAM" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q337535" start="43838" end="43843" title="Steam (service)" label="Steam"/>
<link wikidata="Q10297309" start="44352" end="44382" title="List of handheld game consoles" label="List of handheld game consoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196126" start="44385" end="44412" title="Video game console emulator" label="Video game console emulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797918" start="44415" end="44439" title="Handheld electronic game" label="Handheld electronic game"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394898" start="44442" end="44461" title="Handheld television" label="Handheld television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125755" start="44464" end="44485" title="Video games and Linux" label="Video games and Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102629" start="44488" end="44500" title="Cloud gaming" label="Cloud gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121542" start="44503" end="44514" title="Mobile game" label="Mobile game"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14200" wikidata="Q71716" url="?curid=14200" title="Heinrich Abeken">
<text>Heinrich Abeken (19 August 1809 – 8 August 1872) was a German theologian and Prussian Privy Legation Councillor in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Berlin.

==Early life==
Abeken was born and raised in the city of Osnabrück as a son of a merchant, he was incited to a higher education by the example of his uncle Bernhard Rudolf Abeken. After finishing the college in Osnabrück, he moved in 1827 to visit the University of Berlin to study theology. He combined philosophical and philological studies and was interested in art and modern literature.

==Career==
In 1831, Abeken acquired a licenciate of theology. At the end of the year he visited Rome, and was welcomed in the house of Christian Karl Josias, Freiherr von Bunsen. Abeken participated in Bunsen&#x27;s works, namely an evangelical prayer and hymn-book. In 1834 he became chaplain to the Prussian embassy in Rome. He married his first wife, who died soon thereafter. Bunsen left Rome in 1838 and Abeken followed soon thereafter to Germany. In 1841, he was sent to England to help in founding a German-English missionary bishopric in Jerusalem. In the same year, he was sent by Frederick William IV of Prussia to Egypt and Ethiopia, where he joined an expedition led by professor Karl Richard Lepsius. In 1845 and 1846 he returned via Jerusalem and Rome to Germany. He became Legation Councillor in Berlin, later Council Referee at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

In 1848 he received an appointment in the Prussian ministry for foreign affairs, and in 1853, he was promoted to be privy councillor of legation (&quot;Geheimer Legationsrath&quot;). Abeken remained in charge for more than twenty years of Prussian politics, assisting Otto Theodor Freiherr von Manteuffel and Chancellor Otto von Bismarck. The latter was so much pleased with Abeken&#x27;s work that officials started to call Abeken &quot;the quill [i.e., the scribe] of Bismarck.&quot; Abeken married again in 1866; his second wife was Hedwig von Olfers, daughter of the general director of the royal museums, Privy Councilor von Olfers.

He was much employed by Bismarck in the writing of official despatches, and stood high in the favour of King William, whom he often accompanied on his journeys as representative of the foreign office. He was present with the king during the campaigns of 1866 and 1870–71. In 1851, he published anonymously &quot;Babylon und Jerusalem,&quot; a scathing criticism of the views of Ida, Countess von Hahn-Hahn.

During the war against Austria in 1866 as well as in the wars against France in 1870 and 1871, Abeken stayed in the Prussian headquarters. A major part of the dispatches of the time have been written by him. Unfortunately his health was damaged by the endeavours of these travels, and he died after an illness of several months. Emperor Wilhelm I described Abeken in a condolence letter to his widow: &quot;One of my most reliable advisors, standing on my side in the most decisive moments; His loss is irreplaceable to me; In him his fatherland has lost one of the most noble and most loyal men and officials&quot;.

Despite his engagement in politics, Abeken never lost his interest in theology and continued to publish and speak in this sector during all of his life. He was interested in art and archeology, and was sponsor of the Archeological Institute of Rome and member of the Archeological Society of Rome. He founded a Circle of Friends of the Greek Literature in Berlin and was member of the prize commission for the royal Schiller-Prize.

==Publications==
* &quot;A letter to the Reverend E. B. Pusey in reference to certain charges against the German Church&quot;, (1842)
* &quot;Babylon und Jerusalem&quot; (1851), letter to Countess Ida Hahn-Hahn
* &quot;Der Gottesdienst der alten Kirche&quot; (1853)
* &quot;Das religiöse Leben des Islam&quot; (1854)
* biography of Bunsen in the &quot;Jahrbuch zum Conversationslexikon (Leipzig, Brockhaus), Unsere Zeit&quot; (1861)
* Wolfgang Frischbier, &quot;Heinrich Abeken 1809–1872. Eine Biographie&quot; Paderborn: Ferdinand Schöningh, 2008 (Otto-von-Bismarck-Stiftung. Wissenschaftliche Reihe, 9).

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
;Attribution
* &quot;Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie&quot; - at Wikisource</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q71716" start="0" end="15" title="Heinrich Abeken" label="Heinrich Abeken"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="77" end="84" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916" start="216" end="225" title="Osnabrück" label="Osnabrück"/>
<link wikidata="Q67394" start="315" end="337" title="Bernhard Rudolf Abeken" label="Bernhard Rudolf Abeken"/>
<link wikidata="Q749020" start="590" end="600" title="licenciate" label="licenciate"/>
<link wikidata="Q67409" start="687" end="729" title="Christian Karl Josias, Freiherr von Bunsen" label="Christian Karl Josias, Freiherr von Bunsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="1085" end="1094" title="bishopric" label="bishopric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="1098" end="1107" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q57180" start="1142" end="1173" title="Frederick William IV of Prussia" label="Frederick William IV of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="1177" end="1182" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="1187" end="1195" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q77231" start="1244" end="1264" title="Karl Richard Lepsius" label="Karl Richard Lepsius"/>
<link wikidata="Q63386" start="1698" end="1734" title="Otto Theodor Freiherr von Manteuffel" label="Otto Theodor Freiherr von Manteuffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="1750" end="1767" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1966" end="1983" title="Hedwig von Olfers" label="Hedwig von Olfers"/>
<link wikidata="Q214962" start="2040" end="2066" title="Ignaz von Olfers" label="Privy Councilor von Olfers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="2093" end="2101" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q92101" start="2447" end="2474" title="Ida, Countess von Hahn-Hahn" label="Ida, Countess von Hahn-Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q150652" start="2814" end="2823" title="William I, German Emperor" label="Wilhelm I"/>
<link wikidata="Q237227" start="3924" end="3933" title="Brockhaus Enzyklopädie" label="Brockhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q263" start="4242" end="4252" title="Wikisource" label="Wikisource"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14201" wikidata="Q335550" url="?curid=14201" title="Henry Bruce, 1st Baron Aberdare">
<text>Henry Austin Bruce, 1st Baron Aberdare (16 April 1815 – 25 February 1895), was a British Liberal Party politician, who served in government most notably as Home Secretary (1868–1873) and as Lord President of the Council.

==Origin ==
Lord Aberdare was born at Duffryn, Aberdare, Glamorganshire, the second son of John Bruce Bruce-Pryce (born John Bruce Knight), a Royal Navy agent and banker, and his first wife, Sarah, daughter of Rev. Hugh Williams Austin.

Aberdare&#x27;s father was the eldest son of John Knight (died 1799) and Margaret Bruce (died 1809), daughter and heiress of William Bruce of Llanblethian, High Sheriff of Glamorganshire. His younger brother was James Knight-Bruce. Aberdare&#x27;s paternal grandmother, Margaret Bruce, came from the Welsh Bruces, a branch of Bruce of Kennet of Clackmannan, that dates to the 14th century.

In 1805, Aberdare&#x27;s father changed his surname from Knight to Bruce when he reached the age of majority and inherited the Llanblethian estates. In 1837, he changed his name again to Bruce-Pryce when he inherited Duffryn and the Monknash estates from a distant cousin, Frances Anne Grey (&quot;née&quot; Pryce), the daughter and heiress of Thomas Pryce, who had married Hon. William Booth Grey (1773-1852), the second son of 5th Earl of Stamford.

Lord Aberdare&#x27;s younger brother was Gen. Robert Bruce (1821–1891).

== Education ==
Henry was educated from the age of twelve at the Bishop Gore School, Swansea (Swansea Grammar School). In 1837 he was called to the bar from Lincoln&#x27;s Inn. Shortly after he had begun to practice, the discovery of coal beneath the Duffryn and other Aberdare Valley estates brought his family great wealth. From 1847 to 1854 Bruce was stipendiary magistrate for Merthyr Tydfil and Aberdare, resigning the position in the latter year, after entering parliament as Liberal member for Merthyr Tydfil.

==Industrialist and politician, 1852–1868==

Bruce was returned unopposed as MP for Merthyr Tydfil in December 1852, following the death of Sir John Guest. He did so with the enthusiastic support of the late member&#x27;s political allies, notably the iron masters of Dowlais, and he was thereafter regarded by his political opponents, most notably in the Aberdare Valley, as their nominee. Even so, Bruce&#x27;s parliamentary record demonstrated support for liberal policies, with the exception of the ballot. The electorate in the constituency at this time remained relatively small, excluding the vast majority of the working classes.

Significantly, however, Bruce&#x27;s relationship with the miners of the Aberdare Valley, in particular, deteriorated as a result of the Aberdare Strike of 1857–58. In a speech to a large audience of miners at the Aberdare Market Hall, Bruce sought to strike a conciliatory tone in persuading the miners to return to work. In a second speech, however, he delivered a broadside against the trade union movement generally, referring to the violence engendered elsewhere as a result of strikes and to alleged examples of intimidation and violence in the immediate locality. The strike damaged his reputation and may well have contributed to his eventual election defeat ten years later. In 1855, Bruce was appointed a trustee of the Dowlais Iron Company and played a role in the further development of the iron industry.

In November 1862, after nearly ten years in Parliament, he became Under-Secretary of State for the Home Department, and held that office until April 1864. He became a Privy Councillor and a Charity Commissioner for England and Wales in 1864, when he was moved to be vice-president of the Council of Education.

==1868 general election==
At the 1868 general election, Merthyr Tydfil became a two-member constituency with a much-increased electorate as a result of the Second Reform Act of 1867. Since the formation of the constituency, Merthyr Tydfil had dominated representation as the vast majority of the electorate lived in the town and its vicinity, whereas there was a much lower number of electors in the neighbouring Aberdare Valley. During the 1850s and 1860s, however, the population of Aberdare grew rapidly, and the franchise changes in 1867 gave the vote to large numbers of miners in that valley. Amongst these new electors, Bruce remained unpopular as a result of his actions during the 1857–58 dispute. Initially, it appeared that the Aberdare iron master, Richard Fothergill, would be elected to the second seat alongside Bruce. However, the appearance of a third Liberal candidate, Henry Richard, a nonconformist radical popular in both Merthyr and Aberdare, left Bruce on the defensive and he was ultimately defeated, finishing in third place behind both Richard and Fothergill.

==Later political career==

After losing his seat, Bruce was elected for Renfrewshire on 25 January 1869, and was made Home Secretary by William Ewart Gladstone. His tenure of this office was conspicuous for a reform of the licensing laws, and he was responsible for the Licensing Act 1872, which made the magistrates the licensing authority, increased the penalties for misconduct in public-houses and shortened the number of hours for the sale of drink. In 1873 Bruce relinquished the home secretaryship, at Gladstone&#x27;s request, to become Lord President of the Council, and was elevated to the peerage as Baron Aberdare, of Duffryn in the County of Glamorgan, on 23 August that year. Being a Gladstonian Liberal, Aberdare had hoped for a much more radical proposal to keep existing licensee holders for a further ten years, and to prevent any new applicants. Its unpopularity pricked his nonconformist&#x27;s conscience, when like Gladstone himself he had a strong leaning towards Temperance. He had already pursued &#x27;moral improvement&#x27; on miners in the regulations attempting to further ban boys from the pits. The Trades Union Act 1871 was another more liberal regime giving further rights to unions, and protection from malicious prosecutions.


The defeat of the Liberal government in the following year terminated Lord Aberdare&#x27;s official political life, and he subsequently devoted himself to social, educational and economic questions. Education became one of Lord Aberdare&#x27;s main interests in later life. His interest had been shown by the speech on Welsh education which he had made on 5 May 1862. In 1880, he was appointed to chair the Departmental Committee on Intermediate and Higher Education in Wales and Monmouthshire, whose report ultimately led to the Welsh Intermediate Education Act of 1889. The report also stimulated the campaign for the provision of university education in Wales. In 1883, Lord Aberdare was elected the first president of the University College of South Wales and Monmouthshire. In his inaugural address he declared that the framework of Welsh education would not be complete until there was a University of Wales. The university was eventually founded in 1893 and Aberdare became its first chancellor.

In 1876 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society; from 1878 to 1891 he was president of the Royal Historical Society. and in 1881 he became president of both the Royal Geographical Society and the Girls&#x27; Day School Trust. In 1888 he headed the commission that established the Official Table of Drops, listing how far a person of a particular weight should be dropped when hanged for a capital offence (the only method of &#x27;judicial execution&#x27; in the United Kingdom at that time), to ensure an instant and painless death, by cleanly breaking the neck between the 2nd and 3rd vertebrae, an &#x27;exacting science&#x27;, eventually brought to perfection by Chief Executioner Albert Pierrepoint. Prisoners health, clothing and discipline was a particular concern even at the end of his career. In the Lords he spoke at some length to the Home Affairs Committee chaired by Arthur Balfour about the prison rules system. Aberdare had always expressed concern about intemperate working-classes; in 1878 urging greater vigilance against the vice of excessive drinking, he took evidence on miners and railway colliers drinking habits. The committee tried to establish special legislation based on a link between Sunday Opening and absenteeism established in 1868. Aberdare had been interested in the plight of working class drinkers since Gladstone had appointed him Home Secretary. The defeat of the Licensing Bill by the Tory &#x27;beerage&#x27; and publicans was drafted to limit hours and protect the public, but it persuaded a convinced Anglican forever more of the iniquities.

In 1882 he began a connection with West Africa which lasted the rest of his life, by accepting the chairmanship of the National African Company, formed by Sir George Goldie, which in 1886 received a charter under the title of the Royal Niger Company and in 1899 was taken over by the British government, its territories being constituted the protectorate of Nigeria. West African affairs, however, by no means exhausted Lord Aberdare&#x27;s energies, and it was principally through his efforts that a charter was in 1894 obtained for the University College of South Wales and Monmouthshire, a constituent institution of the University of Wales. This is now Cardiff University. Lord Aberdare, who in 1885 was made a Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath, presided over several Royal Commissions at different times.

==Animal welfare==

Bruce was President of the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals from 1878 to 1893. In 1879, he voted against legislation proposing total abolition of vivisection which resulted in criticism from anti-vivisectionists. Bruce commented that the RSPCA had no position on vivisection and should be kept distinct from the Society. Anti-vivisectionist Frances Power Cobbe noted Bruce&#x27;s contradictory behaviour, as he had publicly spoken against the abolition of vivisection and voted against it.

==Family==

Henry Bruce married firstly Annabella, daughter of Richard Beadon, of Clifton by Annabella à Court, sister of the 1st Baron Heytesbury, on 6 January 1846. They had one son and three daughters. 
* Henry Campbell Bruce, 2nd Baron
* Margaret Cecilia married on 16 September 1889, Douglas Close Richmond, CB, MA, son of Rev. Henry Sylvester Richmond MA, rector of Wyck Rissington, Glos.
* Rachel Mary married 10 September 1872, Augustus George Vernon-Harcourt of St Clare, Ryde, Isle of Wight, son of Admiral Frederick Edward Vernon-Harcourt.
* Jessie Frances, married 3 September 1878, Rev John William Wynne-Jones, MA, rector of Llantrisant, Anglesey. son of John Wynne-Jones JP, DL, of Treiorworth, Bodedern, Holyhead, Anglesey.
After her death on 28 July 1852 he married secondly on 17 August 1854 Norah Creina Blanche, youngest daughter of Lt-Gen Sir William Napier, KCB the historian of the Peninsular War, whose biography he edited, by Caroline Amelia, second daughter of Gen. Henry Edward Fox, son of the Earl of Ilchester. They had seven daughters and two sons, of whom:
* the youngest was the mountaineer Charles Granville Bruce. 
* Alice Bruce took on her mother&#x27;s ideas and took a leading role in women&#x27;s education.
* Sarah married Montague Muir Mackenzie, barrister.
* Elizabeth Fox Bruce (1861–1935) married the author Percy Ewing Matheson.

Lord Aberdare died at his London home, 39 Princes Gardens, South Kensington, on 25 February 1895, aged 79, and was succeeded in the barony by his only son by his first marriage, Henry. He was survived by his wife, Lady Aberdare, born 1827, who died on 27 April 1897. She was a proponent of women&#x27;s education and active in the establishment of Aberdare Hall in Cardiff.

==Memorial==
Henry Austin Bruce is buried at Aberffrwd Cemetery in Mountain Ash, Wales. His large family plot is surrounded by a chain, and his gravestone is a simple Celtic cross with double plinth and kerb. In place is written &quot;To God the Judge of all and to the spirits of just men more perfect.&quot;

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
*

==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q335550" start="0" end="38" title="Henry Bruce, 1st Baron Aberdare" label="Henry Austin Bruce, 1st Baron Aberdare"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="81" end="102" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="British Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="156" end="170" title="Secretary of State for the Home Department" label="Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q943379" start="190" end="219" title="Lord President of the Council" label="Lord President of the Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q319369" start="269" end="277" title="Aberdare" label="Aberdare"/>
<link wikidata="Q13129633" start="602" end="614" title="Llanblethian" label="Llanblethian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238487" start="616" end="646" title="High Sheriff of Glamorganshire" label="High Sheriff of Glamorganshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994564" start="672" end="690" title="James Knight-Bruce" label="James Knight-Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q845196" start="766" end="772" title="Clan Bruce" label="Bruces"/>
<link wikidata="Q845196" start="786" end="801" title="Bruce of Kennet" label="Bruce of Kennet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010098" start="805" end="816" title="Clackmannan" label="Clackmannan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582463" start="1280" end="1300" title="George Grey, 5th Earl of Stamford" label="5th Earl of Stamford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23018855" start="1349" end="1361" title="Robert Bruce (British Army officer, born 1821)" label="Robert Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917566" start="1441" end="1459" title="Bishop Gore School" label="Bishop Gore School"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051" start="1461" end="1468" title="Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917566" start="1470" end="1492" title="Bishop Gore School" label="Swansea Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="1524" end="1527" title="barrister" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12292478" start="1661" end="1668" title="estate (house)" label="estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q752762" start="1757" end="1771" title="Merthyr Tydfil" label="Merthyr Tydfil"/>
<link wikidata="Q319369" start="1776" end="1784" title="Aberdare" label="Aberdare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820684" start="1877" end="1891" title="Merthyr Tydfil (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Merthyr Tydfil"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157437" start="2670" end="2696" title="Aberdare strike 1857–1858" label="Aberdare Strike of 1857–58"/>
<link wikidata="Q597047" start="3263" end="3283" title="GKN plc" label="Dowlais Iron Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883053" start="3418" end="3466" title="Under-Secretary of State for the Home Department" label="Under-Secretary of State for the Home Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528244" start="3519" end="3535" title="Privy Councillor" label="Privy Councillor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325746" start="4424" end="4442" title="Richard Fothergill (politician)" label="Richard Fothergill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5727523" start="4551" end="4564" title="Henry Richard" label="Henry Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313180" start="4823" end="4835" title="Renfrewshire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Renfrewshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484309" start="4869" end="4883" title="Home Secretary" label="Home Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="4887" end="4910" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Ewart Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002416" start="4974" end="4988" title="licensing laws" label="licensing laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543064" start="5021" end="5039" title="Licensing Act 1872" label="Licensing Act 1872"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594605" start="5056" end="5066" title="magistrate" label="magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q943379" start="5296" end="5325" title="Lord President of the Council" label="Lord President of the Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q767296" start="5362" end="5376" title="Baron Aberdare" label="Baron Aberdare"/>
<link wikidata="Q108471067" start="6545" end="6585" title="Welsh Intermediate Education Act 1889" label="Welsh Intermediate Education Act of 1889"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035745" start="6741" end="6792" title="Cardiff University" label="University College of South Wales and Monmouthshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072029" start="6909" end="6928" title="University of Wales" label="University of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="7044" end="7071" title="Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445958" start="7115" end="7139" title="Royal Historical Society" label="Royal Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q691152" start="7185" end="7211" title="Royal Geographical Society" label="Royal Geographical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5564557" start="7220" end="7248" title="Girls&amp;#x27; Public Day School Company" label="Girls&amp;#x27; Day School Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511963" start="7304" end="7327" title="Official Table of Drops" label="Official Table of Drops"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="7413" end="7428" title="capital offence" label="capital offence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="7455" end="7473" title="judicial execution" label="judicial execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q945914" start="7709" end="7727" title="Albert Pierrepoint" label="Albert Pierrepoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806380" start="8730" end="8754" title="National African Company" label="National African Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545092" start="8766" end="8783" title="George Taubman Goldie" label="Sir George Goldie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806380" start="8841" end="8860" title="Royal Niger Company" label="Royal Niger Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="8969" end="8976" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035745" start="9268" end="9286" title="Cardiff University" label="Cardiff University"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="9352" end="9369" title="Order of the Bath" label="Order of the Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986735" start="9393" end="9409" title="Royal Commission" label="Royal Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q584819" start="9479" end="9533" title="Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals" label="Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q259567" start="9620" end="9631" title="vivisection" label="vivisection"/>
<link wikidata="Q466162" start="9815" end="9834" title="Frances Power Cobbe" label="Frances Power Cobbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020938" start="10091" end="10111" title="William_à_Court,_1st_Baron_Heytesbury" label="1st Baron Heytesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5718742" start="10173" end="10204" title="Henry Bruce, 2nd Baron Aberdare" label="Henry Campbell Bruce, 2nd Baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q637730" start="10825" end="10843" title="William Francis Patrick Napier" label="Sir William Napier"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="10870" end="10884" title="Peninsular War" label="Peninsular War"/>
<link wikidata="Q177346" start="11088" end="11111" title="Charles Granville Bruce" label="Charles Granville Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q18917197" start="11116" end="11127" title="Alice Bruce" label="Alice Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904137" start="11227" end="11250" title="Montague Muir Mackenzie" label="Montague Muir Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167334" start="11316" end="11336" title="Percy Ewing Matheson" label="Percy Ewing Matheson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5718742" start="11517" end="11522" title="Henry Bruce, 2nd Baron Aberdare" label="Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4666850" start="11687" end="11700" title="Aberdare Hall" label="Aberdare Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="11704" end="11711" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469852" start="11781" end="11793" title="Mountain Ash, Rhondda Cynon Taf" label="Mountain Ash"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14203" wikidata="Q410865" url="?curid=14203" title="Harpers Ferry (disambiguation)">
<text>Harpers Ferry is the name of several places in the United States of America:
*Harpers Ferry, Iowa, a city in Allamakee County, Iowa
*Harpers Ferry, West Virginia, a town in Jefferson County, West Virginia
**John Brown&#x27;s raid on Harpers Ferry (1859)
**Harpers Ferry Armory, second federal armory (construction begun 1799) and site of John Brown&#x27;s slave revolt of 1859
**Harpers Ferry National Historical Park
**Battle of Harpers Ferry (September 12–15, 1862), a battle in the American Civil War that took place around what is now Harpers Ferry, West Virginia

Harpers Ferry may also refer to:
* &quot;Harpers Ferry&quot; class dock landing ship, a ship class in the United States Navy
** USS &quot;Harpers Ferry&quot; (LSD-49), a &quot;Harpers Ferry&quot; class dock landing ship of the United States Navy, commissioned in 1995
* Harpers Ferry (nightclub), a music venue and nightclub in Boston
* Harper&#x27;s Ferry flintlock pistol

==See also==
*Harpur&#x27;s Ferry, A student volunteer ambulance service in Binghamton University</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q410865" start="0" end="13" title="Harpers Ferry (disambiguation)" label="Harpers Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q674908" start="78" end="97" title="Harpers Ferry, Iowa" label="Harpers Ferry, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q985289" start="133" end="161" title="Harpers Ferry, West Virginia" label="Harpers Ferry, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223430" start="207" end="246" title="John Brown&amp;#x27;s raid on Harpers Ferry" label="John Brown&amp;#x27;s raid on Harpers Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586032" start="256" end="276" title="Harpers Ferry Armory" label="Harpers Ferry Armory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5663505" start="379" end="417" title="Harpers Ferry National Historical Park" label="Harpers Ferry National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565693" start="420" end="443" title="Battle of Harpers Ferry" label="Battle of Harpers Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q410865" start="569" end="582" title="Harpers Ferry (disambiguation)" label="Harpers Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586054" start="604" end="653" title="Harpers Ferry class dock landing ship" label="&amp;quot;Harpers Ferry&amp;quot; class dock landing ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469524" start="697" end="735" title="USS Harpers Ferry (LSD-49)" label="USS &amp;quot;Harpers Ferry&amp;quot; (LSD-49)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5663489" start="839" end="864" title="Harpers Ferry (nightclub)" label="Harpers Ferry (nightclub)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118582" start="906" end="942" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Ferry flintlock pistol" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Ferry flintlock pistol"/>
<link wikidata="Q863813" start="958" end="977" title="Harpur&amp;#x27;s Ferry" label="Harpur&amp;#x27;s Ferry"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14204" wikidata="Q946633" url="?curid=14204" title="Halophile">
<text>A halophile (from the Greek word for &#x27;salt-loving&#x27;) is an extremophile that thrives in high salt concentrations. In chemical terms, halophile refers to a Lewis acidic species that has some ability to extract halides from other chemical species. 

While most halophiles are classified into the domain Archaea, there are also bacterial halophiles and some eukaryotic species, such as the alga &quot;Dunaliella salina&quot; and fungus &quot;Wallemia ichthyophaga&quot;. Some well-known species give off a red color from carotenoid compounds, notably bacteriorhodopsin. 

Halophiles can be found in water bodies with salt concentration more than five times greater than that of the ocean, such as the Great Salt Lake in Utah, Owens Lake in California, the Lake Urmia in Iran, the Dead Sea, and in evaporation ponds. They are theorized to be a possible analogues for modeling extremophiles that might live in the salty subsurface water ocean of Jupiter&#x27;s Europa and similar moons.

== Classification ==
Halophiles are categorized by the extent of their halotolerance: slight, moderate, or extreme. Slight halophiles prefer 0.3 to 0.8 M (1.7 to 4.8%—seawater is 0.6 M or 3.5%), moderate halophiles 0.8 to 3.4 M (4.7 to 20%), and extreme halophiles 3.4 to 5.1 M (20 to 30%) salt content. Halophiles require sodium chloride (salt) for growth, in contrast to halotolerant organisms, which do not require salt but can grow under saline conditions.

== Lifestyle ==
High salinity represents an extreme environment in which relatively few organisms have been able to adapt and survive. Most halophilic and all halotolerant organisms expend energy to exclude salt from their cytoplasm to avoid protein aggregation (&#x27;salting out&#x27;). To survive the high salinities, halophiles employ two differing strategies to prevent desiccation through osmotic movement of water out of their cytoplasm. Both strategies work by increasing the internal osmolarity of the cell. The first strategy is employed by some archaea, the majority of halophilic bacteria, yeasts, algae, and fungi; the organism accumulates organic compounds in the cytoplasm—osmoprotectants which are known as compatible solutes. These can be either synthesised or accumulated from the environment. The most common compatible solutes are neutral or zwitterionic, and include amino acids, sugars, polyols, betaines, and ectoines, as well as derivatives of some of these compounds.

The second, more radical adaptation involves selectively absorbing potassium (K+) ions into the cytoplasm. This adaptation is restricted to the extremely halophilic archaeal family &quot;Halobacteriaceae&quot;, the moderately halophilic bacterial order &quot;Halanaerobiales&quot;, and the extremely halophilic bacterium &quot;Salinibacter ruber&quot;. The presence of this adaptation in three distinct evolutionary lineages suggests convergent evolution of this strategy, it being unlikely to be an ancient characteristic retained in only scattered groups or passed on through massive lateral gene transfer. The primary reason for this is the entire intracellular machinery (enzymes, structural proteins, etc.) must be adapted to high salt levels, whereas in the compatible solute adaptation, little or no adjustment is required to intracellular macromolecules; in fact, the compatible solutes often act as more general stress protectants, as well as just osmoprotectants.

Of particular note are the extreme halophiles or haloarchaea (often known as halobacteria), a group of archaea, which require at least a 2 M salt concentration and are usually found in saturated solutions (about 36% w/v salts). These are the primary inhabitants of salt lakes, inland seas, and evaporating ponds of seawater, such as the deep salterns, where they tint the water column and sediments bright colors. These species most likely perish if they are exposed to anything other than a very high-concentration, salt-conditioned environment. These prokaryotes require salt for growth. The high concentration of sodium chloride in their environment limits the availability of oxygen for respiration. Their cellular machinery is adapted to high salt concentrations by having charged amino acids on their surfaces, allowing the retention of water molecules around these components. They are heterotrophs that normally respire by aerobic means. Most halophiles are unable to survive outside their high-salt native environments. Many halophiles are so fragile that when they are placed in distilled water, they immediately lyse from the change in osmotic conditions.

Halophiles use a variety of energy sources and can be aerobic or anaerobic; anaerobic halophiles include phototrophic, fermentative, sulfate-reducing, homoacetogenic, and methanogenic species.

The Haloarchaea, and particularly the family Halobacteriaceae, are members of the domain &quot;Archaea&quot;, and comprise the majority of the prokaryotic population in hypersaline environments. Currently, 15 recognised genera are in the family. The domain Bacteria (mainly &quot;Salinibacter ruber&quot;) can comprise up to 25% of the prokaryotic community, but is more commonly a much lower percentage of the overall population. At times, the alga &quot;Dunaliella salina&quot; can also proliferate in this environment.

A comparatively wide range of taxa has been isolated from saltern crystalliser ponds, including members of these genera: &quot;Haloferax, Halogeometricum, Halococcus, Haloterrigena, Halorubrum, Haloarcula&quot;, and &quot;Halobacterium&quot;. However, the viable counts in these cultivation studies have been small when compared to total counts, and the numerical significance of these isolates has been unclear. Only recently has it become possible to determine the identities and relative abundances of organisms in natural populations, typically using PCR-based strategies that target 16S small subunit ribosomal ribonucleic acid (16S rRNA) genes. While comparatively few studies of this type have been performed, results from these suggest that some of the most readily isolated and studied genera may not in fact be significant in the &quot;in situ&quot; community. This is seen in cases such as the genus &quot;Haloarcula&quot;, which is estimated to make up less than 0.1% of the&quot; in situ&quot; community, but commonly appears in isolation studies.

== Genomic and proteomic signature ==

The comparative genomic and proteomic analysis showed distinct molecular signatures exist for the environmental adaptation of halophiles. At the protein level, the halophilic species are characterized by low hydrophobicity, an overrepresentation of acidic residues, underrepresentation of Cys, lower propensities for helix formation, and higher propensities for coil structure. The core of these proteins is less hydrophobic, such as DHFR, that was found to have narrower β-strands.
In one study, the net charges (at pH 7.4) of the ribosomal proteins (r-proteins) that comprise the &quot;S10-spc&quot; cluster were observed to have an inverse relationship with the halophilicity/halotolerance levels in both bacteria and archaea. At the DNA level, the halophiles exhibit distinct dinucleotide and codon usage.

== Examples ==
&quot;Halobacteriaceae&quot; is a family that includes a large part of halophilic archaea. The genus &quot;Halobacterium&quot; under it has a high tolerance for elevated levels of salinity. Some species of halobacteria have acidic proteins that resist the denaturing effects of salts. &quot;Halococcus&quot; is another genus of the family Halobacteriaceae.

Some hypersaline lakes are habitat to numerous families of halophiles. For example, the Makgadikgadi Pans in Botswana form a vast, seasonal, high-salinity water body that manifests halophilic species within the diatom genus &quot;Nitzschia&quot; in the family Bacillariaceae, as well as species within the genus &quot;Lovenula&quot; in the family Diaptomidae. Owens Lake in California also contains a large population of the halophilic bacterium &quot;Halobacterium halobium&quot;.

&quot;Wallemia ichthyophaga&quot; is a basidiomycetous fungus, which requires at least 1.5 M sodium chloride for &quot;in vitro&quot; growth, and it thrives even in media saturated with salt. Obligate requirement for salt is an exception in fungi. Even species that can tolerate salt concentrations close to saturation (for example &quot;Hortaea werneckii&quot;) in almost all cases grow well in standard microbiological media without the addition of salt.

The fermentation of salty foods (such as soy sauce, Chinese fermented beans, salted cod, salted anchovies, sauerkraut, etc.) often involves halophiles as either essential ingredients or accidental contaminants. One example is &quot;Chromohalobacter beijerinckii&quot;, found in salted beans preserved in brine and in salted herring. &quot;Tetragenococcus halophilus&quot; is found in salted anchovies and soy sauce.

&quot;Artemia&quot; is a ubiquitous genus of small halophilic crustaceans living in salt lakes (such as Great Salt Lake) and solar salterns that can exist in water approaching the precipitation point of NaCl (340 g/L) and can withstand strong osmotic shocks due to its mitigating strategies for fluctuating salinity levels, such as its unique larval salt gland and osmoregulatory capacity.

North Ronaldsay sheep are a breed of sheep originating from Orkney, Scotland. They have limited access to freshwater sources on the island and their only food source is seaweed. They have adapted to handle salt concentrations that would kill other breeds of sheep.

== See also ==
* Arid Forest Research Institute
* Biosalinity
* Halotolerance

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==
* HaloArchaea.com
* Important Groups of Prokaryotes - Kenneth Todar
* Astrobiology: extremophiles- life in extreme environments</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q946633" start="2" end="11" title="Halophile" label="halophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q206912" start="68" end="80" title="extremophile" label="extremophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11254" start="102" end="106" title="salt" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q900337" start="164" end="176" title="Lewis acids and bases" label="Lewis acidic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872" start="310" end="317" title="Archaea" label="Archaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="334" end="342" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="364" end="374" title="Eukaryote" label="eukaryotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="396" end="400" title="alga" label="alga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441328" start="407" end="424" title="Dunaliella salina" label="Dunaliella salina"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="435" end="441" title="fungus" label="fungus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10719177" start="448" end="469" title="Wallemia ichthyophaga" label="Wallemia ichthyophaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q242310" start="557" end="574" title="bacteriorhodopsin" label="bacteriorhodopsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q178741" start="707" end="722" title="Great Salt Lake" label="Great Salt Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780699" start="732" end="742" title="Owens Lake" label="Owens Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q199551" start="762" end="772" title="Lake Urmia" label="Lake Urmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23883" start="786" end="794" title="Dead Sea" label="Dead Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416061" start="803" end="819" title="evaporation pond" label="evaporation pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143" start="965" end="971" title="Europa (moon)" label="Europa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529024" start="1063" end="1076" title="halotolerance" label="halotolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q672821" start="1144" end="1145" title="Molar concentration" label="M"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314" start="1315" end="1330" title="sodium chloride" label="sodium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529024" start="1613" end="1625" title="halotolerance" label="halotolerant"/>
<link wikidata="Q79899" start="1677" end="1686" title="cytoplasm" label="cytoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q739743" start="1723" end="1734" title="salting out" label="salting out"/>
<link wikidata="Q903071" start="1829" end="1840" title="desiccation" label="desiccation"/>
<link wikidata="Q54237" start="1849" end="1856" title="osmosis" label="osmotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q643555" start="1947" end="1957" title="osmolarity" label="osmolarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="2056" end="2061" title="yeast" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="2064" end="2069" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="2075" end="2080" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="2107" end="2124" title="organic compounds" label="organic compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q176686" start="2142" end="2156" title="osmoprotectant" label="osmoprotectant"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="2305" end="2312" title="pH" label="neutral"/>
<link wikidata="Q245115" start="2316" end="2326" title="zwitterion" label="zwitterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="2342" end="2352" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="2355" end="2360" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q415812" start="2363" end="2369" title="polyol" label="polyol"/>
<link wikidata="Q72052841" start="2372" end="2379" title="betaine" label="betaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q414414" start="2386" end="2393" title="ectoine" label="ectoine"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="2515" end="2524" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q764133" start="2635" end="2651" title="Halobacteriaceae" label="Halobacteriaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052979" start="2707" end="2722" title="Halanaerobiales" label="Halanaerobiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859591" start="2775" end="2793" title="Salinibacter ruber" label="Salinibacter ruber"/>
<link wikidata="Q200312" start="2882" end="2902" title="convergent evolution" label="convergent evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054206" start="3472" end="3483" title="haloarchaea" label="haloarchaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054206" start="3500" end="3512" title="halobacteria" label="halobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3639" end="3642" title="Mass concentration (chemistry)#Usage in biology" label="w/v"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880708" start="3765" end="3772" title="saltern" label="saltern"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="4209" end="4219" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q159344" start="4316" end="4327" title="heterotroph" label="heterotroph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663023" start="4546" end="4550" title="cytolysis" label="lyse"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872" start="4880" end="4887" title="Archaea" label="Archaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912558" start="4954" end="4978" title="hypersaline lake" label="hypersaline environments"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="5042" end="5050" title="Bacteria" label="Bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859591" start="5065" end="5083" title="Salinibacter ruber" label="Salinibacter ruber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441328" start="5241" end="5258" title="Dunaliella salina" label="Dunaliella salina"/>
<link wikidata="Q176996" start="5863" end="5866" title="Polymerase chain reaction" label="PCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472674" start="5898" end="5899" title="Svedberg" label="S"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643348" start="6225" end="6235" title="Haloarcula" label="Haloarcula"/>
<link wikidata="Q417149" start="6843" end="6847" title="DHFR" label="DHFR"/>
<link wikidata="Q764133" start="7241" end="7257" title="Halobacteriaceae" label="Halobacteriaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q139014" start="7342" end="7355" title="Halobacterium" label="Halobacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643365" start="7526" end="7536" title="Halococcus" label="Halococcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912558" start="7598" end="7614" title="hypersaline lake" label="hypersaline lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q533041" start="7681" end="7698" title="Makgadikgadi Pans" label="Makgadikgadi Pans"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="7702" end="7710" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q162678" start="7804" end="7810" title="diatom" label="diatom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583107" start="7823" end="7832" title="Nitzschia" label="Nitzschia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838943" start="7853" end="7867" title="Bacillariaceae" label="Bacillariaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134134" start="7911" end="7919" title="Lovenula" label="Lovenula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808840" start="7940" end="7951" title="Diaptomidae" label="Diaptomidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10719177" start="8082" end="8103" title="Wallemia ichthyophaga" label="Wallemia ichthyophaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q174698" start="8115" end="8130" title="Basidiomycota" label="basidiomycetous"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="8131" end="8137" title="fungus" label="fungus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314" start="8169" end="8184" title="sodium chloride" label="sodium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q5906640" start="8414" end="8431" title="Hortaea werneckii" label="Hortaea werneckii"/>
<link wikidata="Q229385" start="8575" end="8584" title="soy sauce" label="soy sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242685" start="8586" end="8609" title="douchi" label="Chinese fermented beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428509" start="8611" end="8621" title="salted cod" label="salted cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589261" start="8630" end="8639" title="Anchovies as food" label="anchovies"/>
<link wikidata="Q154166" start="8641" end="8651" title="sauerkraut" label="sauerkraut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113884" start="8766" end="8795" title="Chromohalobacter beijerinckii" label="Chromohalobacter beijerinckii"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127419" start="8858" end="8865" title="herring" label="herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q4249857" start="8873" end="8899" title="Tetragenococcus halophilus" label="Tetragenococcus halophilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118656" start="9342" end="9363" title="North Ronaldsay sheep" label="North Ronaldsay sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="9402" end="9418" title="Orkney" label="Orkney, Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q237169" start="9511" end="9518" title="seaweed" label="seaweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821768" start="9625" end="9655" title="Arid Forest Research Institute" label="Arid Forest Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915257" start="9658" end="9669" title="Biosalinity" label="Biosalinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529024" start="9672" end="9685" title="Halotolerance" label="Halotolerance"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14205" wikidata="Q181529" url="?curid=14205" title="Herbert A. Simon">
<text>Herbert Alexander Simon (June 15, 1916 – February 9, 2001) was an American scholar whose work influenced the fields of computer science, economics, and cognitive psychology. His primary research interest was decision-making within organizations and he is best known for the theories of &quot;bounded rationality&quot; and &quot;satisficing&quot;. He received the Turing Award in 1975 and the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences in 1978. His research was noted for its interdisciplinary nature, spanning the fields of cognitive science, computer science, public administration, management, and political science. He was at Carnegie Mellon University for most of his career, from 1949 to 2001, where he helped found the Carnegie Mellon School of Computer Science, one of the first such departments in the world.

Notably, Simon was among the pioneers of several modern-day scientific domains such as artificial intelligence, information processing, decision-making, problem-solving, organization theory, and complex systems. He was among the earliest to analyze the architecture of complexity and to propose a preferential attachment mechanism to explain power law distributions.

==Early life and education==
Herbert Alexander Simon was born in Milwaukee, Wisconsin on June 15, 1916. Simon&#x27;s father, Arthur Simon (1881–1948), was a Jewish electrical engineer who came to the United States from Germany in 1903 after earning his engineering degree at Technische Hochschule Darmstadt. An inventor, Arthur also was an independent patent attorney. Simon&#x27;s mother, Edna Marguerite Merkel (1888–1969), was an accomplished pianist whose Jewish, Lutheran, and Catholic ancestors came from Braunschweig, Prague and Cologne. Simon&#x27;s European ancestors were piano makers, goldsmiths, and vintners.

Simon attended Milwaukee Public Schools, where he developed an interest in science and established himself as an atheist. While attending middle school, Simon wrote a letter to &quot;the editor of the &quot;Milwaukee Journal&quot; defending the civil liberties of atheists&quot;. Simon&#x27;s family introduced him to the idea that human behavior could be studied scientifically; his mother&#x27;s younger brother, Harold Merkel (1892–1922), who studied economics at the University of Wisconsin–Madison under John R. Commons, became one of his earliest influences. Through Harold&#x27;s books on economics and psychology, Simon discovered social science. Among his earliest influences, Simon cited Norman Angell for his book &quot;The Great Illusion&quot; and Henry George for his book &quot;Progress and Poverty&quot;. While attending high school, Simon joined the debate team, where he argued &quot;from conviction, rather than cussedness&quot; in favor of George&#x27;s single tax.

In 1933, Simon entered the University of Chicago, and, following his early influences, decided to study social science and mathematics. Simon was interested in studying biology but chose not to pursue the field because of his &quot;color-blindness and awkwardness in the laboratory&quot;. At an early age, Simon learned he was color blind and discovered the external world is not the same as the perceived world. While in college, Simon focused on political science and economics. Simon&#x27;s most important mentor was Henry Schultz, an econometrician and mathematical economist. Simon received both his B.A. (1936) and his Ph.D. (1943) in political science from the University of Chicago, where he studied under Harold Lasswell, Nicolas Rashevsky, Rudolf Carnap, Henry Schultz, and Charles Edward Merriam. After enrolling in a course on &quot;Measuring Municipal Governments,&quot; Simon became a research assistant for Clarence Ridley, and the two co-authored &quot;Measuring Municipal Activities: A Survey of Suggested Criteria for Appraising Administration&quot; in 1938. Simon&#x27;s studies led him to the field of organizational decision-making, which became the subject of his doctoral dissertation.

==Career==
After receiving his undergraduate degree, Simon obtained a research assistantship in municipal administration that turned into the directorship of an operations research group at the University of California, Berkeley, where he worked from 1939 to 1942. By arrangement with the University of Chicago, during his years at Berkeley, he took his doctoral exams by mail and worked on his dissertation after hours.

From 1942 to 1949, Simon was a professor of political science and also served as department chairman at Illinois Institute of Technology in Chicago. There, he began participating in the seminars held by the staff of the Cowles Commission who at that time included Trygve Haavelmo, Jacob Marschak, and Tjalling Koopmans. He thus began an in-depth study of economics in the area of institutionalism. Marschak brought Simon in to assist in the study he was currently undertaking with Sam Schurr of the &quot;prospective economic effects of atomic energy&quot;.

From 1949 to 2001, Simon was a faculty member at Carnegie-Mellon University, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. In 1949, Simon became a professor of administration and chairman of the Department of Industrial Management at Carnegie Institute of Technology (&quot;Carnegie Tech&quot;), which, in 1967, became Carnegie-Mellon University. Simon later also taught psychology and computer science in the same university, (occasionally visiting other universities).

==Research==
Seeking to replace the highly simplified classical approach to economic modeling, Simon became best known for his theory of corporate decision in his book &quot;Administrative Behavior&quot;. In this book he based his concepts with an approach that recognized multiple factors that contribute to decision making. His organization and administration interest allowed him to not only serve three times as a university department chairman, but he also played a big part in the creation of the Economic Cooperation Administration in 1948; administrative team that administered aid to the Marshall Plan for the U.S. government, serving on President Lyndon Johnson&#x27;s Science Advisory Committee, and also the National Academy of Sciences. Simon has made a great number of contributions to both economic analysis and applications. Because of this, his work can be found in a number of economic literary works, making contributions to areas such as mathematical economics including theorem-proving, human rationality, behavioral study of firms, theory of casual ordering, and the analysis of the parameter identification problem in econometrics.

===Decision-making===

&quot;Administrative Behavior&quot;, first published in 1947 and updated across the years, was based on Simon&#x27;s doctoral dissertation. It served as the foundation for his life&#x27;s work. The centerpiece of this book is the behavioral and cognitive processes of humans making rational decisions. By his definition, an operational administrative decision should be correct, efficient, and practical to implement with a set of coordinated means.
Simon recognized that a theory of administration is largely a theory of human decision making, and as such must be based on both economics and on psychology. He states:

Contrary to the &quot;homo economicus&quot; model, Simon argued that alternatives and consequences may be partly known, and means and ends imperfectly differentiated, incompletely related, or poorly detailed.

Simon defined the task of rational decision making as selecting the alternative that results in the more preferred set of all the possible consequences. Correctness of administrative decisions was thus measured by:
* Adequacy of achieving the desired objective
* Efficiency with which the result was obtained

The task of choice was divided into three required steps:

* Identifying and listing all the alternatives
* Determining all consequences resulting from each of the alternatives;
* Comparing the accuracy and efficiency of each of these sets of consequences

Any given individual or organization attempting to implement this model in a real situation would be unable to comply with the three requirements. Simon argued that knowledge of all alternatives, or all consequences that follow from each alternative is impossible in many realistic cases.

Simon attempted to determine the techniques or behavioral processes that a person or organization could bring to bear to achieve approximately the best result given limits on rational decision making. Simon writes:

Therefore, Simon describes work in terms of an economic framework, conditioned on human cognitive limitations: &quot;Economic man&quot; and &quot;Administrative man&quot;.

&quot;Administrative Behavior&quot; addresses a wide range of human behaviors, cognitive abilities, management techniques, personnel policies, training goals and procedures, specialized roles, criteria for evaluation of accuracy and efficiency, and all of the ramifications of communication processes. Simon is particularly interested in how these factors influence the making of decisions, both directly and indirectly.

Simon argued that the two outcomes of a choice require monitoring and that many members of the organization would be expected to focus on adequacy, but that administrative management must pay particular attention to the efficiency with which the desired result was obtained. 36-49

Simon followed Chester Barnard, who stated &quot;the decisions that an individual makes as a member of an organization are quite distinct from his personal decisions&quot;. Personal choices may be determined whether an individual joins a particular organization and continue to be made in his or her extra–organizational private life. As a member of an organization, however, that individual makes decisions not in relationship to personal needs and results, but in an impersonal sense as part of the organizational intent, purpose, and effect. Organizational inducements, rewards, and sanctions are all designed to form, strengthen, and maintain this identification.212

Simon saw two universal elements of human social behavior as key to creating the possibility of organizational behavior in human individuals: Authority (addressed in Chapter VII—The Role of Authority) and in Loyalties and Identification (Addressed in Chapter X: Loyalties, and Organizational Identification).

Authority is a well-studied, primary mark of organizational behavior, straightforwardly defined in the organizational context as the ability and right of an individual of higher rank to guide the decisions of an individual of lower rank. The actions, attitudes, and relationships of the dominant and subordinate individuals constitute components of role behavior that may vary widely in form, style, and content, but do not vary in the expectation of obedience by the one of superior status, and willingness to obey from the subordinate.

Loyalty was defined by Simon as the &quot;process whereby the individual substitutes organizational objectives (service objectives or conservation objectives) for his own aims as the value-indices which determine his organizational decisions&quot;. This entailed evaluating alternative choices in terms of their consequences for the group rather than only for oneself or one&#x27;s family.

Decisions can be complex admixtures of facts and values. Information about facts, especially empirically proven facts or facts derived from specialized experience, are more easily transmitted in the exercise of authority than are the expressions of values. Simon is primarily interested in seeking identification of the individual employee with the organizational goals and values. Following Lasswell, he states that &quot;a person identifies himself with a group when, in making a decision, he evaluates the several alternatives of choice in terms of their consequences for the specified group&quot;.

Simon has been critical of traditional economics&#x27; elementary understanding of decision-making, and argues it &quot;is too quick to build an idealistic, unrealistic picture of the decision-making process and then prescribe on the basis of such unrealistic picture&quot;.

Herbert Simon rediscovered path diagrams, which were originally invented by Sewall Wright around 1920.

===Artificial intelligence===
Simon was a pioneer in the field of artificial intelligence, creating with Allen Newell the Logic Theory Machine (1956) and the General Problem Solver (GPS) (1957) programs. GPS may possibly be the first method developed for separating problem solving strategy from information about particular problems. Both programs were developed using the Information Processing Language (IPL) (1956) developed by Newell, Cliff Shaw, and Simon. Donald Knuth mentions the development of list processing in IPL, with the linked list originally called &quot;NSS memory&quot; for its inventors. In 1957, Simon predicted that computer chess would surpass human chess abilities within &quot;ten years&quot; when, in reality, that transition took about forty years. He also predicted in 1965 that &quot;machines will be capable, within twenty years, of doing any work a man can do.&quot;

In the early 1960s psychologist Ulric Neisser asserted that while machines are capable of replicating &quot;cold cognition&quot; behaviors such as reasoning, planning, perceiving, and deciding, they would never be able to replicate &quot;hot cognition&quot; behaviors such as pain, pleasure, desire, and other emotions. Simon responded to Neisser&#x27;s views in 1963 by writing a paper on emotional cognition, which he updated in 1967 and published in &quot;Psychological Review&quot;. Simon&#x27;s work on emotional cognition was largely ignored by the artificial intelligence research community for several years, but subsequent work on emotions by Sloman and Picard helped refocus attention on Simon&#x27;s paper and eventually, made it highly influential on the topic.

Simon also collaborated with James G. March on several works in organization theory.

With Allen Newell, Simon developed a theory for the simulation of human problem solving behavior using production rules. The study of human problem solving required new kinds of human measurements and, with Anders Ericsson, Simon developed the experimental technique of verbal protocol analysis. Simon was interested in the role of knowledge in expertise. He said that to become an expert on a topic required about ten years of experience and he and colleagues estimated that expertise was the result of learning roughly 50,000 chunks of information. A chess expert was said to have learned about 50,000 chunks or chess position patterns.

He was awarded the ACM Turing Award, along with Allen Newell, in 1975. &quot;In joint scientific efforts extending over twenty years, initially in collaboration with J. C. (Cliff) Shaw at the RAND Corporation, and with numerous faculty and student colleagues at Carnegie Mellon University, they have made basic contributions to artificial intelligence, the psychology of human cognition, and list processing.&quot;

===Psychology===
Simon was interested in how humans learn and, with Edward Feigenbaum, he developed the EPAM (Elementary Perceiver and Memorizer) theory, one of the first theories of learning to be implemented as a computer program. EPAM was able to explain a large number of phenomena in the field of verbal learning. Later versions of the model were applied to concept formation and the acquisition of expertise. With Fernand Gobet, he has expanded the EPAM theory into the CHREST computational model. The theory explains how simple chunks of information form the building blocks of schemata, which are more complex structures. CHREST has been used predominantly, to simulate aspects of chess expertise.

===Sociology and economics===
Simon has been credited for revolutionary changes in microeconomics. He is responsible for the concept of organizational decision-making as it is known today. He was the first to rigorously examine how administrators made decisions when they did not have perfect and complete information. It was in this area that he was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1978.

At the Cowles Commission, Simon&#x27;s main goal was to link economic theory to mathematics and statistics. His main contributions were to the fields of general equilibrium and econometrics. He was greatly influenced by the marginalist debate that began in the 1930s. The popular work of the time argued that it was not apparent empirically that entrepreneurs needed to follow the marginalist principles of profit-maximization/cost-minimization in running organizations. The argument went on to note that profit maximization was not accomplished, in part, because of the lack of complete information. In decision-making, Simon believed that agents face uncertainty about the future and costs in acquiring information in the present. These factors limit the extent to which agents may make a fully rational decision, thus they possess only &quot;bounded rationality&quot; and must make decisions by &quot;satisficing&quot;, or choosing that which might not be optimal, but which will make them happy enough. Bounded rationality is a central theme in behavioral economics. It is concerned with the ways in which the actual decision-making process influences decision. Theories of bounded rationality relax one or more assumptions of standard expected utility theory.

Further, Simon emphasized that psychologists invoke a &quot;procedural&quot; definition of rationality, whereas economists employ a &quot;substantive&quot; definition. Gustavos Barros argued that the procedural rationality concept does not have a significant presence in the economics field and has never had nearly as much weight as the concept of bounded rationality. However, in an earlier article, Bhargava (1997) noted the importance of Simon&#x27;s arguments and emphasized that there are several applications of the &quot;procedural&quot; definition of rationality in econometric analyses of data on health. In particular, economists should employ &quot;auxiliary assumptions&quot; that reflect the knowledge in the relevant biomedical fields, and guide the specification of econometric models for health outcomes.

Simon was also known for his research on industrial organization. He determined that the internal organization of firms and the external business decisions thereof, did not conform to the neoclassical theories of &quot;rational&quot; decision-making. Simon wrote many articles on the topic over the course of his life, mainly focusing on the issue of decision-making within the behavior of what he termed &quot;bounded rationality&quot;. &quot;Rational behavior, in economics, means that individuals maximize their utility function under the constraints they face (e.g., their budget constraint, limited choices, ...) in pursuit of their self-interest. This is reflected in the theory of subjective expected utility. The term, bounded rationality, is used to designate rational choice that takes into account the cognitive limitations of both knowledge and cognitive capacity. Bounded rationality is a central theme in behavioral economics. It is concerned with the ways in which the actual decision-making process influences decisions. Theories of bounded rationality relax one or more assumptions of standard expected utility theory&quot;.

Simon determined that the best way to study these areas was through computer simulations. As such, he developed an interest in computer science. Simon&#x27;s main interests in computer science were in artificial intelligence, human–computer interaction, principles of the organization of humans and machines as information processing systems, the use of computers to study (by modeling) philosophical problems of the nature of intelligence and of epistemology, and the social implications of computer technology.

In his youth, Simon took an interest in land economics and Georgism, an idea known at the time as &quot;single tax&quot;. The system is meant to redistribute unearned economic rent to the public and improve land use. In 1979, Simon still maintained these ideas and argued that land value tax should replace taxes on wages.

Some of Simon&#x27;s economic research was directed toward understanding technological change in general and the information processing revolution in particular.

===Pedagogy===
Simon&#x27;s work has strongly influenced John Mighton, developer of a program that has achieved significant success in improving mathematics performance among elementary and high school students. Mighton cites a 2000 paper by Simon and two coauthors that counters arguments by French mathematics educator, Guy Brousseau, and others suggesting that excessive practice hampers children&#x27;s understanding:

==Awards and honors==
Simon received many top-level honors in life, including becoming a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and a member of the American Philosophical Society in 1959; election as a Member of the National Academy of Sciences in 1967; APA Award for Distinguished Scientific Contributions to Psychology (1969); the ACM&#x27;s Turing Award for making &quot;basic contributions to artificial intelligence, the psychology of human cognition, and list processing&quot; (1975); the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics &quot;for his pioneering research into the decision-making process within economic organizations&quot; (1978); the National Medal of Science (1986); Founding Fellow of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (1990); the APA&#x27;s Award for Outstanding Lifetime Contributions to Psychology (1993); ACM fellow (1994); and IJCAI Award for Research Excellence (1995).

*Honorary doctorate, Lund School of Economics and Management, 1968.
*Honorary degree, University of Pavia, 1988.
*Honorary Doctor of Laws (LL.D.) degree from Harvard University in 1990.
*Honorary degree, University of Buenos Aires, 1999.

==Selected publications==
Simon was a prolific writer and authored 27 books and almost a thousand papers. , Simon was the most cited person in artificial intelligence and cognitive psychology on Google Scholar. With almost a thousand highly cited publications, he was one of the most influential social scientists of the twentieth century.

===Books===
* 1947. &quot;Administrative Behavior: A Study of Decision-Making Processes in Administrative Organization&quot;.
: – 4th ed. in 1997, The Free Press
* 1957. &quot;Models of Man&quot;. John Wiley. Presents mathematical models of human behaviour.
* 1958 (with James G. March and the collaboration of Harold Guetzkow). &quot;Organizations&quot;. New York: Wiley. the foundation of modern organization theory
* 1969. &quot;The Sciences of the Artificial&quot;. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass, 1st edition. Made the idea easy to grasp: &quot;objects (real or symbolic) in the environment of the decision-maker influence choice as much as the intrinsic information-processing capabilities of the decision-maker&quot;; Explained &quot;the principles of modeling complex systems, particularly the human information-processing system that we call the mind.&quot;
: - 2nd ed. in 1981, MIT Press. As stated in the Preface, the second edition provided the author an opportunity &quot;to amend and expand [his] thesis and to apply it to several additional fields&quot; beyond organization theory, economics, management science, and psychology that were covered in the previous edition.
: - 3rd ed. in 1996, MIT Press.
* 1972 (with Allen Newell). &quot;Human Problem Solving&quot;. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, (1972). &quot;the most important book on the scientific study of human thinking in the 20th century&quot;
* 1977. &quot;Models of Discovery : and other topics in the methods of science&quot;. Dordrecht, Holland: Reidel.
* 1979. &quot;Models of Thought, Vols. 1 and 2&quot;. Yale University Press. His papers on human information-processing and problem-solving.
* 1982. &quot;Models of Bounded Rationality, Vols. 1 and 2&quot;. MIT Press. His papers on economics.
: - Vol. 3. in 1997, MIT Press. His papers on economics since the publication of Vols. 1 and 2 in 1982. The papers grouped under the category &quot;The Structure of Complex Systems&quot;– dealing with issues such as causal ordering, decomposability, aggregation of variables, model abstraction– are of general interest in systems modelling, not just in economics.
* 1983. &quot;Reason in Human Affairs&quot;, Stanford University Press. A readable 115pp. book on human decision-making and information processing, based on lectures he gave at Stanford in 1982. A popular presentation of his technical work.
* 1987 (with P. Langley, G. Bradshaw, and J. Zytkow). &quot;Scientific Discovery: computational explorations of the creative processes&quot;. MIT Press.
* 1991. &quot;Models of My Life&quot;. Basic Books, Sloan Foundation Series. His autobiography.
* 1997. &quot;An Empirically Based Microeconomics&quot;. Cambridge University Press. A compact and readable summary of his criticisms of conventional &quot;axiomatic&quot; microeconomics, based on a lecture series.
* 2008 (posthumously). &quot;Economics, Bounded Rationality and the Cognitive Revolution&quot;. Edward Elgar Publishing, . reprint some of his papers not widely read by economists.

===Articles===
* 1938 (with Clarence E. Ridley). &quot;Measuring Municipal Activities: a Survey of Suggested Criteria and Reporting Forms For Appraising Administration&quot;.
* 1943. &quot;Fiscal Aspects of Metropolitan Consolidation&quot;.
* 1945. &quot;The Technique of Municipal Administration&quot;, 2d ed.
* 1955. &quot;A Behavioral Model of Rational Choice&quot;, &quot;Quarterly Journal of Economics&quot;, vol. 69, 99–118.
* 1956. &quot;Reply: Surrogates for Uncertain Decision Problems&quot;, Office of Naval Research, January 1956.
: – Reprinted in 1982, In: H.A. Simon, Models of Bounded Rationality, Volume 1, Economic Analysis and Public Policy, Cambridge, Mass., MIT Press, 235–44.
* 1958 (with Allen Newell and J. C. Shaw). &quot;Elements of a theory of human problem solving&quot;
* 1967. &quot;Motivational and emotional controls of cognition&quot;, &quot;Psychological Review&quot;, vol. 74, 29–39, reprinted in &quot;Models of Thought&quot; Vol 1.
* 1972. &quot;Theories of Bounded Rationality&quot;, Chapter 8 in C. B. McGuire and R. Radner, eds., Decision and Organization, Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.
* 1980 (with K. Anders Ericsson). &quot;Verbal reports as data&quot;, &quot;Psychological Review&quot;, vol. 87, 215–251.
* 1985 &quot;Human Nature in Politics: The Dialogue of Psychology with Political Science&quot;, &quot;The American Political Science Review&quot;, vol. 79, no. 2 (Jun. 1985), pp. 293–304
* 1989 (with M.J. Prietula). &quot;The Experts in Your Midst&quot;&quot;, Harvard Business Review&quot;, January–February, 120–124.
*1992 &#x27;What is an &quot;Explanation&quot; of Behavior?&#x27; &quot;Psychological Science&quot;, 3(3), 150-161
* 1995 (with Peter C.-H. Cheng). &quot;Scientific discovery and creative reasoning with diagrams&quot;, in S. M. Smith, T. B. Ward &amp; R. A. Finke (Eds.), &quot;The Creative Cognition Approach&quot; (pp. 205–228). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
* 1998 (with John R. Anderson, Lynne M. Reder, K. Anders Ericsson, and Robert Glaser). &quot;Radical Constructivism and Cognitive Psychology&quot;, &quot;Brookings Papers on Education Policy&quot;, no. 1, 227–278.
* 2000 (with John R. Anderson and Lynne M. Reder). &quot;Applications and misapplications of cognitive psychology to mathematics education&quot;, &quot;Texas Education Review&quot;, vol. 1, no. 2, 29–49.

==Personal life and interests==
Simon married Dorothea Pye in 1938. Their marriage lasted 63 years until his death. They had three children, Katherine, Peter, and Barbara.

From 1950 to 1955, Simon studied mathematical economics and during this time, together with David Hawkins, discovered and proved the Hawkins–Simon theorem on the &quot;conditions for the existence of positive solution vectors for input-output matrices&quot;. He also developed theorems on near-decomposability and aggregation. Having begun to apply these theorems to organizations, by 1954 Simon determined that the best way to study problem-solving was to simulate it with computer programs, which led to his interest in computer simulation of human cognition. Founded during the 1950s, he was among the first members of the Society for General Systems Research.

Simon was a pianist and had a keen interest in the arts. He was a friend of Robert Lepper and Richard Rappaport. Rappaport also painted Simon&#x27;s commissioned portrait at Carnegie Mellon University. He was also a keen mountain climber. As a testament to his wide interests, he at one point taught an undergraduate course on the French Revolution.

In January 2001, Simon underwent surgery at UPMC Presbyterian to remove a cancerous tumor in his abdomen. Although the surgery was successful, Simon later died from the complications that followed. His wife died a year later in 2002.

== See also ==
* List of Jewish Nobel laureates

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* Simon, Herbert A. &#x27;Organizations and markets&#x27;, &quot;Journal of Economic Perspectives&quot;, vol. 5, no. 2 (1991), pp. 25–44.


==Further reading==
* Courtois, P.J., 1977. &quot;Decomposability: queueing and computer system applications&quot;. New York: Academic Press. Courtois was influenced by the work of Simon and Albert Ando on hierarchical nearly-decomposable systems in economic modelling as a criterion for computer systems design, and in this book he presents the mathematical theory of these nearly-decomposable systems in more detail than Simon and Ando do in their original papers.
* Frantz, R., and Marsh, L. (Eds.) (2016). &quot;Minds, Models and Milieux: Commemorating the Centennial of the Birth of Herbert Simon&quot;. Palgrave Macmillan.

==External links==
* 
* A Tribute to Herbert A. Simon
* Full-text digital archive of Herbert Simon papers
* Mind Models online Artificial Intelligence exhibit
* pioneering research into the decision-making process within economic organizations
* History of Twentieth-Century Philosophy of Science BOOK VIII: Herbert Simon, Paul Thagard and Others on Discovery Systems – with free downloads for public use.
* IDEAS/RePEc
* Biography of Herbert A. Simon from the Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences
* Documentary interviews with Herbert Simon, with critiques of his work, as part of the Nobel Perspectives project
* including the Prize Lecture December 8, 1978 &quot;Rational Decision-Making in Business Organizations&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q181529" start="0" end="23" title="Herbert A. Simon" label="Herbert Alexander Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="119" end="135" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="137" end="146" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23373" start="152" end="172" title="cognitive psychology" label="cognitive psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331926" start="208" end="223" title="decision-making" label="decision-making"/>
<link wikidata="Q814385" start="292" end="311" title="bounded rationality" label="bounded rationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578122" start="328" end="339" title="satisficing" label="satisficing"/>
<link wikidata="Q185667" start="363" end="375" title="Turing Award" label="Turing Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q47170" start="392" end="433" title="Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences" label="Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q147638" start="523" end="540" title="cognitive science" label="cognitive science"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="542" end="558" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q31728" start="560" end="581" title="public administration" label="public administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920921" start="583" end="593" title="management" label="management"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="599" end="616" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="628" end="654" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043957" start="724" end="766" title="Carnegie Mellon School of Computer Science" label="Carnegie Mellon School of Computer Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="904" end="927" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q750843" start="929" end="951" title="Information processing (psychology)" label="information processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331926" start="953" end="968" title="decision-making" label="decision-making"/>
<link wikidata="Q730920" start="970" end="985" title="problem-solving" label="problem-solving"/>
<link wikidata="Q149584" start="987" end="1006" title="organization theory" label="organization theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q854457" start="1012" end="1027" title="complex systems" label="complex systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239828" start="1114" end="1137" title="preferential attachment" label="preferential attachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q428971" start="1159" end="1168" title="power law" label="power law"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="1250" end="1259" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="1261" end="1270" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="1342" end="1348" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1404" end="1411" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q346549" start="1460" end="1491" title="Technische Hochschule" label="Technische Hochschule Darmstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2773" start="1696" end="1708" title="Braunschweig" label="Braunschweig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="1710" end="1716" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="1721" end="1728" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q211423" start="1781" end="1790" title="goldsmith" label="goldsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q897317" start="1797" end="1804" title="vintner" label="vintner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5483185" start="1823" end="1847" title="Milwaukee Public Schools" label="Milwaukee Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765623" start="2015" end="2032" title="Milwaukee Journal Sentinel" label="Milwaukee Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q838330" start="2279" end="2310" title="University of Wisconsin–Madison" label="University of Wisconsin–Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701606" start="2317" end="2332" title="John R. Commons" label="John R. Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q272224" start="2506" end="2519" title="Norman Angell" label="Norman Angell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3209508" start="2539" end="2557" title="The Great Illusion" label="The Great Illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q355245" start="2568" end="2580" title="Henry George" label="Henry George"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896920" start="2600" end="2620" title="Progress and Poverty" label="Progress and Poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q679595" start="2781" end="2791" title="Georgism" label="single tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="2821" end="2842" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="3242" end="3259" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="3264" end="3273" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971751" start="3314" end="3327" title="Henry Schultz" label="Henry Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q160039" start="3332" end="3346" title="Econometrics" label="econometrician"/>
<link wikidata="Q747534" start="3351" end="3373" title="mathematical economist" label="mathematical economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q314462" start="3508" end="3523" title="Harold Lasswell" label="Harold Lasswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q927125" start="3525" end="3542" title="Nicolas Rashevsky" label="Nicolas Rashevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q76519" start="3544" end="3557" title="Rudolf Carnap" label="Rudolf Carnap"/>
<link wikidata="Q716312" start="3578" end="3600" title="Charles Edward Merriam" label="Charles Edward Merriam"/>
<link wikidata="Q19483216" start="3916" end="3930" title="Organizational behavior" label="organizational"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331926" start="3931" end="3946" title="decision-making" label="decision-making"/>
<link wikidata="Q194292" start="4165" end="4184" title="operations research" label="operations research"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="4198" end="4232" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q659706" start="4530" end="4562" title="Illinois Institute of Technology" label="Illinois Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="4566" end="4573" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179748" start="4646" end="4663" title="Cowles Commission" label="Cowles Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q208124" start="4690" end="4705" title="Trygve Haavelmo" label="Trygve Haavelmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q91541" start="4707" end="4721" title="Jacob Marschak" label="Jacob Marschak"/>
<link wikidata="Q110968" start="4727" end="4744" title="Tjalling Koopmans" label="Tjalling Koopmans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118654" start="4806" end="4822" title="Institutional economics" label="institutionalism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4907" end="4917" title="Sam Schurr" label="Sam Schurr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817330" start="4963" end="4976" title="atomic energy" label="atomic energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="5034" end="5060" title="Carnegie-Mellon University" label="Carnegie-Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="5202" end="5234" title="Carnegie Institute of Technology" label="Carnegie Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="5339" end="5349" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="5354" end="5370" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683452" start="5614" end="5637" title="Administrative Behavior" label="Administrative Behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q918528" start="5943" end="5978" title="Economic Cooperation Administration" label="Economic Cooperation Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="6037" end="6050" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="6097" end="6111" title="Lyndon Johnson" label="Lyndon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="6160" end="6188" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656743" start="6545" end="6577" title="parameter identification problem" label="parameter identification problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164073" start="7261" end="7276" title="homo economicus" label="homo economicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q592555" start="9414" end="9429" title="Chester Barnard" label="Chester Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806688" start="11703" end="11711" title="Lasswell" label="Lasswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="12360" end="12383" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q439245" start="12399" end="12411" title="Allen Newell" label="Allen Newell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391896" start="12416" end="12436" title="Logic Theorist" label="Logic Theory Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387212" start="12452" end="12474" title="General Problem Solver" label="General Problem Solver"/>
<link wikidata="Q776372" start="12668" end="12699" title="Information Processing Language" label="Information Processing Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391903" start="12734" end="12744" title="Cliff Shaw" label="Cliff Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q17457" start="12757" end="12769" title="Donald Knuth" label="Donald Knuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003418" start="12831" end="12842" title="linked list" label="linked list"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122588" start="12933" end="12947" title="computer chess" label="computer chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q62895" start="13226" end="13239" title="Ulric Neisser" label="Ulric Neisser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5910677" start="13432" end="13445" title="hot cognition" label="hot cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662445" start="13846" end="13852" title="Aaron Sloman" label="Sloman"/>
<link wikidata="Q14109" start="13857" end="13863" title="Rosalind Picard" label="Picard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352604" start="13998" end="14012" title="James G. March" label="James G. March"/>
<link wikidata="Q149584" start="14033" end="14052" title="organization theory" label="organization theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q439245" start="14060" end="14072" title="Allen Newell" label="Allen Newell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17737" start="14092" end="14098" title="theory" label="theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q45045" start="14107" end="14117" title="simulation" label="simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q730920" start="14127" end="14142" title="problem solving" label="problem solving"/>
<link wikidata="Q730920" start="14195" end="14210" title="problem solving" label="problem solving"/>
<link wikidata="Q6323089" start="14262" end="14277" title="Anders Ericsson" label="Anders Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089605" start="14583" end="14589" title="chunking (psychology)" label="chunks"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="14608" end="14613" title="chess" label="chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q381160" start="14614" end="14620" title="expert" label="expert"/>
<link wikidata="Q127992" start="14714" end="14717" title="Association for Computing Machinery" label="ACM"/>
<link wikidata="Q185667" start="14718" end="14730" title="Turing Award" label="Turing Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q439245" start="14743" end="14755" title="Allen Newell" label="Allen Newell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391903" start="14861" end="14879" title="Cliff Shaw" label="J. C. (Cliff) Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="14887" end="14903" title="RAND Corporation" label="RAND Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="14957" end="14983" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="15023" end="15046" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q92823" start="15179" end="15196" title="Edward Feigenbaum" label="Edward Feigenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5323829" start="15215" end="15219" title="EPAM" label="EPAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q133500" start="15294" end="15302" title="learning" label="learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4491893" start="15474" end="15491" title="concept formation" label="concept formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q381160" start="15515" end="15524" title="expertise" label="expertise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406499" start="15531" end="15544" title="Fernand Gobet" label="Fernand Gobet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011304" start="15587" end="15593" title="CHREST" label="CHREST"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089605" start="15646" end="15652" title="chunking (psychology)" label="chunks"/>
<link wikidata="Q39072" start="15901" end="15915" title="microeconomics" label="microeconomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074338" start="16103" end="16135" title="Perfect information" label="perfect and complete information"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179748" start="16210" end="16227" title="Cowles Commission" label="Cowles Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q282640" start="16356" end="16375" title="general equilibrium" label="general equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q160039" start="16380" end="16392" title="econometrics" label="econometrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q814385" start="17048" end="17067" title="bounded rationality" label="bounded rationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578122" start="17107" end="17118" title="satisficing" label="satisficing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319304" start="17443" end="17466" title="Expected utility hypothesis" label="expected utility theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411783" start="18333" end="18356" title="industrial organization" label="industrial organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q60571" start="18480" end="18501" title="Neoclassical economics" label="neoclassical theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q814385" start="18703" end="18722" title="bounded rationality" label="bounded rationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425777" start="18980" end="19007" title="subjective expected utility" label="subjective expected utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q814385" start="19019" end="19038" title="bounded rationality" label="bounded rationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q647525" start="19211" end="19231" title="behavioral economics" label="behavioral economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q925667" start="19503" end="19522" title="computer simulation" label="computer simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="19562" end="19578" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q207434" start="19661" end="19687" title="human–computer interaction" label="human–computer interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="19882" end="19894" title="epistemology" label="epistemology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085066" start="19989" end="20003" title="land economics" label="land economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q679595" start="20008" end="20016" title="Georgism" label="Georgism"/>
<link wikidata="Q264259" start="20116" end="20129" title="economic rent" label="economic rent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057250" start="20226" end="20240" title="land value tax" label="land value tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q10966284" start="20493" end="20505" title="John Mighton" label="John Mighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3121606" start="20758" end="20771" title="Guy Brousseau" label="Guy Brousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="20962" end="20999" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="21020" end="21050" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q63315195" start="21074" end="21116" title="Member of the National Academy of Sciences" label="Member of the National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112655" start="21126" end="21192" title="APA Award for Distinguished Scientific Contributions to Psychology" label="APA Award for Distinguished Scientific Contributions to Psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q127992" start="21205" end="21208" title="Association for Computing Machinery" label="ACM"/>
<link wikidata="Q185667" start="21216" end="21228" title="Turing Award" label="Turing Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="21318" end="21327" title="cognition" label="cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q47170" start="21367" end="21400" title="Nobel Prize in Economics" label="Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q737051" start="21516" end="21541" title="National Medal of Science" label="National Medal of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739680" start="21573" end="21631" title="Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence" label="Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q466587" start="21644" end="21647" title="American Psychological Association" label="APA"/>
<link wikidata="Q24534543" start="21655" end="21713" title="APA Award for Lifetime Contributions to Psychology" label="Award for Outstanding Lifetime Contributions to Psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q127992" start="21722" end="21725" title="Association for Computing Machinery" label="ACM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5971528" start="21745" end="21780" title="IJCAI Award for Research Excellence" label="IJCAI Award for Research Excellence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4269442" start="21811" end="21850" title="Lund School of Economics and Management" label="Lund School of Economics and Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q219317" start="21876" end="21895" title="University of Pavia" label="University of Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q959320" start="21913" end="21927" title="Doctor of Laws" label="Doctor of Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="21948" end="21966" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q194223" start="21994" end="22020" title="University of Buenos Aires" label="University of Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="22172" end="22195" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q23373" start="22200" end="22220" title="cognitive psychology" label="cognitive psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q494817" start="22224" end="22238" title="Google Scholar" label="Google Scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683452" start="22396" end="22419" title="Administrative Behavior" label="Administrative Behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352604" start="22641" end="22655" title="James G. March" label="James G. March"/>
<link wikidata="Q30600318" start="22705" end="22718" title="Organizations (book)" label="Organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q30078095" start="22802" end="22832" title="The Sciences of the Artificial" label="The Sciences of the Artificial"/>
<link wikidata="Q439245" start="23597" end="23609" title="Allen Newell" label="Allen Newell"/>
<link wikidata="Q30078096" start="23618" end="23639" title="Human Problem Solving" label="Human Problem Solving"/>
<link wikidata="Q439245" start="26107" end="26119" title="Allen Newell" label="Allen Newell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391903" start="26124" end="26134" title="J. C. Shaw" label="J. C. Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q6323089" start="26551" end="26569" title="K. Anders Ericsson" label="K. Anders Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395071" start="27349" end="27365" title="John Robert Anderson (psychologist)" label="John R. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174693" start="28020" end="28033" title="David Hawkins (philosopher)" label="David Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456162" start="28061" end="28082" title="Hawkins–Simon theorem" label="Hawkins–Simon theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4330297" start="28554" end="28590" title="Society for General Systems Research" label="Society for General Systems Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012686" start="28669" end="28682" title="Robert Lepper" label="Robert Lepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="28767" end="28793" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="28814" end="28830" title="mountain climber" label="mountain climber"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="28924" end="28941" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q30261318" start="28988" end="29005" title="UPMC Presbyterian" label="UPMC Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915649" start="29196" end="29226" title="List of Jewish Nobel laureates" label="List of Jewish Nobel laureates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709633" start="29616" end="29627" title="Albert Ando" label="Albert Ando"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14207" wikidata="Q103223" url="?curid=14207" title="Hematite">
<text>Hematite (), also spelled as haematite, is a common iron oxide compound with the formula, Fe2O3 and is widely found in rocks and soils. Hematite crystals belong to the rhombohedral lattice system which is designated the alpha polymorph of . It has the same crystal structure as corundum () and ilmenite (). With this it forms a complete solid solution at temperatures above .

Hematite occurs naturally in black to steel or silver-gray, brown to reddish-brown, or red colors. It is mined as an important ore mineral of iron. It is electrically conductive. Hematite varieties include &quot;kidney ore&quot;, &quot;martite&quot; (pseudomorphs after magnetite), &quot;iron rose&quot; and &quot;specularite&quot; (specular hematite). While these forms vary, they all have a rust-red streak. Hematite is not only harder than pure iron, but also much more brittle. The term &quot;kidney ore&quot; may be broadly used to describe botryoidal, mammillary, or reniform hematite. Maghemite is a polymorph of hematite (γ-) with the same chemical formula, but with a spinel structure like magnetite.

Large deposits of hematite are found in banded iron formations. Gray hematite is typically found in places that have still, standing water, or mineral hot springs, such as those in Yellowstone National Park in North America. The mineral may precipitate in the water and collect in layers at the bottom of the lake, spring, or other standing water. Hematite can also occur in the absence of water, usually as the result of volcanic activity.

Clay-sized hematite crystals also may occur as a secondary mineral formed by weathering processes in soil, and along with other iron oxides or oxyhydroxides such as goethite, which is responsible for the red color of many tropical, ancient, or otherwise highly weathered soils.

==Etymology and history==

The name hematite is derived from the Greek word for blood, &quot;(haima)&quot;, due to the red coloration found in some varieties of hematite. The color of hematite is often used as a pigment. The English name of the stone is derived from Middle French &quot;hématite pierre&quot;, which was taken from Latin &quot;lapis haematites&quot; the 15th century, which originated from Ancient Greek (&quot;haimatitēs lithos&quot;, &quot;blood-red stone&quot;).

Ochre is a clay that is colored by varying amounts of hematite, varying between 20% and 70%. Red ochre contains unhydrated hematite, whereas yellow ochre contains hydrated hematite (Fe2O3 · H2O). The principal use of ochre is for tinting with a permanent color.

Use of the red chalk of this iron-oxide mineral in writing, drawing, and decoration is among the earliest in human history. To date, the earliest known human use of the powdery mineral is 164,000 years ago by the inhabitants of the Pinnacle Point caves in what now is South Africa, possibly for social purposes. Hematite residues are also found in graves from 80,000 years ago. Near Rydno in Poland and Lovas in Hungary red chalk mines have been found that are from 5000 BC, belonging to the Linear Pottery culture at the Upper Rhine.

Rich deposits of hematite have been found on the island of Elba that have been mined since the time of the Etruscans.

Underground hematite mining is classified as carcinogenic hazard to humans.

==Magnetism==
Hematite shows only a very feeble response to a magnetic field. Unlike magnetite, it is not noticeably attracted to an ordinary magnet. Hematite is an antiferromagnetic material below the Morin transition at , and a canted antiferromagnet or weakly ferromagnetic above the Morin transition and below its Néel temperature at , above which it is paramagnetic.

The magnetic structure of α-hematite was the subject of considerable discussion and debate during the 1950s, as it appeared to be ferromagnetic with a Curie temperature of approximately , but with an extremely small magnetic moment (0.002 Bohr magnetons). Adding to the surprise was a transition with a decrease in temperature at around to a phase with no net magnetic moment. It was shown that the system is essentially antiferromagnetic, but that the low symmetry of the cation sites allows spin–orbit coupling to cause canting of the moments when they are in the plane perpendicular to the &quot;c&quot; axis. The disappearance of the moment with a decrease in temperature at is caused by a change in the anisotropy which causes the moments to align along the &quot;c&quot; axis. In this configuration, spin canting does not reduce the energy. The magnetic properties of bulk hematite differ from their nanoscale counterparts. For example, the Morin transition temperature of hematite decreases with a decrease in the particle size. The suppression of this transition has been observed in hematite nanoparticles and is attributed to the presence of impurities, water molecules and defects in the crystals lattice. Hematite is part of a complex solid solution oxyhydroxide system having various contents of H2O (water), hydroxyl groups and vacancy substitutions that affect the mineral&#x27;s magnetic and crystal chemical properties. Two other end-members are referred to as protohematite and hydrohematite.

Enhanced magnetic coercivities for hematite have been achieved by dry-heating a two-line ferrihydrite precursor prepared from solution. Hematite exhibited temperature-dependent magnetic coercivity values ranging from . The origin of these high coercivity values has been interpreted as a consequence of the subparticle structure induced by the different particle and crystallite size growth rates at increasing annealing temperature. These differences in the growth rates are translated into a progressive development of a subparticle structure at the nanoscale (super small). At lower temperatures (350–600 °C), single particles crystallize. However, at higher temperatures (600–1000 °C), the growth of crystalline aggregates, and a subparticle structure is favored.

==Mine tailings==
Hematite is present in the waste tailings of iron mines. A recently developed process, magnetation, uses magnets to glean waste hematite from old mine tailings in Minnesota&#x27;s vast Mesabi Range iron district. Falu red is a pigment used in traditional Swedish house paints. It is made from tailings of the Falun Mine.

==Mars==
The spectral signature of hematite was seen on the planet Mars by the infrared spectrometer on the NASA &quot;Mars Global Surveyor&quot; and &quot;2001 Mars Odyssey&quot; spacecraft in orbit around Mars. The mineral was seen in abundance at two sites on the planet, the Terra Meridiani site, near the Martian equator at 0° longitude, and the Aram Chaos site near the Valles Marineris. Several other sites also showed hematite, such as Aureum Chaos. Because terrestrial hematite is typically a mineral formed in aqueous environments or by aqueous alteration, this detection was scientifically interesting enough that the second of the two Mars Exploration Rovers was sent to a site in the Terra Meridiani region designated Meridiani Planum. In-situ investigations by the &quot;Opportunity&quot; rover showed a significant amount of hematite, much of it in the form of small &quot;Martian spherules&quot; that were informally named &quot;blueberries&quot; by the science team. Analysis indicates that these spherules are apparently concretions formed from a water solution. &quot;Knowing just how the hematite on Mars was formed will help us characterize the past environment and determine whether that environment was favorable for life&quot;.
==Jewelry==
Hematite is often shaped into beads, tumbling stones, and other jewellery components. Hematite was once used as mourning jewelry. Certain types of hematite- or iron-oxide-rich clay, especially Armenian bole, have been used in gilding. Hematite is also used in art such as in the creation of intaglio engraved gems. Hematine is a synthetic material sold as &quot;magnetic hematite&quot;.

== Pigment ==
Hematite has been sourced to make pigments since earlier origins of human pictorial depictions, such as on cave linings and other surfaces, and has been employed continually in artwork through the eras. In Roman times, the pigment obtained by finely grinding hematite was known as &quot;sil atticum&quot;. Other names for the mineral when used in painting include &quot;colcotar&quot; and &quot;caput mortuum&quot;. In Spanish, it is called &quot;almagre&quot; or &quot;almagra&quot;, from the Arabic &quot;al-maghrah&quot;, red earth, which passed into English and Portuguese. Other ancient names for the pigment include &quot;ochra hispanica&quot;, &quot;sil atticum antiquorum&quot;, and &quot;Spanish brown&quot;. It forms the basis for red, purple, and brown iron-oxide pigments, as well as being an important component of ochre, sienna, and umber pigments. The main producer of hematite for the pigment industry is India, followed distantly by Spain.

== Industrial purposes ==
As mentioned earlier, hematite is an important mineral for iron ore. The physical properties of hematite are also employed in the areas of medical equipment, shipping industries, and coal production. Having high density and capable as an effective barrier against X-ray passage, it often is incorporated into radiation shielding. As with other iron ores, it often is a component of ship ballasts because of its density and economy. In the coal industry, it can be formed into a high specific density solution, to help separate coal powder from impurities.

==Gallery==
==See also==
*Mill scale
*Mineral redox buffer
*Wüstite

==References==
==External links==

*MineralData.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q103223" start="0" end="8" title="Hematite" label="Hematite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13" end="28" title="American and British English spelling differences#ae and oe" label="also spelled as"/>
<link wikidata="Q103223" start="29" end="38" title="Hematite" label="haematite"/>
<link wikidata="Q721849" start="52" end="62" title="iron oxide" label="iron oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q419170" start="90" end="95" title="Iron(III) oxide" label="Fe2O3"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="119" end="124" title="Rock (geology)" label="rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="129" end="133" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q663314" start="168" end="195" title="Hexagonal crystal family" label="rhombohedral lattice system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="220" end="235" title="Iron(III) oxide#Alpha phase" label="alpha polymorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="257" end="274" title="crystal structure" label="crystal structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q131777" start="278" end="286" title="corundum" label="corundum"/>
<link wikidata="Q190729" start="294" end="302" title="ilmenite" label="ilmenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q787619" start="337" end="351" title="solid solution" label="solid solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="482" end="487" title="Mining" label="mined"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="504" end="523" title="Iron ore#Hematite" label="ore mineral of iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456639" start="628" end="639" title="pseudomorph" label="pseudomorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q181395" start="647" end="656" title="magnetite" label="magnetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079524" start="710" end="718" title="Specular reflection" label="specular"/>
<link wikidata="Q107775" start="779" end="785" title="streak (mineralogy)" label="streak"/>
<link wikidata="Q41472" start="808" end="814" title="Mohs scale of mineral hardness" label="harder"/>
<link wikidata="Q898288" start="850" end="857" title="Brittleness" label="brittle"/>
<link wikidata="Q505892" start="923" end="958" title="Crystal habit" label="botryoidal, mammillary, or reniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q420924" start="969" end="978" title="Maghemite" label="Maghemite"/>
<link wikidata="Q51875497" start="1054" end="1070" title="spinel structure" label="spinel structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q304213" start="1128" end="1149" title="banded iron formation" label="banded iron formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q177380" start="1239" end="1249" title="hot spring" label="hot spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q351" start="1269" end="1294" title="Yellowstone National Park" label="Yellowstone National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1298" end="1311" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q113796" start="1329" end="1340" title="Precipitation (chemistry)" label="precipitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="1510" end="1518" title="Volcano" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="1530" end="1534" title="Clay" label="Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="1607" end="1617" title="weathering" label="weathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="1631" end="1635" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q412739" start="1673" end="1685" title="oxyhydroxide" label="oxyhydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q189703" start="1695" end="1703" title="goethite" label="goethite"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="1752" end="1760" title="tropical" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1874" end="1879" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="2021" end="2028" title="pigment" label="pigment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473289" start="2076" end="2089" title="Middle French" label="Middle French"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2140" end="2145" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="2215" end="2228" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q194191" start="2292" end="2297" title="Ochre" label="Ochre"/>
<link wikidata="Q462174" start="2455" end="2462" title="hydrate" label="hydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="2474" end="2476" title="Iron" label="Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="2477" end="2478" title="Oxygen" label="O"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="2482" end="2483" title="Hydrogen" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="2484" end="2485" title="Oxygen" label="O"/>
<link wikidata="Q901944" start="2566" end="2575" title="Sanguine" label="red chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814354" start="2787" end="2807" title="Pinnacle Point" label="Pinnacle Point caves"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2938" end="2943" title="Rydno" label="Rydno"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="2947" end="2953" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q526906" start="2958" end="2963" title="Lovas, Hungary" label="Lovas"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="2967" end="2974" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q806348" start="3047" end="3069" title="Linear Pottery culture" label="Linear Pottery culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q663546" start="3077" end="3088" title="Upper Rhine" label="Upper Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q45328" start="3150" end="3154" title="Elba" label="Elba"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="3198" end="3207" title="Etruscans" label="Etruscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="3349" end="3363" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q575224" start="3452" end="3469" title="antiferromagnetic" label="antiferromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537669" start="3489" end="3505" title="Morin transition" label="Morin transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577397" start="3517" end="3523" title="spin canting" label="canted"/>
<link wikidata="Q184207" start="3550" end="3563" title="ferromagnetic" label="ferromagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191073" start="3605" end="3621" title="Néel temperature" label="Néel temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q188479" start="3645" end="3657" title="paramagnetic" label="paramagnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q242657" start="3876" end="3891" title="magnetic moment" label="magnetic moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q737120" start="3899" end="3912" title="Bohr magneton" label="Bohr magneton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4133" end="4139" title="Ion#Anions and cations" label="cation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570979" start="4153" end="4172" title="spin–orbit coupling" label="spin–orbit coupling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577397" start="4182" end="4204" title="spin canting" label="canting of the moments"/>
<link wikidata="Q466686" start="4368" end="4378" title="anisotropy" label="anisotropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q61231" start="4761" end="4774" title="nanoparticles" label="nanoparticles"/>
<link wikidata="Q432635" start="5181" end="5202" title="Magnetic coercivity" label="magnetic coercivities"/>
<link wikidata="Q899604" start="5539" end="5550" title="crystallite" label="crystallite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784525" start="5992" end="6000" title="tailings" label="tailings"/>
<link wikidata="Q191552" start="6004" end="6014" title="iron mines" label="iron mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731451" start="6046" end="6057" title="magnetation (iron ore)" label="magnetation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="6122" end="6131" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q909225" start="6144" end="6156" title="Mesabi Range" label="Mesabi Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q498423" start="6172" end="6180" title="Falu red" label="Falu red"/>
<link wikidata="Q636194" start="6268" end="6278" title="Falun Mine" label="Falun Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="6348" end="6352" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q188463" start="6369" end="6381" title="spectrometer" label="spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="6389" end="6393" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q206300" start="6400" end="6420" title="Mars Global Surveyor" label="Mars Global Surveyor"/>
<link wikidata="Q207164" start="6437" end="6454" title="2001 Mars Odyssey" label="2001 Mars Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3322097" start="6560" end="6575" title="Terra Meridiani" label="Terra Meridiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299946" start="6632" end="6642" title="Aram Chaos" label="Aram Chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q621110" start="6657" end="6673" title="Valles Marineris" label="Valles Marineris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822314" start="6725" end="6737" title="Aureum Chaos" label="Aureum Chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q220827" start="6928" end="6950" title="Mars Exploration Rover" label="Mars Exploration Rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133595" start="7012" end="7028" title="Meridiani Planum" label="Meridiani Planum"/>
<link wikidata="Q193538" start="7060" end="7089" title="Opportunity rover" label="&amp;quot;Opportunity&amp;quot; rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310161" start="7169" end="7186" title="Martian spherules" label="Martian spherules"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="7295" end="7303" title="spherule" label="spherule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093379" start="7320" end="7330" title="concretion" label="concretion"/>
<link wikidata="Q891670" start="7738" end="7751" title="Armenian bole" label="Armenian bole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334300" start="7771" end="7778" title="gilding" label="gilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501187" start="7836" end="7858" title="Engraved gem" label="intaglio engraved gems"/>
<link wikidata="Q5711116" start="7860" end="7868" title="Hematine" label="Hematine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1844333" start="9514" end="9524" title="Mill scale" label="Mill scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6864382" start="9526" end="9546" title="Mineral redox buffer" label="Mineral redox buffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q415889" start="9548" end="9555" title="Wüstite" label="Wüstite"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14208" wikidata="Q796140" url="?curid=14208" title="Holocene extinction">
<text>The Holocene extinction, also referred to as the Anthropocene extinction, is an ongoing extinction event caused by human activities during the Holocene epoch. This extinction event spans numerous families of plants and animals, including mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, fish, and invertebrates, impacting both terrestrial and marine species. Widespread degradation of biodiversity hotspots such as coral reefs and rainforests has exacerbated the crisis. Many of these extinctions are undocumented, as the species are often undiscovered before their extinctions.

Current extinction rates are estimated at 100 to 1,000 times higher than natural background extinction rates and are accelerating. Over the past 100–200 years, biodiversity loss has reached such alarming levels that some conservation biologists now believe human activities have triggered a mass extinction, or are on the cusp of doing so. As such, after the &quot;Big Five&quot; mass extinctions, the Holocene extinction event has been referred to as the sixth mass extinction. However, given the recent recognition of the Capitanian mass extinction, the term seventh mass extinction has also been proposed.

The Holocene extinction was preceded by the extinction of most large (megafaunal) animals during the Late Pleistocene, a decline attributed in part to human hunting. The prevailing theory is that human overhunting, coinciding with existing stress conditions, likely contributed to this decline. Examples from regions such as New Zealand, Madagascar, and Hawaii have shown how human colonization and habitat destruction have led to significant biodiversity losses. While debates persist about the exact role of human predation and habitat alteration, certain extinctions have been directly linked to these activities. Additionally, climate shifts at the end of the Pleistocene likely compounded these effects.

Over the course of the Late Holocene, human settlement of the previously uninhabited Pacific islands led to extinctions of hundreds of bird species, peaking around 1300 AD. Recent estimates suggest that roughly 12% of avian species have been lost to human activities over the last 126,000 yearsdouble earlier estimates.

In the 20th century, the human population quadrupled, and the global economy grew twenty-five-fold. This period, often called the Great Acceleration, has intensified species&#x27; extinction. Humanity has become an unprecedented &quot;global superpredator&quot;, preying on adult apex predators, invading habitats of other species, and disrupting food webs. 

The Holocene extinction continues into the 21st century, driven by anthropogenic global warming, human population growth, and increasing consumption—particularly among affluent societies. Factors such as rising meat production, deforestation, and the destruction of critical habitats compound these issues. Other drivers include overexploitation of natural resources, pollution, and climate change-induced shifts in ecosystems.

Major extinction events during this period have been recorded across all continents, including Africa, Asia, Europe, Australia, North and South America, and various islands. The cumulative effects of deforestation, overfishing, ocean acidification, and wetland destruction have further destabilized ecosystems. Decline in amphibian populations, in particular, serves as an early indicator of broader ecological collapse.

Despite this grim outlook, there are efforts to mitigate biodiversity loss. Conservation initiatives, international treaties, and sustainable practices aim to address this crisis. However, without significant changes in global policies and individual behaviors, the Holocene extinction threatens to irreversibly alter the planet&#x27;s ecosystems and the services they provide.

== Background ==

Mass extinctions are characterized by the loss of at least 75% of species within a geologically short period of time (i.e., less than 2 million years). The Holocene extinction is also known as the &quot;sixth extinction&quot;, as it is possibly the sixth mass extinction event, after the Ordovician–Silurian extinction events, the Late Devonian extinction, the Permian–Triassic extinction event, the Triassic–Jurassic extinction event, and the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event. If the Capitanian extinction event is included among the first-order mass extinctions, the Holocene extinction would correspondingly be known as the &quot;seventh extinction&quot;. The Holocene is the current geological epoch.

==Overview==
The precise timing of the Holocene extinction event remains debated, with no clear consensus on when it began or whether it should be considered distinct from the Quaternary extinction event. However, most scientists agree that human activities are the primary driver of the Holocene extinction. A 1998 survey conducted by the American Museum of Natural History found that 70% of biologists acknowledged an ongoing anthropogenic extinction event. Some researchers suggested that the activities of earlier archaic humans may have contributed to earlier extinctions, especially in Australia, New Zealand, and Madagascar. Even modest hunting pressure, combined with the vulnerability of large animals on isolated islands, is thought to have been enough to wipe out entire species. Only in the more recent stages of the Holocene have plants suffered extensive losses, which are also linked to human activities such as deforestation and land conversion.

=== Extinction rate ===
The contemporary rate of extinction is estimated at 100 to 1,000 times higher than the natural background extinction rate—the typical rate of species loss through natural evolutionary processes. One estimation suggested the rate could be as high as 10,000 times the background extinction rate, though this figure remains controversial. Theoretical ecologist Stuart Pimm has noted that the extinction rate for plants alone is 100 times higher than normal.

While some argue that the current extinction rates have not yet reached the catastrophic levels of past mass extinctions, Barnosky et al. (2011) and Hull et al. (2015) point out that extinction rates during past mass extinctions cannot be fully determined due to gaps in the fossil record. However, they agree that the ongoing biodiversity loss is nonetheless unprecedented. Estimates of species lost per year vary widely—from 1.5 to 40,000 species—but all indicate that human activity is driving this crisis.

In &quot;The Future of Life&quot; (2002), biologist Edward Osborne Wilson predicted that, if current trend continues, half of Earth&#x27;s higher lifeforms could be extinct by 2100. More recent studies further support this view. A 2015 study on Hawaiian snails suggested that up to 7% of Earth&#x27;s species may already be extinct. A 2021 study also found that only around 3% of the planet&#x27;s terrestrial surface remains ecologically and faunally intact—areas still with healthy populations of native species and minimal human footprint. A 2022 study suggests that if global warming continues, between 13% and 27% of terrestrial vertebrate species could be driven to extinction by 2100, with habitat destructions and co-extinctions accounting for the rest.

The 2019 &quot;Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services&quot;, published by the United Nations IPBES, estimated that about one million species are currently at risk of extinction within decades due to human activities. Organized human existence is jeopardised by increasingly rapid destruction of the systems that support life on Earth, according to the report, the result of one of the most comprehensive studies of the health of the planet ever conducted. Moreover, the 2021 &quot;Economics of Biodiversity&quot; review, published by the UK government, asserts that &quot;biodiversity is declining faster than at any time in human history.&quot; According to a 2022 study published in &quot;Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment&quot;, a survey of more than 3,000 experts says that the extent of the mass extinction might be greater than previously thought, and estimates that roughly 30% of species &quot;have been globally threatened or driven extinct since the year 1500.&quot; In a 2022 report, IPBES listed unsustainable fishing, hunting, and logging as some of the primary drivers of the global extinction crisis. 

A 2023 study published in &quot;PLOS One&quot; shows that around two million species are threatened with extinction, double the estimate put forward in the 2019 IPBES report. According to a 2023 study published in &quot;PNAS&quot;, at least 73 genera of animals have gone extinct since 1500. If humans had never existed, the study estimates it would have taken 18,000 years for the same genera to have disappeared naturally, leading the authors to conclude that &quot;the current generic extinction rates are 35 times higher than expected background rates prevailing in the last million years under the absence of human impacts&quot; and that human civilization is causing the &quot;rapid mutilation of the tree of life.&quot;

=== Attribution ===
There is widespread consensus among scientists that human activities—especially habitat destruction, resource consumption, and the elimination of species—are the main drivers of the current extinction crisis. Rising extinction rates among mammals, birds, reptiles, amphibians, and other groups have led many scientists to declare a global biodiversity crisis.

=== Scientific debate ===

The description of recent extinction as a mass extinction has been debated among scientists. Stuart Pimm, for example, asserts that the sixth mass extinction &quot;is something that hasn&#x27;t happened yet—we are on the edge of it.&quot; Several studies posit that the Earth has entered a sixth mass extinction event, including a 2015 paper by Barnosky et al. and a November 2017 statement titled &quot;World Scientists&#x27; Warning to Humanity: A Second Notice&quot;, led by eight authors and signed by 15,364 scientists from 184 countries which asserted, among other things, that &quot;we have unleashed a mass extinction event, the sixth in roughly 540 million years, wherein many current life forms could be extirpated or at least committed to extinction by the end of this century.&quot; The World Wide Fund for Nature&#x27;s 2020 &quot;Living Planet Report&quot; says that wildlife populations have declined by 68% since 1970 as a result of overconsumption, population growth, and intensive farming, which is further evidence that humans have unleashed a sixth mass extinction event; however, this finding has been disputed by one 2020 study, which posits that this major decline was primarily driven by a few extreme outlier populations, and that when these outliers are removed, the trend shifts to that of a decline between the 1980s and 2000s, but a roughly positive trend after 2000. A 2021 report in &quot;Frontiers in Conservation Science&quot; which cites both of the aforementioned studies, says &quot;population sizes of vertebrate species that have been monitored across years have declined by an average of 68% over the last five decades, with certain population clusters in extreme decline, thus presaging the imminent extinction of their species,&quot; and asserts &quot;that we are already on the path of a sixth major extinction is now scientifically undeniable.&quot; A January 2022 review article published in &quot;Biological Reviews&quot; builds upon previous studies documenting biodiversity decline to assert that a sixth mass extinction event caused by anthropogenic activity is currently under way. A December 2022 study published in &quot;Science Advances&quot; states that &quot;the planet has entered the sixth mass extinction&quot; and warns that current anthropogenic trends, particularly regarding climate and land-use changes, could result in the loss of more than a tenth of plant and animal species by the end of the century. 12% of all bird species are threatened with extinction. A 2023 study published in &quot;Biological Reviews&quot; found that, of 70,000 monitored species, some 48% are experiencing population declines from anthropogenic pressures, whereas only 3% have increasing populations.

According to the UNDP&#x27;s 2020 Human Development Report, &quot;The Next Frontier: Human Development and the Anthropocene&quot;:

The 2022 &quot;Living Planet Report&quot; found that vertebrate wildlife populations have plummeted by an average of almost 70% since 1970, with agriculture and fishing being the primary drivers of this decline.

Some scientists, including Rodolfo Dirzo and Paul R. Ehrlich, contend that the sixth mass extinction is largely unknown to most people globally and is also misunderstood by many in the scientific community. They say it is not the disappearance of species, which gets the most attention, that is at the heart of the crisis, but &quot;the existential threat of myriad population extinctions.&quot;

===Anthropocene===
The abundance of species extinctions considered anthropogenic, or due to human activity, has sometimes (especially when referring to hypothesized future events) been collectively called the &quot;Anthropocene extinction&quot;. &quot;Anthropocene&quot; is a term introduced in 2000. Some now postulate that a new geological epoch has begun, with the most abrupt and widespread extinction of species since the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event 66 million years ago.

The term &quot;anthropocene&quot; is being used more frequently by scientists, and some commentators may refer to the current and projected future extinctions as part of a longer Holocene extinction. The Holocene–Anthropocene boundary is contested, with some commentators asserting significant human influence on climate for much of what is normally regarded as the Holocene Epoch. Some experts mark the transition from the Holocene to the Anthropocene at the onset of the industrial revolution. They also note that the official use of this term in the near future will heavily rely on its usefulness, especially for Earth scientists studying late Holocene periods.

It has been suggested that human activity has made the period starting from the mid-20th century different enough from the rest of the Holocene to consider it a new geological epoch, known as the Anthropocene, a term which was considered for inclusion in the timeline of Earth&#x27;s history by the International Commission on Stratigraphy in 2016, but the proposal was rejected in 2024. To constitute the Holocene as an extinction event, scientists must determine exactly when anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions began to measurably alter natural atmospheric levels on a global scale, and when these alterations caused changes to global climate. Using chemical proxies from Antarctic ice cores, researchers have estimated the fluctuations of carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4) gases in the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere during the Late Pleistocene and Holocene epochs. Estimates of the fluctuations of these two gases in the atmosphere, using chemical proxies from Antarctic ice cores, generally indicate that the peak of the Anthropocene occurred within the previous two centuries: typically beginning with the Industrial Revolution, when the highest greenhouse gas levels were recorded.

=== Human ecology ===

A 2015 article in &quot;Science&quot; suggested that humans are unique in ecology as an unprecedented &quot;global superpredator&quot;, regularly preying on large numbers of fully grown terrestrial and marine apex predators, and with a great deal of influence over food webs and climatic systems worldwide. Although significant debate exists as to how much human predation and indirect effects contributed to prehistoric extinctions, certain population crashes have been directly correlated with human arrival. Human activity has been the main cause of mammalian extinctions since the Late Pleistocene. A 2018 study published in &quot;PNAS&quot; found that since the dawn of human civilization, the biomass of wild mammals has decreased by 83%. The biomass decrease is 80% for marine mammals, 50% for plants, and 15% for fish. Currently, livestock make up 60% of the biomass of all mammals on Earth, followed by humans (36%) and wild mammals (4%). As for birds, 70% are domesticated, such as poultry, whereas only 30% are wild.

==Historic extinction==
===Human activity===
====Activities contributing to extinctions====

Extinction of animals, plants, and other organisms caused by human actions may go as far back as the late Pleistocene, over 12,000 years ago. There is a correlation between megafaunal extinction and the arrival of humans. Megafauna that are still extant also suffered severe declines that were highly correlated with human expansion and activity. Over the past 125,000 years, the average body size of wildlife has fallen by 14% as actions by prehistoric humans eradicated megafauna on all continents with the exception of Africa. Over the past 130,000 years, avian functional diversity has declined precipitously and disproportionately relative to phylogenetic diversity losses.

Human civilization was founded on and grew from agriculture. The more land used for farming, the greater the population a civilization could sustain, and subsequent popularization of farming led to widespread habitat conversion.

Habitat destruction by humans, thus replacing the original local ecosystems, is a major driver of extinction. The sustained conversion of biodiversity rich forests and wetlands into poorer fields and pastures (of lesser carrying capacity for wild species), over the last 10,000 years, has considerably reduced the Earth&#x27;s carrying capacity for wild birds and mammals, among other organisms, in both population size and species count.

Other, related human causes of the extinction event include deforestation, hunting, pollution, the introduction in various regions of non-native species, and the widespread transmission of infectious diseases spread through livestock and crops.

==== Agriculture and climate change ====

Recent investigations into the practice of landscape burning during the Neolithic Revolution have a major implication for the current debate about the timing of the Anthropocene and the role that humans may have played in the production of greenhouse gases prior to the Industrial Revolution. Studies of early hunter-gatherers raise questions about the current use of population size or density as a proxy for the amount of land clearance and anthropogenic burning that took place in pre-industrial times. Scientists have questioned the correlation between population size and early territorial alterations. Ruddiman and Ellis&#x27; research paper in 2009 makes the case that early farmers involved in systems of agriculture used more land per capita than growers later in the Holocene, who intensified their labor to produce more food per unit of area (thus, per laborer); arguing that agricultural involvement in rice production implemented thousands of years ago by relatively small populations created significant environmental impacts through large-scale means of deforestation.

While a number of human-derived factors are recognized as contributing to rising atmospheric concentrations of CH4 (methane) and CO2 (carbon dioxide), deforestation and territorial clearance practices associated with agricultural development may have contributed most to these concentrations globally in earlier millennia. Scientists that are employing a variance of archaeological and paleoecological data argue that the processes contributing to substantial human modification of the environment spanned many thousands of years on a global scale and thus, not originating as late as the Industrial Revolution. Palaeoclimatologist William Ruddiman has argued that in the early Holocene 11,000 years ago, atmospheric carbon dioxide and methane levels fluctuated in a pattern which was different from the Pleistocene epoch before it. He argued that the patterns of the significant decline of CO2 levels during the last ice age of the Pleistocene inversely correlate to the Holocene where there have been dramatic increases of CO2 around 8000 years ago and CH4 levels 3000 years after that. The correlation between the decrease of CO2 in the Pleistocene and the increase of it during the Holocene implies that the causation of this spark of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere was the growth of human agriculture during the Holocene.

===Climate change===

One of the main theories explaining early Holocene extinctions is historic climate change. The climate change theory has suggested that a change in climate near the end of the late Pleistocene stressed the megafauna to the point of extinction. Some scientists favor abrupt climate change as the catalyst for the extinction of the megafauna at the end of the Pleistocene, most who believe increased hunting from early modern humans also played a part, with others even suggesting that the two interacted. In the Americas, a controversial explanation for the shift in climate is presented under the Younger Dryas impact hypothesis, which states that the impact of comets cooled global temperatures. Despite its popularity among nonscientists, this hypothesis has never been accepted by relevant experts, who dismiss it as a fringe theory.

==Contemporary extinction==
===History===
Contemporary human overpopulation and continued population growth, along with economic growth and per-capita consumption growth, prominently in the past two centuries, are regarded as the underlying causes of extinction. Inger Andersen, the executive director of the United Nations Environment Programme, stated that &quot;we need to understand that the more people there are, the more we put the Earth under heavy pressure. As far as biodiversity is concerned, we are at war with nature.&quot;

Some scholars assert that the emergence of capitalism as the dominant economic system has accelerated ecological exploitation and destruction, and has also exacerbated mass species extinction. CUNY professor David Harvey, for example, posits that the neoliberal era &quot;happens to be the era of the fastest mass extinction of species in the Earth&#x27;s recent history&quot;. Ecologist William E. Rees concludes that the &quot;neoliberal paradigm contributes significantly to planetary unraveling&quot; by treating the economy and the ecosphere as totally separate systems, and by neglecting the latter. Major lobbying organizations representing corporations in the agriculture, fisheries, forestry and paper, mining, and oil and gas industries, including the United States Chamber of Commerce, have been pushing back against legislation that could address the extinction crisis. A 2022 report by the climate think tank InfluenceMap stated that &quot;although industry associations, especially in the US, appear reluctant to discuss the biodiversity crisis, they are clearly engaged on a wide range of policies with significant impacts on biodiversity loss.&quot;

The loss of animal species from ecological communities, defaunation, is primarily driven by human activity. This has resulted in empty forests, ecological communities depleted of large vertebrates. This is not to be confused with extinction, as it includes both the disappearance of species and declines in abundance. Defaunation effects were first implied at the Symposium of Plant-Animal Interactions at the University of Campinas, Brazil in 1988 in the context of Neotropical forests. Since then, the term has gained broader usage in conservation biology as a global phenomenon.

Big cat populations have severely declined over the last half-century and could face extinction in the following decades. According to 2011 IUCN estimates: lions are down to 25,000, from 450,000; leopards are down to 50,000, from 750,000; cheetahs are down to 12,000, from 45,000; tigers are down to 3,000 in the wild, from 50,000. A December 2016 study by the Zoological Society of London, Panthera Corporation and Wildlife Conservation Society showed that cheetahs are far closer to extinction than previously thought, with only 7,100 remaining in the wild, existing within only 9% of their historic range. Human pressures are to blame for the cheetah population crash, including prey loss due to overhunting by people, retaliatory killing from farmers, habitat loss and the illegal wildlife trade. Populations of brown bears have experienced similar population decline.

The term pollinator decline refers to the reduction in abundance of insect and other animal pollinators in many ecosystems worldwide beginning at the end of the twentieth century, and continuing into the present day. Pollinators, which are necessary for 75% of food crops, are declining globally in both abundance and diversity. A 2017 study led by Radboud University&#x27;s Hans de Kroon indicated that the biomass of insect life in Germany had declined by three-quarters in the previous 25 years. Participating researcher Dave Goulson of Sussex University stated that their study suggested that humans are making large parts of the planet uninhabitable for wildlife. Goulson characterized the situation as an approaching &quot;ecological Armageddon&quot;, adding that &quot;if we lose the insects then everything is going to collapse.&quot; A 2019 study found that over 40% of insect species are threatened with extinction. The most significant drivers in the decline of insect populations are associated with intensive farming practices, along with pesticide use and climate change. The world&#x27;s insect population decreases by around 1 to 2% per year.


Various species are predicted to become extinct in the near future, among them some species of rhinoceros, primates, and pangolins. Others, including several species of giraffe, are considered &quot;vulnerable&quot; and are experiencing significant population declines from anthropogenic impacts including hunting, deforestation and conflict. Hunting alone threatens bird and mammalian populations around the world. The direct killing of megafauna for meat and body parts is the primary driver of their destruction, with 70% of the 362 megafauna species in decline as of 2019. Mammals in particular have suffered such severe losses as the result of human activity (mainly during the Quaternary extinction event, but partly during the Holocene) that it could take several million years for them to recover. Contemporary assessments have discovered that roughly 41% of amphibians, 25% of mammals, 21% of reptiles and 14% of birds are threatened with extinction, which could disrupt ecosystems on a global scale and eliminate billions of years of phylogenetic diversity. 189 countries, which are signatory to the Convention on Biological Diversity (Rio Accord), have committed to preparing a Biodiversity Action Plan, a first step at identifying specific endangered species and habitats, country by country.
A 2023 study published in &quot;Current Biology&quot; concluded that current biodiversity loss rates could reach a tipping point and inevitably trigger a total ecosystem collapse.

===Recent extinction===
Recent extinctions are more directly attributable to human influences, whereas prehistoric extinctions can be attributed to other factors. The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) characterizes &#x27;recent&#x27; extinction as those that have occurred past the cut-off point of 1500, and at least 875 plant and animal species have gone extinct since that time and 2009. Some species, such as the Père David&#x27;s deer and the Hawaiian crow, are extinct in the wild, and survive solely in captive populations. Other populations are only locally extinct (extirpated), still existent elsewhere, but reduced in distribution, as with the extinction of gray whales in the Atlantic, and of the leatherback sea turtle in Malaysia.

Since the Late Pleistocene, humans (together with other factors) have been rapidly driving the largest vertebrate animals towards extinction, and in the process interrupting a 66-million-year-old feature of ecosystems, the relationship between diet and body mass, which researchers suggest could have unpredictable consequences. A 2019 study published in &quot;Nature Communications&quot; found that rapid biodiversity loss is impacting larger mammals and birds to a much greater extent than smaller ones, with the body mass of such animals expected to shrink by 25% over the next century. Another 2019 study published in &quot;Biology Letters&quot; found that extinction rates are perhaps much higher than previously estimated, in particular for bird species.

The 2019 &quot;Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services&quot; lists the primary causes of contemporary extinctions in descending order: (1) changes in land and sea use (primarily agriculture and overfishing respectively); (2) direct exploitation of organisms such as hunting; (3) anthropogenic climate change; (4) pollution and (5) invasive alien species spread by human trade. This report, along with the 2020 &quot;Living Planet Report&quot; by the WWF, both project that climate change will be the leading cause in the next several decades.

A June 2020 study published in &quot;PNAS&quot; posits that the contemporary extinction crisis &quot;may be the most serious environmental threat to the persistence of civilization, because it is irreversible&quot; and that its acceleration &quot;is certain because of the still fast growth in human numbers and consumption rates.&quot; The study found that more than 500 vertebrate species are poised to be lost in the next two decades.

===Habitat destruction===

Humans both create and destroy crop cultivar and domesticated animal varieties. Advances in transportation and industrial farming has led to monoculture and the extinction of many cultivars. The use of certain plants and animals for food has also resulted in their extinction, including silphium and the passenger pigeon. It was estimated in 2012 that 13% of Earth&#x27;s ice-free land surface is used as row-crop agricultural sites, 26% used as pastures, and 4% urban-industrial areas.

In March 2019, &quot;Nature Climate Change&quot; published a study by ecologists from Yale University, who found that over the next half century, human land use will reduce the habitats of 1,700 species by up to 50%, pushing them closer to extinction. That same month &quot;PLOS Biology&quot; published a similar study drawing on work at the University of Queensland, which found that &quot;more than 1,200 species globally face threats to their survival in more than 90% of their habitat and will almost certainly face extinction without conservation intervention&quot;.

Since 1970, the populations of migratory freshwater fish have declined by 76%, according to research published by the Zoological Society of London in July 2020. Overall, around one in three freshwater fish species are threatened with extinction due to human-driven habitat degradation and overfishing.
Some scientists and academics assert that industrial agriculture and the growing demand for meat is contributing to significant global biodiversity loss as this is a significant driver of deforestation and habitat destruction; species-rich habitats, such as the Amazon region and Indonesia being converted to agriculture. A 2017 study by the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) found that 60% of biodiversity loss can be attributed to the vast scale of feed crop cultivation required to rear tens of billions of farm animals. Moreover, a 2006 report by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations, &quot;Livestock&#x27;s Long Shadow&quot;, also found that the livestock sector is a &quot;leading player&quot; in biodiversity loss. More recently, in 2019, the IPBES &quot;Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services&quot; attributed much of this ecological destruction to agriculture and fishing, with the meat and dairy industries having a very significant impact. Since the 1970s food production has soared to feed a growing human population and bolster economic growth, but at a huge price to the environment and other species. The report says some 25% of the Earth&#x27;s ice-free land is used for cattle grazing. A 2020 study published in &quot;Nature Communications&quot; warned that human impacts from housing, industrial agriculture and in particular meat consumption are wiping out a combined 50 billion years of Earth&#x27;s evolutionary history (defined as phylogenetic diversity) and driving to extinction some of the &quot;most unique animals on the planet,&quot; among them the Aye-aye lemur, the Chinese crocodile lizard and the pangolin. Said lead author Rikki Gumbs:

Urbanization has also been cited as a significant driver of biodiversity loss, particularly of plant life. A 1999 study of local plant extirpations in Great Britain found that urbanization contributed at least as much to local plant extinction as did agriculture.

=== Climate change ===
Climate change is expected to be a major driver of extinctions from the 21st century. Rising levels of carbon dioxide are resulting in influx of this gas into the ocean, increasing its acidity. Marine organisms which possess calcium carbonate shells or exoskeletons experience physiological pressure as the carbonate reacts with acid. For example, this is already resulting in coral bleaching on various coral reefs worldwide, which provide valuable habitat and maintain a high biodiversity. Marine gastropods, bivalves, and other invertebrates are also affected, as are the organisms that feed on them. Some studies have suggested that it is not climate change that is driving the current extinction crisis, but the demands of contemporary human civilization on nature. However, a rise in average global temperatures greater than 5.2 °C is projected to cause a mass extinction similar to the &quot;Big Five&quot; mass extinction events of the Phanerozoic, even without other anthropogenic impacts on biodiversity.

===Overexploitation===

Overhunting can reduce the local population of game animals by more than half, as well as reducing population density, and may lead to extinction for some species. Populations located nearer to villages are significantly more at risk of depletion. Several conservationist organizations, among them IFAW and HSUS, assert that trophy hunters, particularly from the United States, are playing a significant role in the decline of giraffes, which they refer to as a &quot;silent extinction&quot;.

The surge in the mass killings by poachers involved in the illegal ivory trade along with habitat loss is threatening African elephant populations. In 1979, their populations stood at 1.7 million; at present there are fewer than 400,000 remaining. Prior to European colonization, scientists believe Africa was home to roughly 20 million elephants. According to the Great Elephant Census, 30% of African elephants (or 144,000 individuals) disappeared over a seven-year period, 2007 to 2014. African elephants could become extinct by 2035 if poaching rates continue.

Fishing has had a devastating effect on marine organism populations for several centuries even before the explosion of destructive and highly effective fishing practices like trawling. Humans are unique among predators in that they regularly prey on other adult apex predators, particularly in marine environments; bluefin tuna, blue whales, North Atlantic right whales, and over fifty species of sharks and rays are vulnerable to predation pressure from human fishing, in particular commercial fishing. A 2016 study published in &quot;Science&quot; concludes that humans tend to hunt larger species, and this could disrupt ocean ecosystems for millions of years. A 2020 study published in &quot;Science Advances&quot; found that around 18% of marine megafauna, including iconic species such as the Great white shark, are at risk of extinction from human pressures over the next century. In a worst-case scenario, 40% could go extinct over the same time period. According to a 2021 study published in &quot;Nature&quot;, 71% of oceanic shark and ray populations have been destroyed by overfishing (the primary driver of ocean defaunation) from 1970 to 2018, and are nearing the &quot;point of no return&quot; as 24 of the 31 species are now threatened with extinction, with several being classified as critically endangered. Almost two-thirds of sharks and rays around coral reefs are threatened with extinction from overfishing, with 14 of 134 species being critically endangered.


===Disease===

The decline of amphibian populations has also been identified as an indicator of environmental degradation. As well as habitat loss, introduced predators and pollution, Chytridiomycosis, a fungal infection accidentally spread by human travel, globalization, and the wildlife trade, has caused severe population drops of over 500 amphibian species, and perhaps 90 extinctions, including (among many others) the extinction of the golden toad in Costa Rica, the Gastric-brooding frog in Australia, the Rabb&#x27;s Fringe-limbed Treefrog and the extinction of the Panamanian golden frog in the wild. Chytrid fungus has spread across Australia, New Zealand, Central America and Africa, including countries with high amphibian diversity such as cloud forests in Honduras and Madagascar. &quot;Batrachochytrium salamandrivorans&quot; is a similar infection currently threatening salamanders. Amphibians are now the most endangered vertebrate group, having existed for more than 300 million years through three other mass extinctions.

Millions of bats in the US have been dying off since 2012 due to a fungal infection known as white-nose syndrome that spread from European bats, who appear to be immune. Population drops have been as great as 90% within five years, and extinction of at least one bat species is predicted. There is currently no form of treatment, and such declines have been described as &quot;unprecedented&quot; in bat evolutionary history by Alan Hicks of the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.

Between 2007 and 2013, over ten million beehives were abandoned due to colony collapse disorder, which causes worker bees to abandon the queen. Though no single cause has gained widespread acceptance by the scientific community, proposals include infections with &quot;Varroa&quot; and &quot;Acarapis&quot; mites; malnutrition; various pathogens; genetic factors; immunodeficiencies; loss of habitat; changing beekeeping practices; or a combination of factors.

== By region ==
Megafauna were once found on every continent of the world, but are now almost exclusively found on the continent of Africa. In some regions, megafauna experienced population crashes and trophic cascades shortly after the earliest human settlers. Worldwide, 178 species of the world&#x27;s largest mammals died out between 52,000 and 9,000 BC; it has been suggested that a higher proportion of African megafauna survived because they evolved alongside humans. The timing of South American megafaunal extinction appears to precede human arrival, although the possibility that human activity at the time impacted the global climate enough to cause such an extinction has been suggested.

=== Africa ===

Africa experienced the smallest decline in megafauna compared to the other continents. This is presumably due to the idea that African megafauna evolved alongside humans, and thus developed a healthy fear of them, unlike the comparatively tame animals of other continents.

=== Eurasia ===
Unlike other continents, the megafauna of Eurasia went extinct over a relatively long period of time, possibly due to climate fluctuations fragmenting and decreasing populations, leaving them vulnerable to over-exploitation, as with the steppe bison (&quot;Bison priscus&quot;). The warming of the arctic region caused the rapid decline of grasslands, which had a negative effect on the grazing megafauna of Eurasia. Most of what once was mammoth steppe was converted to mire, rendering the environment incapable of supporting them, notably the woolly mammoth. However, all these megafauna had survived previous interglacials with the same or more intense warming, suggesting that even during warm periods, refugia may have existed and that human hunting may have been the critical factor for their extinction.

In the western Mediterranean region, anthropogenic forest degradation began around 4,000 BP, during the Chalcolithic, and became especially pronounced during the Roman era. The reasons for the decline of forest ecosystems stem from agriculture, grazing, and mining. During the twilight years of the Western Roman Empire, forests in northwestern Europe rebounded from losses incurred throughout the Roman period, though deforestation on a large scale resumed once again around 800 BP, during the High Middle Ages.

In southern China, human land use is believed to have permanently altered the trend of vegetation dynamics in the region, which was previously governed by temperature. This is evidenced by high fluxes of charcoal from that time interval.

=== Americas ===

There has been a debate as to the extent to which the disappearance of megafauna at the end of the last glacial period can be attributed to human activities by hunting, or even by slaughter of prey populations. Discoveries at Monte Verde in South America and at Meadowcroft Rock Shelter in Pennsylvania have caused a controversy regarding the Clovis culture. There likely would have been human settlements prior to the Clovis culture, and the history of humans in the Americas may extend back many thousands of years before the Clovis culture. The amount of correlation between human arrival and megafauna extinction is still being debated: for example, in Wrangel Island in Siberia the extinction of dwarf woolly mammoths (approximately 2000 BC) did not coincide with the arrival of humans, nor did megafaunal mass extinction on the South American continent, although it has been suggested climate changes induced by anthropogenic effects elsewhere in the world may have contributed.

Comparisons are sometimes made between recent extinctions (approximately since the Industrial Revolution) and the Pleistocene extinction near the end of the last glacial period. The latter is exemplified by the extinction of large herbivores such as the woolly mammoth and the carnivores that preyed on them. Humans of this era actively hunted the mammoth and the mastodon, but it is not known if this hunting was the cause of the subsequent massive ecological changes, widespread extinctions and climate changes.

The ecosystems encountered by the first Americans had not been exposed to human interaction, and may have been far less resilient to human made changes than the ecosystems encountered by industrial era humans. Therefore, the actions of the Clovis people, despite seeming insignificant by today&#x27;s standards could indeed have had a profound effect on the ecosystems and wild life which was entirely unused to human influence.

In the Yukon, the mammoth steppe ecosystem collapsed between 13,500 and 10,000 BP, though wild horses and woolly mammoths somehow persisted in the region for millennia after this collapse. In what is now Texas, a drop in local plant and animal biodiversity occurred during the Younger Dryas cooling, though while plant diversity recovered after the Younger Dryas, animal diversity did not. In the Channel Islands, multiple terrestrial species went extinct around the same time as human arrival, but direct evidence for an anthropogenic cause of their extinction remains lacking. In the montane forests of the Colombian Andes, spores of coprophilous fungi indicate megafaunal extinction occurred in two waves, the first occurring around 22,900 BP and the second around 10,990 BP. A 2023 study of megafaunal extinctions in the Junín Plateau of Peru found that the timing of the disappearance of megafauna was concurrent with a large uptick in fire activity attributed to human actions, implicating humans as the cause of their local extinction on the plateau.

=== New Guinea ===
Humans in New Guinea used volcanically fertilised soil following major eruptions and interfered with vegetation succession patterns since the Late Pleistocene, with this process intensifying in the Holocene. 

=== Australia ===


Since European colonisation Australia has lost over 100 plant and animal species, including 10% of its mammal species, the highest of any continent.

Australia was once home to a large assemblage of megafauna, with many parallels to those found on the African continent today. Australia&#x27;s fauna is characterized by primarily marsupial mammals, and many reptiles and birds, all existing as giant forms until recently. Humans arrived on the continent very early, about 50,000 years ago. The extent human arrival contributed is controversial; climatic drying of Australia 40,000–60,000 years ago was an unlikely cause, as it was less severe in speed or magnitude than previous regional climate change which failed to kill off megafauna. Extinctions in Australia continued from original settlement until today in both plants and animals, while many more animals and plants have declined or are endangered.

Due to the older timeframe and the soil chemistry on the continent, very little subfossil preservation evidence exists relative to elsewhere. However, continent-wide extinction of all genera weighing over 100 kilograms, and six of seven genera weighing between 45 and 100 kilograms occurred around 46,400 years ago (4,000 years after human arrival) and the fact that megafauna survived until a later date on the island of Tasmania following the establishment of a land bridge suggest direct hunting or anthropogenic ecosystem disruption such as fire-stick farming as likely causes. The first evidence of direct human predation leading to extinction in Australia was published in 2016.

A 2021 study found that the rate of extinction of Australia&#x27;s megafauna is rather unusual, with some generalistic species having gone extinct earlier while highly specialized ones having become extinct later or even still surviving today. A mosaic cause of extinction with different anthropogenic and environmental pressures has been proposed.

The arrival of invasive species such as feral cats and cane toads has further devastated Australia&#x27;s ecosystems.

=== Caribbean ===

Human arrival in the Caribbean around 6,000 years ago is correlated with the extinction of many species. These include many different genera of ground and arboreal sloths across all islands. These sloths were generally smaller than those found on the South American continent. &quot;Megalocnus&quot; were the largest genus at up to , &quot;Acratocnus&quot; were medium-sized relatives of modern two-toed sloths endemic to Cuba, &quot;Imagocnus&quot; also of Cuba, &quot;Neocnus&quot; and many others.

=== Macaronesia ===
The arrival of the first human settlers in the Azores saw the introduction of invasive plants and livestock to the archipelago, resulting in the extinction of at least two plant species on Pico Island. On Faial Island, the decline of &quot;Prunus lusitanica&quot; has been hypothesized by some scholars to have been related to the tree species being endozoochoric, with the extirpation or extinction of various bird species drastically limiting its seed dispersal. Lacustrine ecosystems were ravaged by human colonization, as evidenced by hydrogen isotopes from C30 fatty acids recording hypoxic bottom waters caused by eutrophication in Lake Funda on Flores Island beginning between 1500 and 1600 AD.

The arrival of humans on the archipelago of Madeira caused the extinction of approximately two-thirds of its endemic bird species, with two non-endemic birds also being locally extirpated from the archipelago. Of thirty-four land snail species collected in a subfossil sample from eastern Madeira Island, nine became extinct following the arrival of humans. On the Desertas Islands, of forty-five land snail species known to exist before human colonization, eighteen are extinct and five are no longer present on the islands. &quot;Eurya stigmosa&quot;, whose extinction is typically attributed to climate change following the end of the Pleistocene rather than humans, may have survived until the colonization of the archipelago by the Portuguese and gone extinct as a result of human activity. Introduced mice have been implicated as a leading driver of extinction on Madeira following its discovery and settlement by humans.

In the Canary Islands, native thermophilous woodlands were decimated and two tree taxa were driven extinct following the arrival of its first humans, primarily as a result of increased fire clearance and soil erosion and the introduction of invasive pigs, goats, and rats. Invasive species introductions accelerated during the Age of Discovery when Europeans first settled the Macaronesian archipelago. The archipelago&#x27;s laurel forests, though still negatively impacted, fared better due to being less suitable for human economic use.

Cabo Verde, like the Canary Islands, witnessed precipitous deforestation upon the arrival of European settlers and various invasive species brought by them in the archipelago, with the archipelago&#x27;s thermophilous woodlands suffering the greatest destruction. Introduced species, overgrazing, increased fire incidence, and soil degradation have been attributed as the chief causes of Cabo Verde&#x27;s ecological devastation.

=== Pacific ===
Archaeological and paleontological digs on 70 different Pacific islands suggested that numerous species became extinct as people moved across the Pacific, starting 30,000 years ago in the Bismarck Archipelago and Solomon Islands. It is currently estimated that among the bird species of the Pacific, some 2000 species have gone extinct since the arrival of humans, representing a 20% drop in the biodiversity of birds worldwide. In Polynesia, the Late Holocene declines in avifaunas only abated after they were heavily depleted and there were increasingly fewer bird species able to be driven to extinction. Iguanas were likewise decimated by the spread of humans. Additionally, the endemic faunas of Pacific archipelagos are exceptionally at risk in the coming decades due to rising sea levels caused by global warming.

Lord Howe Island, which remained uninhabited until the arrival of Europeans in the South Pacific in the 18th century, lost much of its endemic avifauna when it became a whaling station in the early 19th century. Another wave of bird extinctions occurred following the introduction of black rats in 1918.

The endemic megafaunal meiolaniid turtles of Vanuatu became extinct immediately following the first human arrivals and remains of them containing evidence of butchery by humans have been found.

The arrival of humans in New Caledonia marked the commencement of coastal forest and mangrove decline on the island. The archipelago&#x27;s megafauna was still extant when humans arrived, but indisputable evidence for the anthropogenicity of their extinction remains elusive.

In Fiji, the giant iguanas &quot;Brachylophus gibbonsi&quot; and &quot;Lapitiguana impensa&quot; both succumbed to human-induced extinction shortly after encountering the first humans on the island.

In American Samoa, deposits dating back to the period of initial human colonisation contain elevated quantities of bird, turtle, and fish remains caused by increased predation pressure.

On Mangaia in the Cook Islands, human colonisation was associated with a major extinction of endemic avifauna, along with deforestation, erosion of volcanic hillsides, and increased charcoal influx, causing additional environmental damage.

On Rapa in the Austral Archipelago, human arrival, marked by the increase in charcoal and in taro pollen in the palynological record, is associated with the extinction of an endemic palm.

Henderson Island, once thought to be untouched by humans, was colonised and later abandoned by Polynesians. The ecological collapse on the island caused by the anthropogenic extinctions is believed to have caused the island&#x27;s abandonment.

The first human settlers of the Hawaiian Islands are thought to have arrived between 300 and 800 AD, with European arrival in the 16th century. Hawaii is notable for its endemism of plants, birds, insects, mollusks and fish; 30% of its organisms are endemic. Many of its species are endangered or have gone extinct, primarily due to accidentally introduced species and livestock grazing. Over 40% of its bird species have gone extinct, and it is the location of 75% of extinctions in the United States. Evidence suggests that the introduction of the Polynesian rat, above all other factors, drove the ecocide of the endemic forests of the archipelago. Extinction has increased in Hawaii over the last 200 years and is relatively well documented, with extinctions among native snails used as estimates for global extinction rates. High rates of habitat fragmentation on the archipelago have further reduced biodiversity. The extinction of endemic Hawaiian avifauna is likely to accelerate even further as anthropogenic global warming adds additional pressure on top of land-use changes and invasive species.

=== Madagascar ===
Within centuries of the arrival of humans around the 1st millennium AD, nearly all of Madagascar&#x27;s distinct, endemic, and geographically isolated megafauna became extinct. The largest animals, of more than , were extinct very shortly after the first human arrival, with large and medium-sized species dying out after prolonged hunting pressure from an expanding human population moving into more remote regions of the island around 1000 years ago. as well as 17 species of &quot;giant&quot; lemurs. Some of these lemurs typically weighed over , and their fossils have provided evidence of human butchery on many species. Other megafauna present on the island included the Malagasy hippopotamuses as well as the large flightless elephant birds, both groups are thought to have gone extinct in the interval 750–1050 AD. Smaller fauna experienced initial increases due to decreased competition, and then subsequent declines over the last 500 years. All fauna weighing over died out. The primary reasons for the decline of Madagascar&#x27;s biota, which at the time was already stressed by natural aridification, were human hunting, herding, farming, and forest clearing, all of which persist and threaten Madagascar&#x27;s remaining taxa today. The natural ecosystems of Madagascar as a whole were further impacted by the much greater incidence of fire as a result of anthropogenic fire production; evidence from Lake Amparihibe on the island of Nosy Be indicates a shift in local vegetation from intact rainforest to a fire-disturbed patchwork of grassland and woodland between 1300 and 1000 BP.

=== New Zealand ===

New Zealand is characterized by its geographic isolation and island biogeography, and had been isolated from mainland Australia for 80 million years. It was the last large land mass to be colonized by humans. Upon the arrival of Polynesian settlers in the late 13th century, the native biota suffered a catastrophic decline due to deforestation, hunting, and the introduction of invasive species. The extinction of all of the islands&#x27; megafaunal birds occurred within several hundred years of human arrival. The moa, large flightless ratites, were thriving during the Late Holocene, but became extinct within 200 years of the arrival of human settlers, as did the enormous Haast&#x27;s eagle, their primary predator, and at least two species of large, flightless geese. The Polynesians also introduced the Polynesian rat. This may have put some pressure on other birds, but at the time of early European contact (18th century) and colonization (19th century), the bird life was prolific. The megafaunal extinction happened extremely rapidly despite a very small population density, which never exceeded 0.01 people per km2. Extinctions of parasites followed the extinction of New Zealand&#x27;s megafauna. With them, the Europeans brought various invasive species including ship rats, possums, cats and mustelids which devastated native bird life, some of which had adapted flightlessness and ground nesting habits, and had no defensive behavior as a result of having no native mammalian predators. The kākāpō, the world&#x27;s biggest parrot, which is flightless, now only exists in managed breeding sanctuaries. New Zealand&#x27;s national emblem, the kiwi, is on the endangered bird list.

==Mitigation==

Stabilizing human populations; reining in capitalism, decreasing economic demands, and shifting them to economic activities with low impacts on biodiversity; transitioning to plant-based diets; and increasing the number and size of terrestrial and marine protected areas have been suggested to avoid or limit biodiversity loss and a possible sixth mass extinction. Rodolfo Dirzo and Paul R. Ehrlich suggest that &quot;the one fundamental, necessary, &#x27;simple&#x27; cure, ... is reducing the scale of the human enterprise.&quot; According to a 2021 paper published in &quot;Frontiers in Conservation Science&quot;, humanity almost certainly faces a &quot;ghastly future&quot; of mass extinction, biodiversity collapse, climate change, and their impacts unless major efforts to change human industry and activity are rapidly undertaken.

Reducing human population growth has been suggested as a means of mitigating climate change and the biodiversity crisis, although many scholars believe it has been largely ignored in mainstream policy discourse. An alternative proposal is greater agricultural efficiency &amp; sustainability. Lots of non-arable land can be made into arable land good for growing food crops. Mushrooms have also been known to repair damaged soil.

A 2018 article in &quot;Science&quot; advocated for the global community to designate 30% of the planet by 2030, and 50% by 2050, as protected areas to mitigate the contemporary extinction crisis. It highlighted that the human population is projected to grow to 10 billion by the middle of the century, and consumption of food and water resources is projected to double by this time. A 2022 report published in &quot;Science&quot; warned that 44% of Earth&#x27;s terrestrial surface, or , must be conserved and made &quot;ecologically sound&quot; to prevent further biodiversity loss.

In November 2018, the UN&#x27;s biodiversity chief Cristiana Pașca Palmer urged people worldwide to pressure governments to implement significant protections for wildlife by 2020. She called biodiversity loss a &quot;silent killer&quot; as dangerous as global warming but said it had received little attention by comparison. &quot;It&#x27;s different from climate change, where people feel the impact in everyday life. With biodiversity, it is not so clear but by the time you feel what is happening, it may be too late.&quot; In January 2020, the UN Convention on Biological Diversity drafted a Paris-style plan to stop biodiversity and ecosystem collapse by setting the deadline of 2030 to protect 30% of the Earth&#x27;s land and oceans and to reduce pollution by 50%, to allow for the restoration of ecosystems by 2050. The world failed to meet the Aichi Biodiversity Targets for 2020 set by the convention during a summit in Japan in 2010. Of the 20 biodiversity targets proposed, only six were &quot;partially achieved&quot; by the deadline. It was called a global failure by Inger Andersen, head of the United Nations Environment Programme:

Some scientists have proposed keeping extinctions below 20 per year for the next century as a global target to reduce species loss, which is the biodiversity equivalent of the 2 °C climate target, although it is still much higher than the normal background rate of two per year prior to anthropogenic impacts on the natural world.

An October 2020 report on the &quot;era of pandemics&quot; from IPBES found that many of the same human activities that contribute to biodiversity loss and climate change, including deforestation and the wildlife trade, have also increased the risk of future pandemics. The report offers several policy options to reduce such risk, such as taxing meat production and consumption, cracking down on the illegal wildlife trade, removing high disease-risk species from the legal wildlife trade, and eliminating subsidies to businesses which are harmful to the environment. According to marine zoologist John Spicer, &quot;the COVID-19 crisis is not just another crisis alongside the biodiversity crisis and the climate change crisis. Make no mistake, this is one big crisis—the greatest that humans have ever faced.&quot;

In December 2022, nearly every country on Earth, with the United States and the Holy See being the only exceptions, signed onto the Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework agreement formulated at the 2022 United Nations Biodiversity Conference (COP 15) which includes protecting 30% of land and oceans by 2030 and 22 other targets intended to mitigate the extinction crisis. The agreement is weaker than the Aichi Targets of 2010. It was criticized by some countries for being rushed and not going far enough to protect endangered species.

==See also==
* Anthropocene
* Biodiversity loss
* Ecocide
* Existential risk from artificial intelligence
* Extinction Rebellion
* Extinction risk from climate change
* Extinction symbol
* Human impact on the environment
* Lists of extinct species
* Pleistocene rewilding
* Late Pleistocene extinctions
* &quot;Racing Extinction&quot; (2015 documentary film)
* Timeline of extinctions in the Holocene
* World Scientists&#x27; Warning to Humanity

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* 
==External links==

*The Extinction Crisis . Center for Biological Diversity.
*Vanishing: The extinction crisis is far worse than you think . CNN. December 2016.
*Biologists say half of all species could be extinct by end of century , &quot;The Guardian,&quot; 25 February 2017
*Humans are ushering in the sixth mass extinction of life on Earth, scientists warn , &quot;The Independent,&quot; 31 May 2017
*Human activity pushing Earth towards &#x27;sixth mass species extinction,&#x27; report warns . CBC. Mar 26, 2018
*&#x27;Terror being waged on wildlife&#x27;, leaders warn . &quot;The Guardian.&quot; October 4, 2018.
*Earth Is on the Cusp of the Sixth Mass Extinction. Here&#x27;s What Paleontologists Want You to Know . &quot;Discover&quot;. December 3, 2020.
*What the Extinction Crisis Took From the World in 2022 . &quot;The Nation&quot;. December 22, 2022.
*Extinction crisis puts 1 million species on the brink . Reuters. December 23, 2022.
*Exclusive: Huge chunk of plants, animals in U.S. at risk of extinction . Reuters. February 6, 2023.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q796140" start="4" end="23" title="Holocene extinction" label="Holocene extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q796140" start="49" end="72" title="Holocene extinction" label="Anthropocene extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q55814" start="88" end="104" title="extinction event" label="extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="143" end="151" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="238" end="244" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="264" end="273" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="286" end="298" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230015" start="332" end="338" title="marine life" label="marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q864294" start="374" end="394" title="biodiversity hotspot" label="biodiversity hotspot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="404" end="414" title="coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q9444" start="420" end="430" title="rainforest" label="rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839645" start="650" end="676" title="background extinction rate" label="background extinction rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q641498" start="790" end="813" title="conservation biologists" label="conservation biologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="826" end="831" title="humankind" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="928" end="965" title="Extinction event#The &amp;quot;Big Five&amp;quot; mass extinctions" label="&amp;quot;Big Five&amp;quot; mass extinctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q796140" start="1025" end="1047" title="Holocene extinction" label="sixth mass extinction."/>
<link wikidata="Q21014121" start="1093" end="1119" title="Capitanian mass extinction event" label="Capitanian mass extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q796140" start="1130" end="1153" title="Holocene extinction" label="seventh mass extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759232" start="1223" end="1233" title="Late Pleistocene extinctions" label="extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q498831" start="1280" end="1296" title="Late Pleistocene" label="Late Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050262" start="1381" end="1392" title="overhunting" label="overhunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619146" start="1504" end="1515" title="List of extinct animals of New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542941" start="1517" end="1527" title="List of Madagascar and Indian Ocean Island animals extinct in the Holocene" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619151" start="1533" end="1539" title="List of extinct animals of the Hawaiian Islands" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q552431" start="1578" end="1597" title="habitat destruction" label="habitat destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="1695" end="1704" title="predation" label="predation"/>
<link wikidata="Q552431" start="1709" end="1727" title="habitat alteration" label="habitat alteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="1843" end="1854" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q19617380" start="1974" end="1989" title="List of islands in the Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q12903986" start="2340" end="2358" title="Great Acceleration" label="Great Acceleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q19067" start="2490" end="2503" title="apex predator" label="apex predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="2515" end="2523" title="habitats" label="habitats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775153" start="2557" end="2565" title="food web" label="food web"/>
<link wikidata="Q574376" start="2637" end="2650" title="Human impact on the environment" label="anthropogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="2651" end="2665" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q386191" start="2667" end="2690" title="human population growth" label="human population growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174091" start="2696" end="2718" title="Overconsumption (economics)" label="increasing consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q200535" start="2738" end="2746" title="Wealth" label="affluent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288465" start="2781" end="2796" title="Environmental impact of meat production" label="meat production"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="2798" end="2811" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q552431" start="2821" end="2853" title="Habitat destruction" label="destruction of critical habitats"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="2938" end="2947" title="pollution" label="pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="2953" end="2967" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850313" start="3094" end="3100" title="List of African animals extinct in the Holocene" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010636" start="3102" end="3106" title="List of Asian animals extinct in the Holocene" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270708" start="3108" end="3114" title="List of extinct animals of Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619138" start="3116" end="3125" title="List of extinct animals of Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850298" start="3127" end="3132" title="List of North American animals extinct in the Holocene" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617516" start="3137" end="3150" title="List of South American animals extinct in the Holocene" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="3199" end="3212" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q331828" start="3214" end="3225" title="overfishing" label="overfishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q855711" start="3227" end="3246" title="ocean acidification" label="ocean acidification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363331" start="3310" end="3342" title="Decline in amphibian populations" label="Decline in amphibian populations"/>
<link wikidata="Q18466271" start="3478" end="3495" title="biodiversity loss" label="biodiversity loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="3551" end="3572" title="Sustainability" label="sustainable practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="3757" end="3767" title="ecosystems" label="ecosystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q55814" start="3818" end="3834" title="Extinction event" label="Mass extinctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="3884" end="3891" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065985" start="4106" end="4143" title="Ordovician–Silurian extinction events" label="Ordovician–Silurian extinction events"/>
<link wikidata="Q678023" start="4149" end="4173" title="Late Devonian extinction" label="Late Devonian extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q141118" start="4179" end="4212" title="Permian–Triassic extinction event" label="Permian–Triassic extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q835034" start="4218" end="4252" title="Triassic–Jurassic extinction event" label="Triassic–Jurassic extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q55811" start="4262" end="4299" title="Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event" label="Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q21014121" start="4308" end="4335" title="Capitanian mass extinction event" label="Capitanian extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="4486" end="4494" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="4521" end="4526" title="Geologic time scale" label="epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759232" start="4705" end="4732" title="Quaternary extinction event" label="Quaternary extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q217717" start="4869" end="4903" title="American Museum of Natural History" label="American Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="5047" end="5061" title="archaic humans" label="archaic humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591752" start="5121" end="5130" title="Australian megafauna" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619146" start="5132" end="5143" title="List of extinct animals of New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850313" start="5149" end="5159" title="List of African animals extinct in the Holocene" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q853848" start="5243" end="5259" title="Geographical isolation" label="isolated islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347223" start="5372" end="5404" title="Effect of climate change on plant biodiversity" label="plants suffered extensive losses"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839645" start="5611" end="5637" title="background extinction rate" label="background extinction rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4839645" start="5782" end="5808" title="background extinction rate" label="background extinction rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782365" start="5852" end="5873" title="Theoretical ecologist" label="Theoretical ecologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626951" start="5874" end="5885" title="Stuart Pimm" label="Stuart Pimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q57748812" start="6094" end="6102" title="Anthony David Barnosky" label="Barnosky"/>
<link wikidata="Q211029" start="6535" end="6556" title="E.O. Wilson" label="Edward Osborne Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q104021" start="6926" end="6931" title="fauna" label="fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q552431" start="7180" end="7200" title="Habitat destruction" label="habitat destructions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981817" start="7205" end="7219" title="Coextinction" label="co-extinctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q63535006" start="7261" end="7324" title="Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services" label="Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666088" start="7364" end="7369" title="Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services" label="IPBES"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506064" start="7962" end="8002" title="Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment" label="Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q28455123" start="8322" end="8329" title="Overlogging" label="logging"/>
<link wikidata="Q564954" start="8428" end="8436" title="PLOS One" label="PLOS One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146531" start="8616" end="8620" title="PNAS" label="PNAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="8640" end="8646" title="genera" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626951" start="9625" end="9636" title="Stuart Pimm" label="Stuart Pimm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9936" end="9995" title="World Scientists&amp;#x27; Warning to Humanity#Second notice" label="World Scientists&amp;#x27; Warning to Humanity: A Second Notice"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="10331" end="10357" title="World Wide Fund for Nature" label="World Wide Fund for Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q581977" start="10376" end="10396" title="Living Planet Report" label="Living Planet Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q241741" start="10413" end="10421" title="wildlife" label="wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174091" start="10481" end="10496" title="overconsumption" label="overconsumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q386191" start="10498" end="10515" title="population growth" label="population growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148482" start="10521" end="10538" title="intensive farming" label="intensive farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318358" start="11440" end="11454" title="review article" label="review article"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881044" start="11704" end="11720" title="Science Advances" label="Science Advances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165944" start="11880" end="11895" title="land-use change" label="land-use change"/>
<link wikidata="Q161718" start="12292" end="12296" title="UNDP" label="UNDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185686" start="12309" end="12333" title="Human Development Report" label="Human Development Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q47495880" start="12647" end="12660" title="Rodolfo Dirzo" label="Rodolfo Dirzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q377983" start="12665" end="12680" title="Paul R. Ehrlich" label="Paul R. Ehrlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q574376" start="13084" end="13097" title="human impact on the environment" label="anthropogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26841" start="13269" end="13281" title="Anthropocene" label="Anthropocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q55811" start="13444" end="13481" title="Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event" label="Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="13871" end="13879" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="13880" end="13885" title="Epoch (geology)" label="Epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="13978" end="13999" title="Industrial Revolution" label="industrial revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="14337" end="14353" title="geological epoch" label="geological epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q402104" start="14471" end="14511" title="International Commission on Stratigraphy" label="International Commission on Stratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55814" start="14593" end="14609" title="extinction event" label="extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q106358009" start="14664" end="14688" title="greenhouse gas emissions" label="greenhouse gas emissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="14918" end="14932" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="14943" end="14950" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q498831" start="15005" end="15021" title="Late Pleistocene" label="Late Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="15286" end="15307" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q192864" start="15405" end="15424" title="Science (journal)" label="&amp;quot;Science&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q19067" start="15596" end="15610" title="apex predators" label="apex predators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146531" start="16022" end="16026" title="PNAS" label="PNAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945560" start="16086" end="16093" title="Biomass (ecology)" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="16615" end="16626" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q730371" start="16981" end="16990" title="megafauna" label="megafauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="17189" end="17207" title="Civilization" label="Human civilization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17419" end="17448" title="Habitat destruction#Human causes" label="Habitat destruction by humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="17919" end="17932" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="17993" end="18011" title="Invasive species" label="non-native species"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118143" start="18021" end="18031" title="globalization and disease" label="widespread"/>
<link wikidata="Q525512" start="18032" end="18044" title="transmission (medicine)" label="transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="18048" end="18066" title="infectious disease" label="infectious disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q180548" start="18219" end="18239" title="Neolithic Revolution" label="Neolithic Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="18417" end="18438" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000285" start="18547" end="18552" title="Proxy (climate)" label="proxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="19599" end="19613" title="Archaeology" label="archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="19821" end="19842" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q265986" start="19864" end="19880" title="William Ruddiman" label="William Ruddiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="20418" end="20426" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="20526" end="20543" title="Agriculture" label="human agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133621" start="20654" end="20677" title="climate change (general concept)" label="historic climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092095" start="21185" end="21216" title="Younger Dryas impact hypothesis" label="Younger Dryas impact hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q331439" start="21481" end="21501" title="human overpopulation" label="human overpopulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q386191" start="21516" end="21533" title="population growth" label="population growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q189833" start="21546" end="21561" title="economic growth" label="economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174091" start="21577" end="21588" title="Overconsumption" label="consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q18636685" start="21689" end="21703" title="Inger Andersen (environmentalist)" label="Inger Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q182016" start="21735" end="21771" title="United Nations Environment Programme" label="United Nations Environment Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="22007" end="22017" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q762266" start="22157" end="22161" title="CUNY" label="CUNY"/>
<link wikidata="Q343055" start="22172" end="22184" title="David Harvey" label="David Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="22215" end="22225" title="Neoliberalism" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380042" start="22352" end="22367" title="William E. Rees" label="William E. Rees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800288" start="22726" end="22759" title="United States Chamber of Commerce" label="United States Chamber of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251091" start="23187" end="23198" title="defaunation" label="defaunation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16889242" start="23260" end="23272" title="empty forest" label="empty forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q217151" start="23598" end="23617" title="Neotropical realm" label="Neotropical forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667323" start="23714" end="23721" title="Big cat" label="Big cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="23854" end="23858" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="IUCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q34706" start="23910" end="23918" title="leopards" label="leopards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131819" start="24105" end="24125" title="Panthera Corporation" label="Panthera Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118246" start="24130" end="24159" title="Wildlife Conservation Society" label="Wildlife Conservation Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q36341" start="24530" end="24540" title="brown bear" label="brown bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225689" start="24597" end="24615" title="pollinator decline" label="pollinator decline"/>
<link wikidata="Q632004" start="24937" end="24962" title="Radboud University Nijmegen" label="Radboud University&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161297" start="25128" end="25145" title="Sussex University" label="Sussex University"/>
<link wikidata="Q61707847" start="25550" end="25579" title="Decline in insect populations" label="decline of insect populations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148482" start="25600" end="25617" title="intensive farming" label="intensive farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q6646725" start="25782" end="25815" title="List of critically endangered species" label="become extinct in the near future"/>
<link wikidata="Q34718" start="25844" end="25854" title="rhinoceros" label="rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="25856" end="25863" title="primate" label="primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191516" start="25870" end="25878" title="pangolin" label="pangolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q278113" start="25948" end="25958" title="Vulnerable species" label="vulnerable"/>
<link wikidata="Q730371" start="26187" end="26196" title="megafauna" label="megafauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759232" start="26432" end="26459" title="Quaternary extinction event" label="Quaternary extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q7189436" start="26793" end="26815" title="phylogenetic diversity" label="phylogenetic diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q152805" start="26859" end="26893" title="Convention on Biological Diversity" label="Convention on Biological Diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914772" start="26938" end="26962" title="Biodiversity Action Plan" label="Biodiversity Action Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="27001" end="27019" title="endangered species" label="endangered species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144851" start="27086" end="27101" title="Current Biology" label="Current Biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="27402" end="27448" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="International Union for Conservation of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q207906" start="27672" end="27694" title="Père David&amp;#x27;s deer" label="Père David&amp;#x27;s deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q247472" start="27703" end="27716" title="Hawaiian crow" label="Hawaiian crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q945835" start="27813" end="27828" title="Local extinction" label="locally extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q179154" start="27924" end="27934" title="gray whale" label="gray whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="27943" end="27951" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q120043" start="27964" end="27986" title="leatherback sea turtle" label="leatherback sea turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q573880" start="28362" end="28383" title="Nature Communications" label="Nature Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q43341" start="28629" end="28644" title="Biology Letters" label="Biology Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q63535006" start="28778" end="28841" title="Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services" label="Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q581977" start="29203" end="29223" title="Living Planet Report" label="Living Planet Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146531" start="29368" end="29372" title="PNAS" label="PNAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="29703" end="29713" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="29828" end="29841" title="Crop cultivation" label="crop cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301561" start="29846" end="29865" title="domesticated animal" label="domesticated animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347753" start="29908" end="29926" title="industrial farming" label="industrial farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q220212" start="29938" end="29949" title="monoculture" label="monoculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570745" start="30084" end="30092" title="Silphium (antiquity)" label="silphium"/>
<link wikidata="Q191968" start="30101" end="30117" title="passenger pigeon" label="passenger pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970247" start="30306" end="30327" title="Nature Climate Change" label="Nature Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="30371" end="30386" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771695" start="30559" end="30571" title="PLOS Biology" label="PLOS Biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q866012" start="30627" end="30651" title="University of Queensland" label="University of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q852569" start="30889" end="30898" title="Fish migration" label="migratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q220198" start="30976" end="31004" title="Zoological Society of London" label="Zoological Society of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q912362" start="31202" end="31224" title="Intensive animal farming" label="industrial agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288465" start="31252" end="31256" title="Environmental impact of meat production" label="meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q18466271" start="31295" end="31312" title="biodiversity loss" label="biodiversity loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="31348" end="31361" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251697" start="31422" end="31435" title="Deforestation of the Amazon rainforest" label="Amazon region"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272786" start="31440" end="31449" title="Deforestation in Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="31502" end="31521" title="World Wildlife Fund" label="World Wildlife Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="31707" end="31740" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="Food and Agriculture Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658248" start="31776" end="31804" title="Livestock&amp;#x27;s Long Shadow" label="Livestock&amp;#x27;s Long Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666088" start="31931" end="31936" title="IPBES" label="IPBES"/>
<link wikidata="Q63535006" start="31943" end="32006" title="Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services" label="Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q573880" start="32441" end="32462" title="Nature Communications" label="Nature Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q186778" start="32783" end="32790" title="Aye-aye" label="Aye-aye"/>
<link wikidata="Q302215" start="32802" end="32826" title="Chinese crocodile lizard" label="Chinese crocodile lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191516" start="32835" end="32843" title="pangolin" label="pangolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="33164" end="33178" title="Climate change" label="Climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422084" start="33205" end="33226" title="Extinction risk from climate change" label="driver of extinctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q213096" start="33389" end="33413" title="seashell" label="calcium carbonate shells"/>
<link wikidata="Q191944" start="33417" end="33428" title="exoskeleton" label="exoskeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q568916" start="33541" end="33556" title="coral bleaching" label="coral bleaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="33568" end="33578" title="coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867740" start="33663" end="33673" title="Gastropoda" label="gastropods"/>
<link wikidata="Q25368" start="33675" end="33683" title="Bivalvia" label="bivalves"/>
<link wikidata="Q223930" start="34251" end="34263" title="game (hunting)" label="game animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666594" start="34502" end="34506" title="IFAW" label="IFAW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636612" start="34511" end="34515" title="HSUS" label="HSUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q640682" start="34529" end="34543" title="Trophy hunting" label="trophy hunters"/>
<link wikidata="Q34577" start="34732" end="34740" title="poachers" label="poachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q185038" start="34816" end="34832" title="African elephant" label="African elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q28129585" start="35063" end="35084" title="Great Elephant Census" label="Great Elephant Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q105729329" start="35439" end="35447" title="trawling" label="trawling"/>
<link wikidata="Q19067" start="35526" end="35539" title="apex predator" label="apex predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975916" start="35579" end="35591" title="bluefin tuna" label="bluefin tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q42196" start="35593" end="35603" title="blue whale" label="blue whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q193683" start="35606" end="35632" title="North Atlantic right whale" label="North Atlantic right whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6495741" start="35672" end="35675" title="Batoidea" label="ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881044" start="35960" end="35976" title="Science Advances" label="Science Advances"/>
<link wikidata="Q129026" start="36063" end="36080" title="Great white shark" label="Great white shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q331828" start="36349" end="36360" title="overfishing" label="overfishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251091" start="36390" end="36401" title="defaunation" label="defaunation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090290" start="36932" end="36948" title="Chytridiomycosis" label="Chytridiomycosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q320632" start="37191" end="37202" title="golden toad" label="golden toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q550093" start="37222" end="37243" title="Gastric-brooding frog" label="Gastric-brooding frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q139998" start="37262" end="37296" title="Rabb&amp;#x27;s Fringe-limbed Treefrog" label="Rabb&amp;#x27;s Fringe-limbed Treefrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048914" start="37323" end="37345" title="Panamanian golden frog" label="Panamanian golden frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q214469" start="37502" end="37514" title="cloud forest" label="cloud forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="37519" end="37527" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="37532" end="37542" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q19826825" start="37550" end="37583" title="Batrachochytrium salamandrivorans" label="Batrachochytrium salamandrivorans"/>
<link wikidata="Q53663" start="37635" end="37645" title="salamander" label="salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q55814" start="37772" end="37787" title="mass extinction" label="mass extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362025" start="37884" end="37903" title="white-nose syndrome" label="white-nose syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339061" start="38237" end="38292" title="New York State Department of Environmental Conservation" label="New York State Department of Environmental Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q497841" start="38366" end="38390" title="colony collapse disorder" label="colony collapse disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q627153" start="38405" end="38415" title="worker bee" label="worker bee"/>
<link wikidata="Q816345" start="38432" end="38437" title="queen bee" label="queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766457" start="38564" end="38570" title="Varroa" label="Varroa"/>
<link wikidata="Q337959" start="38581" end="38601" title="Acarapis woodi" label="&amp;quot;Acarapis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441993" start="38602" end="38606" title="mite" label="mite"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="38609" end="38621" title="malnutrition" label="malnutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="38631" end="38639" title="pathogen" label="pathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="38642" end="38657" title="genetics" label="genetic factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q641307" start="38659" end="38677" title="immunodeficiency" label="immunodeficiencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q552431" start="38679" end="38694" title="habitat destruction" label="loss of habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q176353" start="38705" end="38715" title="beekeeping" label="beekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q730371" start="38773" end="38782" title="Megafauna" label="Megafauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455497" start="38959" end="38974" title="trophic cascade" label="trophic cascade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617516" start="39246" end="39282" title="List of South American animals extinct in the Holocene" label="South American megafaunal extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q830854" start="40001" end="40013" title="steppe bison" label="steppe bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661606" start="40203" end="40217" title="mammoth steppe" label="mammoth steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36449705" start="40235" end="40239" title="mire" label="mire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699044" start="40309" end="40323" title="woolly mammoth" label="woolly mammoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="40738" end="40743" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="40875" end="40895" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q212685" start="41071" end="41087" title="High Middle Ages" label="High Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q730371" start="41418" end="41427" title="megafauna" label="megafauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="41451" end="41465" title="glacial period" label="glacial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896118" start="41609" end="41633" title="Meadowcroft Rock Shelter" label="Meadowcroft Rock Shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485378" start="41690" end="41704" title="Clovis culture" label="Clovis culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q13925462" start="41801" end="41823" title="Prehistoric migration and settlement of the Americas from Asia" label="humans in the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q106594" start="42004" end="42018" title="Wrangel Island" label="Wrangel Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699044" start="42054" end="42068" title="woolly mammoth" label="woolly mammoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="42416" end="42437" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="42495" end="42509" title="glacial period" label="glacial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699044" start="42587" end="42601" title="woolly mammoth" label="woolly mammoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q36715" start="42681" end="42688" title="mammoth" label="mammoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q192272" start="42697" end="42705" title="mastodon" label="mastodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q306147" start="43675" end="43690" title="Channel Islands (California)" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="44120" end="44124" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591752" start="44765" end="44794" title="Australian megafauna" label="large assemblage of megafauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q25336" start="44916" end="44925" title="marsupial" label="marsupial"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="45008" end="45014" title="Indigenous Australians" label="Humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619138" start="45405" end="45411" title="List of extinct flora of Australia" label="plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619138" start="45416" end="45423" title="List of extinct animals of Australia" label="animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797201" start="45431" end="45448" title="Threatened fauna of Australia" label="many more animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q614432" start="45453" end="45459" title="List of threatened flora of Australia" label="plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="45574" end="45583" title="subfossil" label="subfossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="45916" end="45924" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451268" start="46039" end="46057" title="fire-stick farming" label="fire-stick farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q457898" start="46668" end="46681" title="History of the Caribbean" label="Human arrival"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="46689" end="46698" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194316" start="46812" end="46838" title="Pilosans of the Caribbean" label="ground and arboreal sloths"/>
<link wikidata="Q141383" start="46951" end="46961" title="Megalocnus" label="Megalocnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q965019" start="47008" end="47018" title="Acratocnus" label="Acratocnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q511079" start="47063" end="47077" title="two-toed sloth" label="two-toed sloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="47090" end="47094" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5805808" start="47102" end="47111" title="Imagocnus" label="Imagocnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6992206" start="47138" end="47145" title="Neocnus" label="Neocnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="47237" end="47243" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q210811" start="47379" end="47390" title="Pico Island" label="Pico Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q657187" start="47395" end="47407" title="Faial Island" label="Faial Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969110" start="47430" end="47447" title="Prunus lusitanica" label="Prunus lusitanica"/>
<link wikidata="Q216752" start="47842" end="47855" title="Flores Island (Azores)" label="Flores Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="47937" end="47944" title="Madeira" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q30188" start="48182" end="48196" title="Madeira Island" label="Madeira Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q27923" start="48258" end="48274" title="Desertas Islands" label="Desertas Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075743" start="48425" end="48439" title="Eurya" label="Eurya stigmosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="48829" end="48843" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="49149" end="49165" title="Age of Discovery" label="Age of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q105472" start="49199" end="49210" title="Macaronesia" label="Macaronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011" start="49363" end="49373" title="Cabo Verde" label="Cabo Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q19617380" start="49866" end="49881" title="Pacific islands" label="Pacific islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q154628" start="49998" end="50018" title="Bismarck Archipelago" label="Bismarck Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="50023" end="50038" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="51157" end="51170" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953482" start="51442" end="51463" title="Brachylophus gibbonsi" label="Brachylophus gibbonsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6488240" start="51480" end="51499" title="Lapitiguana" label="Lapitiguana impensa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16641" start="51612" end="51626" title="American Samoa" label="American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359323" start="51799" end="51806" title="Mangaia" label="Mangaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26988" start="51814" end="51826" title="Cook Islands" label="Cook Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q227997" start="52130" end="52134" title="taro" label="taro"/>
<link wikidata="Q10749897" start="52475" end="52495" title="Ancient Hawaii" label="first human settlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q192626" start="52503" end="52519" title="Hawaiian Islands" label="Hawaiian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q85759274" start="52641" end="52649" title="Endemism in the Hawaiian Islands" label="endemism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376024" start="52661" end="52666" title="Endemic birds of Hawaii" label="birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620194" start="52690" end="52694" title="List of fish of Hawaii" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q310983" start="53633" end="53639" title="Malagasy people" label="humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="53712" end="53719" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q853848" start="53725" end="53748" title="Allopatric speciation" label="geographically isolated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086758" start="54076" end="54100" title="Subfossil lemur" label="&amp;quot;giant&amp;quot; lemurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q25796510" start="54275" end="54296" title="Malagasy hippopotamus" label="Malagasy hippopotamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q214508" start="54331" end="54344" title="elephant bird" label="elephant bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790326" start="54697" end="54710" title="aridification" label="aridification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251684" start="54754" end="54769" title="Deforestation in Madagascar" label="forest clearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330558" start="55046" end="55053" title="Nosy Be" label="Nosy Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q853848" start="55255" end="55275" title="geographic isolation" label="geographic isolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664460" start="55280" end="55299" title="Insular biogeography" label="island biogeography"/>
<link wikidata="Q35942" start="55448" end="55457" title="Polynesia" label="Polynesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q452969" start="55736" end="55739" title="moa" label="moa"/>
<link wikidata="Q19170" start="55758" end="55764" title="ratite" label="ratite"/>
<link wikidata="Q243451" start="55897" end="55915" title="Haast&amp;#x27;s eagle" label="Haast&amp;#x27;s eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443727" start="55969" end="55992" title="New Zealand goose" label="large, flightless geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q339418" start="56030" end="56044" title="Polynesian rat" label="Polynesian rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821185" start="56471" end="56487" title="Invasive species in New Zealand" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q106133" start="56498" end="56506" title="Black rat" label="ship rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q865137" start="56598" end="56612" title="Flightless bird" label="flightlessness"/>
<link wikidata="Q179959" start="56727" end="56733" title="kākāpō" label="kākāpō"/>
<link wikidata="Q43642" start="56878" end="56882" title="Kiwi (bird)" label="kiwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11188" start="56945" end="56962" title="World Population" label="human populations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="56975" end="56985" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201457" start="57108" end="57125" title="plant-based diets" label="plant-based diets"/>
<link wikidata="Q18466271" start="57242" end="57259" title="biodiversity loss" label="biodiversity loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q47495880" start="57298" end="57311" title="Rodolfo Dirzo" label="Rodolfo Dirzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q377983" start="57316" end="57331" title="Paul R. Ehrlich" label="Paul R. Ehrlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q80796" start="57510" end="57543" title="Frontiers Media" label="Frontiers in Conservation Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="58107" end="58118" title="arable land" label="arable land"/>
<link wikidata="Q192864" start="58228" end="58235" title="Science (journal)" label="Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q109233841" start="58290" end="58315" title="30 by 30" label="30% of the planet by 2030"/>
<link wikidata="Q473972" start="58337" end="58351" title="protected area" label="protected area"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58466" end="58505" title="Projections of population growth#Up to 2050" label="10 billion by the middle of the century"/>
<link wikidata="Q192864" start="58621" end="58628" title="Science (journal)" label="Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q152805" start="58841" end="58863" title="Cristiana Pașca Palmer" label="Cristiana Pașca Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="59043" end="59057" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q152805" start="59341" end="59375" title="Convention on Biological Diversity" label="Convention on Biological Diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q21707860" start="59386" end="59397" title="Paris Agreement" label="Paris-style"/>
<link wikidata="Q56708726" start="59428" end="59446" title="ecosystem collapse" label="ecosystem collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q109233841" start="59474" end="59529" title="30 by 30" label="2030 to protect 30% of the Earth&amp;#x27;s land and oceans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428433" start="59579" end="59604" title="Ecosystem restoration" label="restoration of ecosystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q152805" start="59643" end="59669" title="Aichi Biodiversity Targets" label="Aichi Biodiversity Targets"/>
<link wikidata="Q18636685" start="59872" end="59886" title="Inger Andersen (environmentalist)" label="Inger Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q182016" start="59900" end="59936" title="United Nations Environment Programme" label="United Nations Environment Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666088" start="60335" end="60340" title="IPBES" label="IPBES"/>
<link wikidata="Q18466271" start="60405" end="60422" title="biodiversity loss" label="biodiversity loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="60427" end="60441" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="60453" end="60466" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141338" start="60475" end="60489" title="wildlife trade" label="wildlife trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184" start="60530" end="60539" title="pandemics" label="pandemics"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="60893" end="60908" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="61170" end="61178" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q115780453" start="61222" end="61268" title="Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework" label="Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q56760666" start="61297" end="61340" title="2022 United Nations Biodiversity Conference" label="2022 United Nations Biodiversity Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q152805" start="61505" end="61518" title="Convention on Biological Diversity" label="Aichi Targets"/>
<link wikidata="Q26841" start="61653" end="61665" title="Anthropocene" label="Anthropocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q18466271" start="61668" end="61685" title="Biodiversity loss" label="Biodiversity loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q296486" start="61688" end="61695" title="Ecocide" label="Ecocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q21715237" start="61698" end="61743" title="Existential risk from artificial intelligence" label="Existential risk from artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q58819597" start="61746" end="61766" title="Extinction Rebellion" label="Extinction Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422084" start="61769" end="61804" title="Extinction risk from climate change" label="Extinction risk from climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q64505779" start="61807" end="61824" title="Extinction symbol" label="Extinction symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q574376" start="61827" end="61858" title="Human impact on the environment" label="Human impact on the environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6646992" start="61861" end="61885" title="Lists of extinct species" label="Lists of extinct species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632825" start="61888" end="61909" title="Pleistocene rewilding" label="Pleistocene rewilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759232" start="61912" end="61940" title="Late Pleistocene extinctions" label="Late Pleistocene extinctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q19059425" start="61943" end="61996" title="Racing Extinction" label="&amp;quot;Racing Extinction&amp;quot; (2015 documentary film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806069" start="61999" end="62038" title="Timeline of extinctions in the Holocene" label="Timeline of extinctions in the Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036137" start="62041" end="62083" title="World Scientists&amp;#x27; Warning to Humanity" label="World Scientists&amp;#x27; Warning to Humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196675" start="62192" end="62223" title="Center for Biological Diversity" label="Center for Biological Diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="62289" end="62292" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q733742" start="62879" end="62887" title="Discover (magazine)" label="Discover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897630" start="62977" end="62987" title="The Nation" label="The Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="63071" end="63078" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14210" wikidata="Q3127752" url="?curid=14210" title="Harrison Narcotics Tax Act">
<text>The Harrison Narcotics Tax Act (Ch. 1, ) was a United States federal law that regulated and taxed the production, importation, and distribution of opiates and coca products. The act was proposed by Representative Francis Burton Harrison of New York and was signed into law by President Woodrow Wilson on December 17, 1914.

&quot;An Act To provide for the registration of, with collectors of internal revenue, and to impose a special tax on all persons who produce, import, manufacture, compound, deal in, dispense, sell, distribute, or give away opium or coca leaves, their salts, derivatives, or preparations, and for other purposes.&quot; In &quot;Webb v. United States&quot;, the act was interpreted to prohibit prescribing maintenance doses for narcotics unless it was intended to cure the patient&#x27;s addiction.

The Harrison anti-narcotic legislation consisted of three U.S. House bills imposing restrictions on the availability and consumption of the psychoactive drug opium. House Resolution (H.R.) 1966 and passed conjointly with (the Opium and Coca Leaves Trade Restrictions Act).

Although technically illegal for purposes of distribution and use, the distribution, sale and use of cocaine was still legal for registered companies and individuals.

==Background==

===International===
Following the Spanish–American War and the Philippine–American War, the Philippines saw a proliferation of opium use. A cholera outbreak in 1902 further strengthened this tendency due to the astringent properties of opium.

Charles Henry Brent was an American Episcopal bishop who served as Missionary Bishop of the Philippines beginning in 1901. He convened a Commission of Inquiry, known as the Brent Commission, for the purpose of examining alternatives to a licensing system for opium addicts. Although Governor William Taft supported this policy, Brent opposed it &quot;on moral grounds&quot;. The Commission recommended that narcotics should be subject to international control. The recommendations of the Brent Commission were endorsed by the United States Department of State and in 1906 President Theodore Roosevelt called for an international conference, the International Opium Commission, which was held in Shanghai in February 1909. A second conference was held at The Hague in May 1911, and out of it came the first international drug control treaty, the International Opium Convention of 1912.

===Domestic===
Between 1895 and 1900 there were probably more morphine addicts in the United States than today on a per capita basis. Opium usage peaked in 1896 and then began to decline gradually. Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr., then dean Harvard Medical school, blamed the prevalence of opiate addiction on ignorance. As awareness of the addictiveness of morphine and patent medicines grew public opinion in the 1890s was in favor of state laws restricting morphine. Demand gradually declined thereafter in response to mounting public concern, local and state regulations, and the Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906, which required labeling of patent medicines that contained opiates, cocaine, alcohol, cannabis and other intoxicants. By 1914, forty-six states had regulations on cocaine and twenty-nine states had laws against opium, morphine, and heroin. 

====Opium====
In the 1800s opiates were mostly unregulated drugs. Morphine addiction had spread rapidly during and after the Civil war. The consumption of household remedies and marketed syrups containing morphine was commonplace and mostly associated with the upper and middle class of society. Many women who were prescribed and dispensed legal opiates by physicians and pharmacist for &quot;female problems&quot; (probably pain at menstruation) became addicted. It&#x27;s likely many who became addicted initially did not know what the syrups and concoctions contained. 

Although morphine syrups were easily available, opium smoking was already banned by many municipalities. There was more hostility to opium smoking than laudanum and other widely available tonics because of anti-Chinese sentiments and accusations that proprietors lured young white girls to opium dens. Chinese immigrants were blamed for importing the opium-smoking habit to the U.S. The 1903 blue-ribbon citizens&#x27; panel, the Committee on the Acquirement of the Drug Habit, concluded: &quot;If the Chinaman cannot get along without his dope we can get along without him.&quot;

Heroin use became widespread among low-income immigrants in the early 20th century. In the 1890s, the Sears &amp; Roebuck catalogue started offering a syringe and a small amount of cocaine or heroin for $1.50. 

====Cocaine====
Cocaine was first isolated in 1855. Within a few decades public opinion had associated cocaine use with crime sprees committed by black men. There were many hysterical news reports in the early 20th-century about cocaine-fueled rampages using hyperbole like &quot;cocaine-crazed negro&quot; and others exaggerating the addictiveness of cocaine saying it quickly reduced users to &quot;another entry in Satan&#x27;s ledger&quot;. In 1900, the &quot;Journal of the American Medical Association&quot; published an editorial stating, &quot;Negroes in the South are reported as being addicted to a new form of vice – that of &#x27;cocaine sniffing&#x27; or the &#x27;coke habit. A well-known article published in &quot;The New York Times&quot; on February 8, 1914 claimed cocaine use caused blacks to rape white women. This article and similar articles of the era, however, do not provide examples of such crimes. The people who made such allegations used racism to manipulate public opinion, but their allegations were unfounded. The article titled &quot;Negro Cocaine &#x27;Fiends&#x27; Are a New Southern Menace&quot; is remembered for its portrayal of &quot;the cocaine-crazed negro&quot; who was invulnerable to bullets. The use of the term &quot;fiends&quot; by Dr. Edward Huntington Williams, the author of the article, is understood to connote the demonization of the non-white drug user. 

According to historian David F. Musto public opinion about cocaine turned negative as newspapers and even &quot;Good Housekeeping&quot; scapegoated the drug to explain rising crime in the South:

Thus the problem of cocaine proceeded from an association with Negroes in about 1900, when a massive repression and disenfranchisement were under way in the South, to a convenient explanation for crime waves, and eventually Northerners used it as an argument against Southern fear of infringement of states&#x27;s rights.

Despite the extreme racialization of the issue that took place in the buildup to the act&#x27;s passage, contemporary research in Northern cities found relatively few cocaine users compared with alcoholics and opium addicts overall and no significant concentration among blacks. Blacks did use &quot;patent medicines&quot; containing opiates and cocaine for pulmonary conditions. It&#x27;s possible that higher rates of disease among blacks in the early 20th century may explain why blacks consumed patent medicines more than whites.

==Hearings==

Theodore Roosevelt appointed Dr. Hamilton Wright as the first opium commissioner of the United States in 1908. Wright testified at the hearing about the dangers alleging that drugs made blacks uncontrollable, gave them superhuman powers and caused them to rebel against white authority. He said cocaine was often &quot;the direct incentive to the crime of rape of white women by Negroes&quot;. He also stated that &quot;one of the most unfortunate phases of smoking opium in this country is the large number of women who have become involved and were living as common-law wives or cohabitating with Chinese in the Chinatowns of our various cities&quot;. 

Dr. Christopher Koch of the State Pharmacy Board of Pennsylvania testified of the dangerous &quot;cocaine-crazed&quot; blacks in the South: &quot;Most of the attacks upon the white women of the South are the direct result of a cocaine-crazed Negro brain&quot;. 

Writing in 1953 Rufus G. King explained that the Harrison Act was &quot;intended partly to carry out a treaty obligation, but mainly to aid the states in combating a local police problem which had gotten somewhat out of hand.&quot;

==Congressional passage==
When Representative Francis Burton Harrison of New York placed HR 1966 for debate before the full House of Representatives on June 26, 1913, he began by noting that the Smoking Opium Exclusion Act of 1909 failed to limit importation of opium because it regulated the maritime shipping industry, rather than the individual drug users. In Harrison&#x27;s view, shipping companies could evade regulation by forging documents and smuggling opium across the Mexico–United States border, whereas individual drug users would struggle to dispute their role in smuggling networks.

The Congressional Record showcases that the House was unsure whether the Commerce Clause actually permitted the federal government to restrict what types of goods could be exported, but the chamber adopted an expansive view based on dicta from the 1904 antitrust case &quot;Northern Securities Co. v. United States&quot;. While the House agreed that the Export Clause clearly prohibits taxing exported opium, they were divided as to whether they could outright prohibit such exports. Though the 1906 Pure Food and Drug Act prohibited the importation of adulterated or misbranded food and drugs, that law was considered a product standard, whereas the Harrison Narcotics Tax Act would not allow any form of opium as imports or exports. Congress would not attempt another restriction on the types of goods that can be exported until the 1940 Export Control Act.

Representative Thomas U. Sisson of Mississippi objected to restricting the market for narcotics as encroaching on state police power in violation of the Tenth Amendment. Harrison admitted that the federal authority to tax those involved in the market for narcotics under the Taxing and Spending Clause was weak because the federal government stood to earn more in import taxes without this act. Surprisingly, Sisson and Harrison were in agreement that the bill would allow physicians to continue prescribing narcotics as part of medical treatment for those with substance use disorder, yet the act&#x27;s enforcement by the Commissioner of Internal Revenue frequently prosecuted such patients.

== Enforcement ==
Enforcement began in 1915. The act appears to be mainly concerned about the marketing of opiates. However, a clause applying to doctors allowed distribution &quot;in the course of his professional practice only.&quot; Physicians believed relieving the suffering of physical dependance was within the &quot;professional practice&quot; exception. King says &quot;there is not the slightest suggestion that Congress intended to change this&quot;. He says the public hysteria surrounding contemporaneous press reports about violent &quot;dope fiends&quot; probably distorted the Congressional intent and turned addicts into criminals. 

The &quot;professional practice&quot; clause was interpreted after 1917 to mean that a doctor could not prescribe opiates to an addict. Addicts and doctors were jailed for decades under theories adopted by the Narcotics Division that addiction could not be successfully treated in a clinical setting. A number of doctors were arrested and some were imprisoned. The medical profession quickly learned not to supply opiates to addicts. In &quot;United States v. Doremus&quot;, 249 U.S. 86 (1919), the Supreme Court ruled that the Harrison Act was constitutional, and in &quot;Webb v. United States&quot;, 249 U.S. 96, 99 (1919) that physicians could not prescribe narcotics solely for maintenance.

The impact of diminished supply was obvious by mid-1915. A 1918 commission called for sterner law enforcement, while newspapers published sensational articles about addiction-related crime waves. Congress responded by tightening up the Harrison Act—the importation of heroin for any purpose was banned in 1924.

Secretary of the Treasury William Gibbs McAdoo appointed Representative Henry T. Rainey to lead a special committee to investigate the law&#x27;s effects. In June 1919, this Rainey Committee found that criminal organizations were smuggling drugs into the country across all four of the United States&#x27; coastal and land borders. Annually, the United States consumed 470,000 pounds of opium, whereas France and Germany each purchased around 17,000 pounds of opium. While the United States&#x27; 1920 population of 106 million was far larger than France&#x27;s 1921 population of 39 million and Germany&#x27;s 1920 population of 62 million, per capita opium consumption was still much higher in America. Based on the US Department of Commerce&#x27;s monthly summaries of foreign commerce, between July 1919 and January 1920, imports of opium increased to 528,635 pounds from only 74,650 pounds during the same period a year prior.

==Challenges==
In the 1919 cases &quot;United States v. Doremus&quot; and &quot;Webb v. United States&quot;, the Harrison Narcotics Tax Act was upheld by the Supreme Court under an expansive reading of the Taxing and Spending Clause based on the earlier &quot;License Tax Cases&quot; (1866).

The act&#x27;s applicability in prosecuting doctors who prescribe narcotics to addicts was successfully challenged in &quot;Linder v. United States&quot; in 1925, as Associate Justice James Clark McReynolds ruled that the federal government has no power to regulate medical practice.

==See also==
* Arguments for and against drug prohibition
* Prohibition of drugs

==References==
==Sources==
*
*
*
*

==External links==
* (full text)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3127752" start="4" end="30" title="Harrison Narcotics Tax Act" label="Harrison Narcotics Tax Act"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47" end="72" title="Law of the United States#Federal law" label="United States federal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026938" start="147" end="153" title="opiate" label="opiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q66793593" start="159" end="163" title="coca" label="coca"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="198" end="212" title="United States House of Representatives" label="Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q612408" start="213" end="236" title="Francis Burton Harrison" label="Francis Burton Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="240" end="248" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="276" end="300" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="President Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q46452" start="547" end="552" title="opium" label="opium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978679" start="651" end="672" title="Webb v. United States" label="Webb v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q49371" start="849" end="860" title="legislation" label="legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706669" start="962" end="979" title="psychoactive drug" label="psychoactive drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="1197" end="1204" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="1314" end="1334" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q214456" start="1343" end="1366" title="Philippine–American War" label="Philippine–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="1372" end="1383" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q46452" start="1407" end="1412" title="opium" label="opium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="1420" end="1427" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q378705" start="1491" end="1501" title="astringent" label="astringent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075765" start="1524" end="1543" title="Charles Henry Brent" label="Charles Henry Brent"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="1816" end="1828" title="William Taft" label="William Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="2050" end="2083" title="United States Department of State" label="United States Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="2106" end="2124" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667405" start="2169" end="2199" title="International Opium Commission" label="International Opium Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="2278" end="2287" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q751398" start="2369" end="2399" title="International Opium Convention" label="International Opium Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q319829" start="2608" end="2633" title="Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr." label="Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1029367" start="2988" end="3010" title="Pure Food and Drug Act" label="Pure Food and Drug Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026938" start="3289" end="3295" title="opiate" label="opiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q898739" start="3989" end="3997" title="laudanum" label="laudanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100101" start="4339" end="4347" title="Chinaman" label="Chinaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499202" start="4521" end="4540" title="Sears &amp;amp; Roebuck" label="Sears &amp;amp; Roebuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470970" start="5095" end="5138" title="Journal of the American Medical Association" label="Journal of the American Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130557" start="5183" end="5188" title="Negro" label="Negro"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="5361" end="5379" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233502" start="6064" end="6078" title="David F. Musto" label="David F. Musto"/>
<link wikidata="Q174941" start="6153" end="6170" title="Good Housekeeping" label="Good Housekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="7109" end="7127" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645257" start="7142" end="7157" title="Hamilton Wright" label="Hamilton Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q130051429" start="8044" end="8057" title="Rufus G. King" label="Rufus G. King"/>
<link wikidata="Q751398" start="8131" end="8148" title="International Opium Convention" label="treaty obligation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="8292" end="8306" title="United States House of Representatives" label="Representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q612408" start="8307" end="8330" title="Francis Burton Harrison" label="Francis Burton Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="8334" end="8342" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="8385" end="8409" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8456" end="8491" title="Smoking Opium Exclusion Act of 1909" label="Smoking Opium Exclusion Act of 1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="8740" end="8767" title="Mexico–United States border" label="Mexico–United States border"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160952" start="8864" end="8884" title="Congressional Record" label="Congressional Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q17349491" start="8933" end="8948" title="Commerce Clause" label="Commerce Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658870" start="9093" end="9098" title="Dictum" label="dicta"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="9113" end="9122" title="Competition law" label="antitrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058959" start="9134" end="9174" title="Northern Securities Co. v. United States" label="Northern Securities Co. v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q48416" start="9214" end="9227" title="Export Clause" label="Export Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029367" start="9360" end="9382" title="Pure Food and Drug Act" label="Pure Food and Drug Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421545" start="9700" end="9718" title="Export Control Act" label="Export Control Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462348" start="9736" end="9752" title="Thomas U. Sisson" label="Thomas U. Sisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="9756" end="9767" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389196" start="9841" end="9853" title="Police power (United States constitutional law)" label="police power"/>
<link wikidata="Q164665" start="9874" end="9889" title="Tenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Tenth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689659" start="9996" end="10022" title="Taxing and Spending Clause" label="Taxing and Spending Clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632070" start="10283" end="10305" title="substance use disorder" label="substance use disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152821" start="10345" end="10377" title="Commissioner of Internal Revenue" label="Commissioner of Internal Revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3740857" start="11277" end="11295" title="Federal Bureau of Narcotics" label="Narcotics Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978679" start="11641" end="11662" title="Webb v. United States" label="Webb v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="12032" end="12038" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215834" start="12076" end="12101" title="United States Secretary of the Treasury" label="Secretary of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q741058" start="12102" end="12122" title="William Gibbs McAdoo" label="William Gibbs McAdoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q943321" start="12148" end="12163" title="Henry T. Rainey" label="Henry T. Rainey"/>
<link wikidata="Q558635" start="12718" end="12728" title="per capita" label="per capita"/>
<link wikidata="Q503577" start="12794" end="12826" title="United States Department of Commerce" label="US Department of Commerce&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q19029812" start="13048" end="13072" title="United States v. Doremus" label="United States v. Doremus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978679" start="13089" end="13110" title="Webb v. United States" label="Webb v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="13167" end="13180" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689659" start="13215" end="13241" title="Taxing and Spending Clause" label="Taxing and Spending Clause"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13269" end="13286" title="License Tax Cases" label="License Tax Cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="13346" end="13353" title="Physician" label="doctors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378593" start="13381" end="13388" title="Substance dependence" label="addicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6552423" start="13426" end="13449" title="Linder v. United States" label="Linder v. United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q724204" start="13486" end="13508" title="James Clark McReynolds" label="James Clark McReynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789760" start="13602" end="13644" title="Arguments for and against drug prohibition" label="Arguments for and against drug prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551312" start="13647" end="13667" title="Prohibition of drugs" label="Prohibition of drugs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14215" wikidata="Q950799" url="?curid=14215" title="Horse tack">
<text>Tack is equipment or accessories equipped on horses and other equines in the course of their use as domesticated animals. This equipment includes such items as saddles, stirrups, bridles, halters, reins, bits, and harnesses. Equipping a horse is often referred to as tacking up, and involves putting the tack equipment on the horse. A room to store such equipment, usually near or in a stable, is a tack room.

== Saddles ==
Saddles are seats for the rider, fastened to the horse&#x27;s back by means of a &quot;girth&quot; in English-style riding, or a &quot;cinch&quot; in the use of Western tack. Girths are generally a wide strap that goes around the horse at a point about four inches behind the forelegs. Some western saddles will also have a second strap known as a &quot;flank&quot; or &quot;back cinch&quot; that fastens at the rear of the saddle and goes around the widest part of the horse&#x27;s belly.

It is important that the saddle be comfortable for both the rider and the horse as an improperly fitting saddle may create pressure points on the horse&#x27;s back muscle (Latissimus dorsi) and cause the horse pain and can lead to the horse, rider, or both getting injured.

There are many types of saddle, each specially designed for its given task.
Saddles are usually divided into two major categories: &quot;English saddles&quot; and &quot;Western saddles&quot; according to the riding discipline they are used in. Other types of saddles, such as racing saddles, Australian saddles, sidesaddles and endurance saddles do not necessarily fit neatly in either category.

===Saddle accessories===
*Breastplate or breastcollar: Prevents saddles of all styles from sliding sideways or backward on a horse&#x27;s back
*Surcingle
*Crupper
*Breeching, also called &quot;britching&quot;
*Saddle blanket or numnah

=== Stirrups ===

Stirrups are supports for the rider&#x27;s feet that hang down on either side of the saddle. They provide greater stability for the rider but can have safety concerns due to the potential for a rider&#x27;s feet to get stuck in them. If a rider is thrown from a horse but has a foot caught in the stirrup, they could be dragged if the horse runs away. To minimize this risk, a number of safety precautions are taken. First, most riders wear riding boots with a heel and a smooth sole. Next, some saddles, particularly English saddles, have safety bars that allow a stirrup leather to fall off the saddle if pulled backwards by a falling rider. Other precautions are done with stirrup design itself. Western saddles have wide stirrup treads that make it more difficult for the foot to become trapped. A number of saddle styles incorporate a tapedero, which is covering over the front of the stirrup that keeps the foot from sliding all the way through the stirrup. The English stirrup (or &quot;iron&quot;) has several design variations which are either shaped to allow the rider&#x27;s foot to slip out easily or are closed with a very heavy rubber band. The invention of stirrups was of great historic significance in mounted combat, giving the rider secure foot support while on horseback.

==Headgear==

&quot;Bridles&quot;, hackamores, &quot;halters&quot;, or &quot;headcollars&quot;, and similar equipment consist of various arrangements of straps around the horse&#x27;s head, and are used for control and communication with the animal.

===Halters===
A &quot;halter&quot; (United States) or &quot;headcollar&quot; (United Kingdom) (occasionally &quot;headstall&quot;) consists of a noseband and headstall that buckles around the horse&#x27;s head and allows the horse to be led or tied. The lead rope is separate, and it may be short (from six to ten feet, two to three meters) for everyday leading and tying, or much longer (up to , eight meters) for tasks such as for leading packhorses or for picketing a horse out to graze.

Some horses, particularly stallions, may have a chain attached to the lead rope and placed over the nose or under the jaw to increase the control provided by a halter while being led. Most of the time, horses are not ridden with a halter, as it offers insufficient precision and control. Halters have no bit.

In Australian and British English, a &quot;halter&quot; is a rope with a spliced running loop around the nose and another over the poll, used mainly for unbroken horses or for cattle. The lead rope cannot be removed from the halter. A show halter is made from rolled leather and the lead attaches to form the chinpiece of the noseband. These halters are not suitable for paddock usage or in loose stalls. An &quot;underhalter&quot; is a lightweight halter or headcollar which is made with only one small buckle, and can be worn under a bridle for tethering a horse without untacking.

===Bridles===
Bridles usually have a &quot;bit&quot; attached to &quot;reins&quot; and are used for riding and driving horses.

&quot;English Bridles&quot; have a &quot;cavesson&quot; style noseband and are seen in English riding. Their reins are buckled to one another, and they have little adornment or flashy hardware.

&quot;Western Bridles&quot; used in Western riding usually have no noseband, are made of thin bridle leather. They may have long, separated &quot;Split&quot; reins or shorter closed reins, which sometimes include an attached &quot;Romal&quot;. Western bridles are often adorned with silver or other decorative features.

&quot;Double bridles&quot; are a type of English bridle that use two bits in the mouth at once, a snaffle and a curb. The two bits allow the rider to have very precise control of the horse. As a rule, only very advanced horses and riders use double bridles. Double bridles are usually seen in the top levels of dressage, but also are seen in certain types of show hack and Saddle seat competition.

===Hackamores and other bitless designs===

A &quot;hackamore&quot; is a headgear that utilizes a heavy noseband of some sort, rather than a bit, most often used to train young horses or to go easy on an older horse&#x27;s mouth. Hackamores are more often seen in western riding. Some related styles of headgear that control a horse with a noseband rather than a bit are known as bitless bridles.

The word &quot;hackamore&quot; is derived from the Spanish word &quot;jáquima.&quot; Hackamores are seen in western riding disciplines, as well as in endurance riding and English riding disciplines such as show jumping and the stadium phase of eventing. While the classic bosal-style hackamore is usually used to start young horses, other designs, such as various bitless bridles and the mechanical hackamore are often seen on mature horses with dental issues that make bit use painful, horses with certain training problems, and on horses with mouth or tongue injuries. Some riders also like to use them in the winter to avoid putting a frozen metal bit into a horse&#x27;s mouth.

Like bitted bridles, noseband-based designs can be gentle or harsh, depending on the hands of the rider. It is a myth that a bit is cruel and a hackamore is gentler. The horse&#x27;s face is very soft and sensitive with many nerve endings. Misuse of a hackamore can cause swelling on the nose, scraping on the nose and jawbone, and extreme misuse may cause damage to the bones and cartilage of the horse&#x27;s head.

===Other headgear===
A &quot;longeing cavesson&quot; (UK: &quot;lungeing&quot;) is a special type of halter or noseband used for longeing a horse. Longeing is the activity of having a horse walk, trot and/or canter in a large circle around the handler at the end of a rope that is 25 to long. It is used for training and exercise.

A &quot;neck rope&quot; or &quot;cordeo&quot; is a rope tied around a horse&#x27;s neck used to guide the horse during bridleless riding or groundwork.

== Reins ==

Reins consist of leather straps or rope attached to the outer ends of a &quot;bit&quot; and extend to the rider&#x27;s or driver&#x27;s hands. Reins are the means by which a horse rider or driver communicates directional commands to the horse&#x27;s head. Pulling on the reins can be used to steer or stop the horse. The sides of a horse&#x27;s mouth are sensitive, so pulling on the reins pulls the bit, which then pulls the horse&#x27;s head from side to side, which is how the horse is controlled.

On some types of harnesses there might be supporting rings to carry the reins over the horse&#x27;s back. When pairs of horses are used in drawing a wagon or coach it is usual for the outer side of each pair to be connected to reins and the inside of the bits connected by a short bridging strap or rope. The driver carries &quot;four-in-hand&quot; or &quot;six-in-hand&quot; being the number of reins connecting to the pairs of horses.

A rein may be attached to a halter to lead or guide the horse in a circle for training purposes or to lead a packhorse, but a simple lead rope is more often used for these purposes. A longe line is sometimes called a &quot;longe rein&quot;, but it is actually a flat line about long, usually made of nylon or cotton web, about one inch wide, thus longer and wider than even a driving rein.

==Bits==

A bit is a device placed in a horse&#x27;s mouth, kept on a horse&#x27;s head by means of a headstall. There are many types, each useful for specific types of riding and training.

The mouthpiece of the bit does not rest on the teeth of the horse, but rather rests on the gums or &quot;bars&quot; of the horse&#x27;s mouth in an interdental space behind the front incisors and in front of the back molars. It is important that the style of bit is appropriate to the horse&#x27;s needs and is fitted properly for it to function properly and be as comfortable as possible for the horse.

The basic &quot;classic&quot; styles of bits are:
*Curb bit
*Snaffle bit
*Pelham bit
*Weymouth or Double Bridle

While there are literally hundreds of types of bit mouthpieces, bit rings and bit shanks, essentially there are really only two broad categories: direct pressure bits, broadly termed snaffle bits; and leverage bits, usually termed curbs.

Bits that act with direct pressure on the tongue and lips of the bit are in the general category of &quot;snaffle&quot; bits. Snaffle bits commonly have a single jointed mouthpiece and act with a nutcracker effect on the bars, tongue and occasionally roof of the mouth. However, regardless of mouthpiece, any bit that operates only on direct pressure is a &quot;snaffle&quot; bit.

Leverage bits have shanks coming off the mouthpiece to create leverage that applies pressure to the poll, chin groove and mouth of the horse are in the category of &quot;curb&quot; bits. Any bit with shanks that works off of leverage is a &quot;curb&quot; bit, regardless of whether the mouthpiece is solid or jointed.

Some combination or hybrid bits combine direct pressure and leverage, such as the Kimblewick or Kimberwicke, which adds slight leverage to a two-rein design that resembles a snaffle; and the four rein designs such as the single mouthpiece Pelham bit and the double bridle, which places a curb and a snaffle bit simultaneously in the horse&#x27;s mouth.

In the wrong hands even the mildest bit can hurt the horse. Conversely, a very severe bit, in the right hands, can transmit subtle commands that cause no pain to the horse. Bit commands should be given with only the quietest movements of the hands, and much steering and stopping should be done with the legs and seat.
== Harness ==

A horse harness is a set of devices and straps that attaches a horse to a cart, carriage, sledge or any other load. There are two main styles of harnesses - breaststrap and collar and hames style. These differ in how the weight of the load is attached. Most Harnesses are made from leather, which is the traditional material for harnesses, though some designs are now made of nylon webbing or synthetic biothane.

A breaststrap harness has a wide leather strap going horizontally across the horses&#x27; breast, attached to the traces and then to the load. This is used only for lighter loads. A collar and hames harness has a collar around the horses&#x27; neck with wood or metal hames in the collar. The traces attach from the hames to the load. This type of harness is needed for heavy draft work.

Both types will also have a bridle and reins. A harness that is used to support shafts, such as on a cart pulled by a single horse, will also have a &quot;saddle&quot; attached to the harness to help the horse support the shafts and &quot;breeching&quot; to brake the forward motion of the vehicle, especially when stopping or moving downhill. Horses guiding vehicles by means of a pole, such as two-horse teams pulling a wagon, a hay-mower, or a dray, will have &quot;pole-straps&quot; attached to the lower part of the horse collar.
==Breastplates and martingales==
Breastplates, breastcollars or breastgirths attach to the front of the saddle, cross the horse&#x27;s chest, and usually have a strap that runs between the horse&#x27;s front legs and attaches to the girth. They keep the saddle from sliding back or sideways. They are usually seen in demanding, fast-paced sports. They are crucial pieces of safety equipment for English riding activities requiring jumping, such as eventing, show jumping, polo, and fox hunting. They are also seen in Western riding events, particularly in rodeo, reining and cutting, where it is particularly important to prevent a saddle from shifting. They may also be worn in other horse show classes for decorative purposes.

A martingale is a piece of equipment that keeps a horse from raising its head too high. Various styles can be used as a control measure, to prevent the horse from avoiding rider commands by raising its head out of position; or as a safety measure to keep the horse from tossing its head high or hard enough to smack its rider in the face.

They are allowed in many types of competition, especially those where speed or jumping may be required, but are not allowed in most &quot;flat&quot; classes at horse shows, though an exception is made in a few classes limited exclusively to young or &quot;green&quot; horses who may not yet be fully trained.

Martingales are usually attached to the horse one of two ways. They are either attached to the center chest ring of a breastplate or, if no breastplate is worn, they are attached by two straps, one that goes around the horse&#x27;s neck, and the other that attaches to the girth, with the martingale itself beginning at the point in the center of the chest where the neck and girth straps intersect.

Martingale types include the standing martingale, running, German, Market Harborough, and Irish.

There are other training devices that fall loosely in the martingale category, in that they use straps attached to the reins or bit which limit the movement of the horse&#x27;s head or add leverage to the rider&#x27;s hands in order to control the horse&#x27;s head. Common devices of this nature include the overcheck, the chambon, de Gogue, grazing reins, draw reins and the &quot;bitting harness&quot; or &quot;bitting rig&quot;. However, most of this equipment is used for training purposes and is not legal in any competition. In some disciplines, use of leverage devices, even in training, is controversial.
==Associated Equipment==
*Crop
*Spurs
*Leg protection
*Horseshoe
*Hoof boot
*Blinkers and Blinders
==See also==

*Glossary of equestrian terms
*Equestrian helmet
*Riding boot

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q950799" start="0" end="4" title="Horse tack" label="Tack"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="45" end="50" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q468739" start="100" end="112" title="domestication of the horse" label="domesticated"/>
<link wikidata="Q192249" start="160" end="167" title="Saddle" label="saddles"/>
<link wikidata="Q191657" start="169" end="177" title="Stirrup" label="stirrups"/>
<link wikidata="Q148558" start="179" end="186" title="Bridle" label="bridles"/>
<link wikidata="Q13403557" start="188" end="195" title="Halter" label="halters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196000" start="197" end="202" title="Rein" label="reins"/>
<link wikidata="Q830004" start="204" end="208" title="Bit (horse)" label="bits"/>
<link wikidata="Q950799" start="267" end="278" title="Horse tack" label="tacking up,"/>
<link wikidata="Q214252" start="386" end="392" title="stable" label="stable"/>
<link wikidata="Q950799" start="399" end="408" title="Horse tack" label="tack room"/>
<link wikidata="Q179226" start="451" end="456" title="horseback riding" label="rider"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037298" start="487" end="491" title="Back (horse)" label="back"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588253" start="512" end="517" title="Girth (tack)" label="girth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217573" start="628" end="633" title="strap" label="strap"/>
<link wikidata="Q283673" start="1088" end="1104" title="Latissimus dorsi" label="Latissimus dorsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954915" start="1328" end="1342" title="English saddle" label="English saddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12072752" start="1360" end="1374" title="Western saddle" label="Western saddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q187916" start="1467" end="1473" title="Horse racing" label="racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824715" start="1483" end="1500" title="Australian Stock Saddle" label="Australian saddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092049" start="1503" end="1513" title="sidesaddle" label="sidesaddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229455" start="1519" end="1528" title="Endurance riding" label="endurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q934269" start="1614" end="1625" title="Breastplate (tack)" label="Breastplate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645518" start="1732" end="1741" title="Surcingle" label="Surcingle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255517" start="1743" end="1750" title="Crupper" label="Crupper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127570" start="1752" end="1761" title="Horse harness" label="Breeching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423546" start="1798" end="1812" title="Saddle blanket" label="Saddle blanket"/>
<link wikidata="Q191657" start="1842" end="1849" title="Stirrup" label="Stirrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q118532" start="2283" end="2294" title="riding boot" label="riding boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3954915" start="2360" end="2374" title="English saddle" label="English saddle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2407" end="2422" title="Stirrup#Stirrup leathers" label="stirrup leather"/>
<link wikidata="Q12072752" start="2541" end="2555" title="Western saddle" label="Western saddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16754216" start="2682" end="2690" title="tapedero" label="tapedero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194462" start="3061" end="3075" title="horses in warfare" label="mounted combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q148558" start="3155" end="3161" title="Bridle" label="Bridle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718948" start="3170" end="3179" title="hackamore" label="hackamore"/>
<link wikidata="Q13403557" start="3188" end="3194" title="halter" label="halter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434121" start="3354" end="3367" title="animal communication" label="communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q13403557" start="3408" end="3414" title="halter" label="halter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227595" start="3827" end="3836" title="packhorse" label="packhorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q757833" start="3904" end="3912" title="Stallion (horse)" label="stallion"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="4364" end="4370" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q830004" start="4816" end="4819" title="bit (horse)" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q179226" start="4873" end="4879" title="equestrianism" label="riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q628839" start="4884" end="4891" title="Driving (horse)" label="driving"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492002" start="4942" end="4950" title="caveson" label="cavesson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492002" start="4963" end="4971" title="noseband" label="noseband"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378628" start="4988" end="5002" title="English riding" label="English riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323015" start="5132" end="5146" title="Western riding" label="Western riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492002" start="5163" end="5171" title="noseband" label="noseband"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361556" start="5327" end="5332" title="Romal" label="Romal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299977" start="5423" end="5436" title="Double bridle" label="Double bridle"/>
<link wikidata="Q216033" start="5728" end="5736" title="dressage" label="dressage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397740" start="5790" end="5801" title="Saddle seat" label="Saddle seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718948" start="5868" end="5877" title="hackamore" label="hackamore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492002" start="5920" end="5928" title="noseband" label="noseband"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323015" start="6080" end="6094" title="western riding" label="western riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497080" start="6196" end="6210" title="bitless bridle" label="bitless bridle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718948" start="6229" end="6238" title="hackamore" label="hackamore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="6265" end="6272" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323015" start="6322" end="6336" title="western riding" label="western riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229455" start="6364" end="6380" title="endurance riding" label="endurance riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378628" start="6385" end="6399" title="English riding" label="English riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q211773" start="6420" end="6432" title="show jumping" label="show jumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q838781" start="6458" end="6466" title="eventing" label="eventing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947105" start="6486" end="6491" title="bosal" label="bosal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497080" start="6578" end="6592" title="bitless bridle" label="bitless bridle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17115983" start="6602" end="6622" title="mechanical hackamore" label="mechanical hackamore"/>
<link wikidata="Q502730" start="7278" end="7287" title="cartilage" label="cartilage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250855" start="7344" end="7361" title="longeing cavesson" label="longeing cavesson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752757" start="7444" end="7452" title="longeing" label="longeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196000" start="7813" end="7818" title="Reins" label="Reins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434121" start="8009" end="8021" title="animal communication" label="communicates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127570" start="8332" end="8339" title="Horse harness" label="harness"/>
<link wikidata="Q859281" start="8464" end="8469" title="wagon" label="wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12334006" start="8473" end="8478" title="coach (vehicle)" label="coach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752757" start="8937" end="8947" title="longeing" label="longe line"/>
<link wikidata="Q830004" start="9156" end="9159" title="Bit (horse)" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5905688" start="9382" end="9400" title="horse teeth" label="teeth of the horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q273543" start="9518" end="9526" title="incisors" label="incisors"/>
<link wikidata="Q189218" start="9552" end="9558" title="molars" label="molars"/>
<link wikidata="Q830004" start="9780" end="9784" title="Bit (horse)" label="bits"/>
<link wikidata="Q356740" start="9791" end="9799" title="Curb bit" label="Curb bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546894" start="9801" end="9812" title="Snaffle bit" label="Snaffle bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q373297" start="9814" end="9824" title="Pelham bit" label="Pelham bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299977" start="9826" end="9851" title="Double bridle" label="Weymouth or Double Bridle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918721" start="9900" end="9914" title="bit mouthpiece" label="bit mouthpiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851422" start="9917" end="9925" title="bit ring" label="bit ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918727" start="9931" end="9940" title="bit shank" label="bit shank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546894" start="10036" end="10047" title="snaffle bit" label="snaffle bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q356740" start="10084" end="10089" title="curb bit" label="curbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918721" start="10385" end="10395" title="bit mouthpiece" label="mouthpiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918727" start="10493" end="10499" title="bit shank" label="shanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225527" start="10574" end="10578" title="poll (livestock)" label="poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918721" start="10761" end="10771" title="bit mouthpiece" label="mouthpiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q830004" start="10799" end="10825" title="bit (horse)" label="combination or hybrid bits"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815345" start="10876" end="10901" title="Kimberwicke" label="Kimblewick or Kimberwicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q373297" start="11033" end="11043" title="Pelham bit" label="Pelham bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299977" start="11052" end="11065" title="double bridle" label="double bridle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151670" start="11373" end="11382" title="riding aids" label="movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127570" start="11484" end="11497" title="horse harness" label="horse harness"/>
<link wikidata="Q234668" start="11556" end="11560" title="cart" label="cart"/>
<link wikidata="Q235356" start="11562" end="11570" title="carriage" label="carriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q181388" start="11572" end="11578" title="sledge" label="sledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q934269" start="11639" end="11650" title="breaststrap" label="breaststrap"/>
<link wikidata="Q152523" start="11655" end="11671" title="Horse collar" label="collar and hames"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127570" start="12010" end="12016" title="trace (tack)" label="traces"/>
<link wikidata="Q152523" start="12109" end="12115" title="horse collar" label="collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q152523" start="12164" end="12169" title="horse collar" label="hames"/>
<link wikidata="Q18562285" start="12266" end="12277" title="Draft horse" label="heavy draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q148558" start="12313" end="12319" title="bridle" label="bridle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196000" start="12324" end="12328" title="rein" label="rein"/>
<link wikidata="Q859281" start="12707" end="12712" title="wagon" label="wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q859281" start="12732" end="12736" title="Wagon" label="dray"/>
<link wikidata="Q934269" start="12853" end="12865" title="Breastplate (tack)" label="Breastplates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378628" start="13215" end="13229" title="English riding" label="English riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q838781" start="13268" end="13276" title="eventing" label="eventing"/>
<link wikidata="Q211773" start="13278" end="13290" title="show jumping" label="show jumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q134211" start="13292" end="13296" title="polo" label="polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q133333" start="13302" end="13313" title="fox hunting" label="fox hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323015" start="13337" end="13351" title="Western riding" label="Western riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q207703" start="13376" end="13381" title="rodeo" label="rodeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185311" start="13383" end="13390" title="reining" label="reining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660416" start="13395" end="13402" title="cutting (sport)" label="cutting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752292" start="13505" end="13515" title="horse show" label="horse show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643129" start="13552" end="13562" title="Martingale (tack)" label="martingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752292" start="14050" end="14060" title="horse show" label="horse show"/>
<link wikidata="Q127445" start="15008" end="15017" title="bearing rein" label="overcheck"/>
<link wikidata="Q386834" start="15023" end="15030" title="chambon" label="chambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577496" start="15032" end="15040" title="gogue" label="de Gogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305994" start="15057" end="15067" title="draw reins and running reins" label="draw reins"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919088" start="15113" end="15124" title="bitting rig" label="bitting rig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515419" start="15339" end="15343" title="Crop (implement)" label="Crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q740732" start="15345" end="15349" title="Spur" label="Spur"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348262" start="15352" end="15366" title="Horse leg protection" label="Leg protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q192130" start="15368" end="15377" title="Horseshoe" label="Horseshoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q490274" start="15379" end="15388" title="Hoof boot" label="Hoof boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265341" start="15390" end="15411" title="Blinkers (horse tack)" label="Blinkers and Blinders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2950573" start="15427" end="15455" title="Glossary of equestrian terms" label="Glossary of equestrian terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718981" start="15457" end="15474" title="Equestrian helmet" label="Equestrian helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q118532" start="15476" end="15487" title="Riding boot" label="Riding boot"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14216" wikidata="Q56475" url="?curid=14216" title="Hausa language">
<text>Hausa (; / ; Ajami: ) is a Chadic language that is spoken by the Hausa people in the northern parts of Nigeria, Ghana, Cameroon, Benin and Togo, and the southern parts of Niger, and Chad, with significant minorities in Ivory Coast. A small number of speakers also exist in Sudan.

Hausa is a member of the Afroasiatic language family and is the most widely spoken language within the Chadic branch of that family. Despite originating from a non-tonal language family, Hausa utilizes differences in pitch to distinguish words and grammar. &quot;Ethnologue&quot; estimated that it was spoken as a first language by some 54 million people and as a second language by another 34 million, bringing the total number of Hausa speakers to an estimated 88 million.

In Nigeria, the Hausa film industry is known as Kannywood.

==Classification==

Hausa belongs to the West Chadic languages subgroup of the Chadic languages group, which in turn is part of the Afroasiatic language family.

==Geographic distribution==
Native speakers of Hausa, the Hausa people, are mostly found in southern Niger and northern Nigeria. The language is used as a lingua franca by non-native speakers in most of northern Nigeria, southern Niger, northern Cameroon, northern Ghana, northern Benin, northern Togo, southern Chad and parts of Sudan.

===By country===
====Nigeria====

In Nigeria, Hausa is dominant throughout the north, but not dominant in the states of Kwara, Kogi and Benue. States (or cities) in which Hausa is spoken predominantly include Kano, Kaduna, Katsina, Daura, Gobir, Zaria, Sokoto, Birnin Kebbi, Gusau, Dutse, Hadejia, Bauchi, Misau, Zamfara, Gombe, Nafada, Maiduguri, Yobe, Yola, Jalingo, Jos, Lafia, Nasarawa, Minna, Kontagora, Keffi and Abuja.

====Niger====
In Niger, Hausa is spoken by up to 53% of the population. It is very popular in the cities of Maradi, Diffa, Tahoua, Zinder, Tillaberi, Dosso, and Agadez.

====Cameroon====
In Cameroon, Hausa is spoken in the north, including the cities of Ngaoundere, Garoua, and Maroua.

====Ghana====
In Ghana, Hausa is the lingua franca of the Zongo communities across the country.

====Benin====
In Benin, Hausa is spoken in the north. Cities where it is spoken include Parakou, Kandi, Natitingou, and Djougou.

====Togo====
In Togo, Hausa is spoken in the north. Cities where it is spoken include Sokode, Kara, and Dapaong.

====Chad====
In Chad, Hausa is spoken in the south. Cities where it is spoken include N&#x27;Djamena.

====Sudan====
In Sudan, Hausa is spoken in almost all the states of Jazirah, Blue Nile, and Kordofan, Darfur States, Gadaref State, Red Sea State, White Nile State, River Nile

==Dialects==
Hausa presents a wide uniformity wherever it is spoken. However, linguists have identified dialect areas with a cluster of features characteristic of each one.

=== Traditional dialects ===
Eastern Hausa dialects include &quot;Dauranci&quot; in Daura, &quot;Kananci&quot; in Kano, &quot;Bausanci&quot; in Bauchi, &quot;Gudduranci&quot; in Katagum Misau and part of Borno, and &quot;Hadejanci&quot; in Hadejiya.

Western Hausa dialects include &quot;Sakkwatanci&quot; in Sokoto, &quot;Katsinanci&quot; in Katsina, &quot;Arewanci&quot; in Gobir, Adar, Kebbi, and Zanhwaranci in Zamfara, and &quot;Kurhwayanci&quot; in Kurfey in Niger. Katsina is transitional between Eastern and Western dialects. Sokoto is used in a variety of classical Hausa literature, and is often known as &quot;Classical Hausa&quot;.

Northern Hausa dialects include &quot;Arewa&quot; (meaning &#x27;North&#x27;) and &quot;Arewaci&quot;.

&quot;Zazzaganci&quot; in Zazzau is the major Southern dialect.

The Daura (&quot;Dauranchi&quot;) and Kano (&quot;Kananci&quot;) dialects are the standard. The BBC, Deutsche Welle, Radio France Internationale and Voice of America offer Hausa services on their international news web sites using Dauranci and Kananci. In recent language development Zazzaganci took over the innovation of writing and speaking the current Hausa language use.

=== Northernmost dialects and loss of tonality ===
The western to eastern Hausa dialects of &quot;Kurhwayanci&quot;, Dam&quot;agaram&quot; and &quot;Adarawa&quot;, represent the traditional northernmost limit of native Hausa communities. These are spoken in the northernmost sahel and mid-Saharan regions in west and central Niger in the Tillaberi, Tahoua, Dosso, Maradi, Agadez and Zinder regions. While mutually comprehensible with other dialects (especially &quot;Sakkwatanci&quot;, and to a lesser extent &quot;Gaananci&quot;), the northernmost dialects have slight grammatical and lexical differences owing to frequent contact with the Zarma, Fula, and Tuareg groups and cultural changes owing to the geographical differences between the grassland and desert zones. These dialects also have the quality of bordering on non-tonal pitch accent dialects.

This link between non-tonality and geographic location is not limited to Hausa alone, but is exhibited in other northern dialects of neighbouring languages; example includes differences within the Songhay language (between the non-tonal northernmost dialects of Koyra Chiini in Timbuktu and Koyraboro Senni in Gao; and the tonal southern Zarma dialect, spoken from western Niger to northern Ghana), and within the Soninke language (between the non-tonal northernmost dialects of Imraguen and Nemadi spoken in east-central Mauritania; and the tonal southern dialects of Senegal, Mali and the Sahel).

=== Ghanaian Hausa dialect ===
The Ghanaian Hausa dialect (&quot;Gaananci&quot;), spoken in Ghana and Togo, is a distinct western native Hausa dialect-bloc with adequate linguistic and media resources available. Separate smaller Hausa dialects are spoken by an unknown number of Hausa further west in parts of Burkina Faso, and in the Haoussa Foulane, Badji Haoussa, Guezou Haoussa, and Ansongo districts of northeastern Mali (where it is designated as a minority language by the Malian government), but there are very little linguistic resources and research done on these particular dialects at this time.

Gaananci forms a separate group from other Western Hausa dialects, as it now falls outside the contiguous Hausa-dominant area, and is usually identified by the use of &quot;c&quot; for &quot;ky&quot;, and &quot;j&quot; for &quot;gy&quot;. This is attributed to the fact that Ghana&#x27;s Hausa population descend from Hausa-Fulani traders settled in the zongo districts of major trade-towns up and down the previous Asante, Gonja and Dagomba kingdoms stretching from the sahel to coastal regions, in particular the cities of Accra (Sabon Zango, Nima), Takoradi and Cape Coast

Gaananci exhibits noted inflected influences from Zarma, Gur, Jula-Bambara, Akan, and Soninke, as Ghana is the westernmost area in which the Hausa language is a major lingua-franca among sahelian/Muslim West Africans, including both Ghanaian and non-Ghanaian zango migrants primarily from the northern regions, or Mali and Burkina Faso. Ghana also marks the westernmost boundary in which the Hausa people inhabit in any considerable number. Immediately west and north of Ghana (in Côte d&#x27;Ivoire, and Burkina Faso), Hausa is abruptly replaced with Dioula–Bambara as the main sahelian/Muslim lingua-franca of what become predominantly Manding areas, and native Hausa-speakers plummet to a very small urban minority.

Because of this, and the presence of surrounding Akan, Gbe, Gur and Mande languages, Gaananci was historically isolated from the other Hausa dialects. Despite this difference, grammatical similarities between &quot;Sakkwatanci&quot; and Ghanaian Hausa determine that the dialect, and the origin of the Ghanaian Hausa people themselves, are derived from the northwestern Hausa area surrounding Sokoto.

Hausa is also widely spoken by non-native Gur, and Mandé Ghanaian Muslims, but differs from Gaananci, and rather has features consistent with non-native Hausa dialects.

=== Other native dialects ===
Hausa is also spoken in various parts of Cameroon and Chad, which combined the mixed dialects of Northern Nigeria and Niger. In addition, Arabic has had a great influence in the way Hausa is spoken by the native Hausa speakers in these areas.

=== Non-native Hausa ===
In West Africa, Hausa&#x27;s use as a lingua franca has given rise to a non-native pronunciation that differs vastly from native pronunciation by way of key omissions of implosive and ejective consonants present in native Hausa dialects, such as &quot;ɗ&quot;, &quot;ɓ&quot; and &quot;kʼ/ƙ&quot;, which are pronounced by non-native speakers as &quot;d&quot;, &quot;b&quot; and &quot;k&quot; respectively. This creates confusion among non-native and native Hausa speakers, as non-native pronunciation does not distinguish words like &#x27; (&quot;correct&quot;) and &#x27; (&quot;one-by-one&quot;). Another difference between native and non-native Hausa is the omission of vowel length in words and change in the standard tone of native Hausa dialects (ranging from native Fulani and Tuareg Hausa-speakers omitting tone altogether, to Hausa speakers with Gur or Yoruba mother tongues using additional tonal structures similar to those used in their native languages). Use of masculine and feminine gender nouns and sentence structure are usually omitted or interchanged, and many native Hausa nouns and verbs are substituted with non-native terms from local languages.

Non-native speakers of Hausa numbered more than 25 million and, in some areas, live close to native Hausa. It has replaced many other languages especially in the north-central and north-eastern part of Nigeria and continues to gain popularity in other parts of Africa as a result of Hausa movies and music which spread out throughout the region.

===Hausa-based pidgins===
There are several pidgin forms of Hausa. Barikanchi was formerly used in the colonial army of Nigeria. Gibanawa is currently in widespread use in Jega in northwestern Nigeria, south of the native Hausa area.

=== Loan words ===
The Hausa language has a long history of borrowing words from other languages, usually from the languages being spoken around and near Hausaland. 
==Phonology==

===Consonants===
Hausa has between 23 and 25 consonant phonemes depending on the speaker.

The three-way contrast between palatals , plain velars , and labialized velars is found only before long and short , e.g. (&#x27;grass&#x27;), (&#x27;to increase&#x27;), (&#x27;shea-nuts&#x27;). Before front vowels, only palatals and labialized velars occur, e.g. (&#x27;jealousy&#x27;) vs. (&#x27;side of body&#x27;). Before rounded vowels, only labialized velars occur, e.g. (&#x27;ringworm&#x27;).

===Glottalic consonants===
Hausa has glottalic consonants (implosives and ejectives) at four or five places of articulation (depending on the dialect). They require movement of the glottis during pronunciation and have a staccato sound.

They are written with modified versions of Latin letters. They can also be denoted with an apostrophe, either before or after depending on the letter, as shown below:

* ɓ / b&#x27;, an implosive consonant, , sometimes ;
* ɗ / d&#x27;, an implosive , sometimes ;
* ts&#x27;, an ejective consonant, or , according to the dialect;
* ch&#x27;, an ejective (does not occur in Kano dialect)
* ƙ / k&#x27;, an ejective ; and are separate consonants;
* ƴ / &#x27;y is a palatal approximant with creaky voice, , found in only a small number of high-frequency words (e.g. &quot;children&quot;, &quot;daughter&quot;). Historically it developed from palatalized .

===Vowels===

Hausa vowels occur in five different vowel qualities, all of which can be short or long, totaling 10 monophthongs. In addition, there are four diphthongs, giving a total number of 14 vocalic phonemes.

In comparison with the long vowels, the short can be similar in quality to the long vowels, mid-centralized to or centralized to .

Medial can be neutralized to , with the rounding depending on the environment.

Medial are neutralized with .

The short can be either similar in quality to the long , or it can be as high as , with possible intermediate pronunciations ().

The 4 diphthongs in Hausa are .

===Tones===
Hausa is a tonal language. Each of its five vowels may have low tone, high tone or falling tone. In standard written Hausa, tone is not marked. In recent linguistic and pedagogical materials, tone is marked by means of diacritics.

:  – low tone: grave accent ()

:  – falling tone: circumflex ()

An acute accent () may be used for high tone, but the usual practice is to leave high tone unmarked.

==Morphology==

===Nouns===
Except for the Zaria and Bauchi dialects spoken south of Kano, Hausa distinguishes between masculine and feminine genders.

Hausa, like the rest of the Chadic languages in particular and Afro-Asiatic languages in general, is known for its complex, irregular pluralization of nouns. Noun plurals in Hausa are derived using a variety of morphological processes, such as suffixation, infixation, reduplication, or a combination of any of these processes. There are 20 plural classes proposed by Newman (2000).

===Pronouns===
Hausa marks tense differences by different sets of subject pronouns, sometimes with the pronoun combined with some additional particle. For this reason, a subject pronoun must accompany every verb in Hausa, regardless of whether the subject is known from previous context or is expressed by a noun subject.

===Verbs===
Hausa verbs are classified into 7 grades and are inflected based on whether they are followed by an object.

* Grade 1: Example: &quot;kāmā̀&quot; (to take).

* Grade 2: transitive verbs that end in &quot;ā&quot;. Example: &quot;sàyā&quot; (to buy).

* Grade 3: intransitive verbs that end in &quot;a&quot;. Example: &quot;shìga&quot; (to enter).

* Grade 4: Example: &quot;riƙḕ&quot; (to hold).

* Grade 5: Example: &quot;mayar̃&quot; (to put back).

* Grade 6: verbs that end in &quot;o&quot;. Example: &quot;kāwō&quot; (to bring).

* Grade 7: verbs that end in &quot;u&quot;. Example: &quot;kā̀mu&quot; (to get captured).

==Writing systems==

===&quot;Boko&quot; (Latin)===

Hausa&#x27;s modern official orthography is a Latin-based alphabet called &quot;boko&quot;, which was introduced in the 1930s by the British colonial administration.
The letter &quot;ƴ&quot; (y with a right hook) is used only in Niger; in Nigeria it is written &quot;ʼy&quot;.

Tone and vowel length are not marked in writing. So, for example, &quot;from&quot; and &quot;battle&quot; are both written &quot;daga&quot;. The distinction between and (which does not exist for all speakers) is not marked in orthography, but may be indicated with R̃ r̃ for the trill in linguistic transcription.

===&quot;Ajami&quot; (Arabic)===

Hausa has also been written in &quot;ajami&quot;, an Arabic alphabet, since the early 17th century. The first known work to be written in Hausa is Riwayar Nabi Musa by Abdullahi Suka in the 17th century. There is no standard system of using &quot;ajami&quot;, and different writers may use letters with different values. Short vowels are written regularly with the help of vowel marks, which are seldom used in Arabic texts other than the Quran. Many medieval Hausa manuscripts in &quot;ajami&quot;, similar to the Timbuktu Manuscripts, have been discovered recently; some of them even describe constellations and calendars.

As Hausa Ajami script was never recognized and regulated officially, there has never been a top down imposition of a unified convention. Standardization of letters in Ajami has happened over time and in various stages, in synch with neighbouring Ajami traditions, as well as external factors.

In Niger and Nigeria, there exists two general orthographic traditions, each derived from two Quranic orthographic practices. One of these is based on the Quran recitation and inscription of the 8th century religious scholar Hafs ibn Sulayman, the other based on the Quran recitation and inscription of another 8th Century scholar, Warsh. &quot;Hafs&quot; tradition is the most popular across the Muslim world, and especially in Egypt, the Levant, and the Arabian Peninsula. &quot;Warsh&quot; tradition is the second most popular tradition across the Muslim world, and has been especially popular in North Africa, West Africa, and Andalusia.

For example, vowels in Hausa Ajami script, including representation of vowel [e], and differentiation of short versus long vowels, were one of the first aspects to be unified and standardized. Consonants on the other hand, especially consonant letters for representing sounds that don&#x27;t exist in Arabic, took longer to become standardized. Some new letters were even coined in the late 19th and early 20th century, and because of the direct influence of the Boko alphabet (Latin alphabet). For example, whereas previously in writing, sounds [b] and [ɓ] may have usually been written with a singe letter &quot;ba&quot; &quot;, it was the innovation of introducing the separate letter in Latin alphabet that created an impetus for scholars writing in Ajami script, to innovate and introduce a separate Ajami letter for the distinct sound as well.

Below is the list of letters of Hausa Ajami, in both Warsh and Hafs traditions. Beige highlight marks letters that are only used for writing of loan words of Arabic or European origin. Green highlight marks letters that are innovations of Hausa orthography and are not used in Arabic language.

===Other systems===

Hausa is one of three indigenous languages of Nigeria that have been rendered in braille.

At least three other writing systems for Hausa have been proposed or &quot;discovered&quot;. None of these are in active use beyond perhaps some individuals.

* A Hausa alphabet, named in some sources as &quot;Salifou&quot; or &quot;Gobiri&quot;, supposedly of ancient origin and in use north of Maradi, Niger.
* A script that apparently originated with the writing/publishing group Raina Kama in the 1980s.
* A script called &quot;Tafi&quot; proposed in the 1970s(?)

==Oral literature==
In 1905, George Charleton Merrick (a British army officer and Hausa interpreter) published &quot;Hausa Proverbs,&quot; a collection of over 400 proverbs in Hausa (Roman script) with English translations. Here are some of those proverbs: 
*&quot;Fawa biu tana bata hankali&#x27;n kuda.&quot; &quot;Two pieces of meat confuse the mind of the fly (i.e to hesitate between two things).&quot; (#18)
*&quot;Da ayi jiranka ga abinchi, gara akayi ka jira&#x27;n abinchi.&quot; &quot;Better that you should be made to wait for food than that food should be made to wait for you.&quot; (#26)
*&quot;Kunkurru ya so dambe, ba shi da yasa.&quot; &quot;The tortoise wishes to fight with his fists, but he has no fingers (i.e. impotent wrath).&quot; (#45)
*&quot;Komi ya ke chikkin dan kaza, shafu ya deddi da sanninshi.&quot; &quot;Whatever there is inside a chicken, the hawk has been familiar with it for a very long time (i.e. there is not much that you can teach me about that).&quot; (#47)
*&quot;Kaffa&#x27;n woni ba ta wa woni taffia.&quot; &quot;The legs of one man are no good to another for walking.&quot; (#61)
Charles Henry Robinson&#x27;s &quot;Hausa Grammar&quot;, also published in 1905, contains a selection of proverbs in Hausa (Roman script) with English translations; here are a few of those proverbs:
*&quot;Giwa awani gari zomo.&quot; &quot;An elephant is a hare in another town (i.e. a great man is a nobody where no one knows him).&quot;
*&quot;Idan ka rubuta ya tabbatta, idan ka kiyaye ya gudu.&quot; &quot;If you write, the writing remains; if you keep a thing in your mind, it flees away.&quot;
*&quot;Alberkachin kaza kadangari shi kan sha ruan kasko.&quot; &quot;Thanks to the fowl, the lizard finds water to drink in the pot (i.e. if there were no fowls, there would be no water put out; this is said when a man gains some benefit through no virtue of his own).&quot;
*&quot;Karambanin akwai ta gaida kura.&quot; &quot;It is no business of the goat to salute the hyena; i.e. if a man meddles with that which does not concern him, he has only himself to thank for his misfortune.&quot;
*&quot;Haukan kaza amren musuru.&quot; &quot;It is madness for the fowl to marry a cat (i.e. the meaning is practically the same as the preceding).&quot;
A collection of over 100 Hausa proverbs in both Hausa and English translation appears in Volume 2 of R. S. Rattray&#x27;s &quot;Hausa Folklore, Customs, Proverbs, etc. by Malam Shaihu&quot;. The Hausa text is printed both in Arabic script as provided by Malam Shaihu, a Kano-born Hausa teacher, and in Roman transliteration provided by Rattray. Here are some of those proverbs:
*&quot;Hanchi bai san dadin gishiri ba.&quot; &quot;The nose does not know the flavor of the salt.&quot; (#7)
*&quot;Kinwa che ba ta gida, domin hakanan bera ke gada.&quot; &quot;The cat is not at home, because of that the mice are playing.&quot; (#15)
*&quot;Kaza mai-yaya, ita ke tsoro shirwa.&quot; &quot;It is the hen with chicks that fears the hawk.&quot; (#21)
*&quot;Gingidin kunama, kowa ya taba, shi sha kashi.&quot; &quot;The snoozing scorpion, whoever touches it (quickly) gets a blow.&quot; (#39)
*&quot;Harara bai mari ba.&quot; &quot;A frown is not a slap (it does not hurt).&quot; (#43)
Rattray also includes 30 stories told in Hausa by Malam Shaihu: 21 stories with human characters in volume 1, and 9 animal stories in volume 2, featuring a cycle of stories about Gizo, the trickster spider of Hausa tradition.

There are several other collections of traditional Hausa tales available in both Hausa and English translation. J.F. Schon&#x27;s &quot;Magana Hausa&quot; of 1885 includes the Hausa text of 83 tales with an English translation available in some, but not all, editions. In 1914, A.J.N. Tremearne published the Hausa texts of over 170 Hausa stories in &quot;Hausa Folktales&quot;, which features Gizo the trickster spider on its cover, with English translations having appeared earlier in Tremearne&#x27;s &quot;Hausa Superstitions and Customs&quot; and other publications. More recently, Neil Skinner&#x27;s &quot;Hausa Tales and Traditions&quot; provides English translations of the stories that first appeared in 1924 in Frank Edgar’s &quot;Tatsuniyoyi na Hausa&quot;.

==See also==

* History of Niger
* History of Nigeria
* Kanem Empire
* Bornu Empire
* Bayajidda

==References==
==Bibliography==

* Philips, John Edward. “Hausa in the Twentieth Century: An Overview.” in &quot;Sudanic Africa, &quot;vol. 15, 2004, pp. 55–84. online, on Romanization of the language.
* 
* (Now in the public domain).
==External links==
* Omniglot
* Hausa Language Acquisitions at Columbia University Libraries
* Hausa Vocabulary List –World Loanword Database
* Hausa Dictionary at University of Vienna
* &quot;Hausar Yau Da Kullum:&quot; –Intermediate and Advanced Lessons in Hausa Language and Culture
* Robinson, Charles Henry. (1899) &quot;Hausa-English Dictionary&quot;, in both Latin and Ajami, Vol 1. https://archive.org/details/dictionaryhausa01englgoog/page/n2/mode/2up</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q56475" start="0" end="5" title="Hausa language" label="Hausa"/>
<link wikidata="Q125701119" start="13" end="18" title="Hausa Ajami" label="Ajami"/>
<link wikidata="Q33184" start="27" end="42" title="Chadic language" label="Chadic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33938" start="65" end="77" title="Hausa people" label="Hausa people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="103" end="110" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="112" end="117" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="119" end="127" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="129" end="134" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="139" end="143" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="171" end="176" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="182" end="186" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="219" end="230" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="273" end="278" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25268" start="306" end="333" title="Afroasiatic language family" label="Afroasiatic language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q33184" start="384" end="390" title="Chadic" label="Chadic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14790" start="544" end="554" title="Ethnologue" label="Ethnologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q125421" start="645" end="660" title="second language" label="second language"/>
<link wikidata="Q13422621" start="805" end="814" title="Kannywood" label="Kannywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447774" start="858" end="879" title="West Chadic languages" label="West Chadic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33184" start="896" end="912" title="Chadic languages" label="Chadic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q25268" start="949" end="969" title="Afroasiatic languages" label="Afroasiatic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33938" start="1037" end="1049" title="Hausa people" label="Hausa people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="1080" end="1085" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="1099" end="1106" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="1134" end="1147" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="1191" end="1198" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="1209" end="1214" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009" start="1225" end="1233" title="Cameroon" label="Cameroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="1244" end="1249" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="1260" end="1265" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="1276" end="1280" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="1291" end="1295" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="1309" end="1314" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509092" start="1396" end="1401" title="Northern Nigeria" label="north"/>
<link wikidata="Q464953" start="1437" end="1442" title="Kwara" label="Kwara"/>
<link wikidata="Q387745" start="1444" end="1448" title="Kogi State" label="Kogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q429908" start="1453" end="1458" title="Benue State" label="Benue"/>
<link wikidata="Q182984" start="1526" end="1530" title="Kano, Nigeria" label="Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q208318" start="1532" end="1538" title="Kaduna" label="Kaduna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173023" start="1549" end="1554" title="Daura" label="Daura"/>
<link wikidata="Q147975" start="1563" end="1568" title="Zaria" label="Zaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q865828" start="1578" end="1590" title="Birnin Kebbi" label="Birnin Kebbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q600405" start="1592" end="1597" title="Gusau" label="Gusau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023713" start="1599" end="1604" title="Dutse" label="Dutse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637733" start="1606" end="1613" title="Hadejia" label="Hadejia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078475" start="1623" end="1628" title="Misau" label="Misau"/>
<link wikidata="Q145793" start="1630" end="1637" title="Zamfara State" label="Zamfara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6958144" start="1646" end="1652" title="Nafada" label="Nafada"/>
<link wikidata="Q682777" start="1665" end="1669" title="Yobe" label="Yobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q994114" start="1671" end="1675" title="Yola, Nigeria" label="Yola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023720" start="1677" end="1684" title="Jalingo" label="Jalingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q321079" start="1686" end="1689" title="Jos" label="Jos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023721" start="1691" end="1696" title="Lafia" label="Lafia"/>
<link wikidata="Q836645" start="1698" end="1706" title="Nasarawa State" label="Nasarawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q994129" start="1715" end="1724" title="Kontagora" label="Kontagora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510599" start="1726" end="1731" title="Keffi" label="Keffi"/>
<link wikidata="Q664550" start="1852" end="1858" title="Maradi, Niger" label="Maradi"/>
<link wikidata="Q990527" start="1860" end="1865" title="Diffa" label="Diffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q877122" start="1867" end="1873" title="Tahoua" label="Tahoua"/>
<link wikidata="Q204365" start="1875" end="1881" title="Zinder" label="Zinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011866" start="1883" end="1892" title="Tillaberi" label="Tillaberi"/>
<link wikidata="Q985620" start="1894" end="1899" title="Dosso, Niger" label="Dosso"/>
<link wikidata="Q320049" start="1905" end="1911" title="Agadez" label="Agadez"/>
<link wikidata="Q745906" start="1998" end="2008" title="Ngaoundere" label="Ngaoundere"/>
<link wikidata="Q157915" start="2010" end="2016" title="Garoua" label="Garoua"/>
<link wikidata="Q818824" start="2022" end="2028" title="Maroua" label="Maroua"/>
<link wikidata="Q22082421" start="2089" end="2106" title="Zongo community" label="Zongo communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q688324" start="2216" end="2223" title="Parakou" label="Parakou"/>
<link wikidata="Q845666" start="2225" end="2230" title="Kandi, Benin" label="Kandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q994125" start="2232" end="2242" title="Natitingou" label="Natitingou"/>
<link wikidata="Q868198" start="2248" end="2255" title="Djougou" label="Djougou"/>
<link wikidata="Q845097" start="2344" end="2350" title="Sokode" label="Sokode"/>
<link wikidata="Q860729" start="2352" end="2356" title="Kara, Togo" label="Kara"/>
<link wikidata="Q970904" start="2362" end="2369" title="Dapaong" label="Dapaong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3659" start="2458" end="2472" title="N&amp;#x27;Djamena" label="N&amp;#x27;Djamena"/>
<link wikidata="Q309469" start="2543" end="2550" title="Al Jazirah, Sudan" label="Jazirah"/>
<link wikidata="Q309489" start="2552" end="2561" title="Blue Nile, Sudan" label="Blue Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q867052" start="2567" end="2575" title="Kordofan" label="Kordofan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="2869" end="2876" title="dialect" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173023" start="2910" end="2915" title="Daura" label="Daura"/>
<link wikidata="Q182984" start="2940" end="2944" title="Kano (city)" label="Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q503936" start="2970" end="2976" title="Bauchi" label="Bauchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375000" start="3004" end="3011" title="Katagum" label="Katagum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078475" start="3012" end="3017" title="Misau" label="Misau"/>
<link wikidata="Q130626" start="3030" end="3035" title="Borno State" label="Borno"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637733" start="3066" end="3074" title="Hadejia" label="Hadejiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q503941" start="3135" end="3141" title="Sokoto" label="Sokoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q657821" start="3169" end="3176" title="Katsina" label="Katsina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533541" start="3202" end="3207" title="Gobir" label="Gobir"/>
<link wikidata="Q212779" start="3209" end="3213" title="Adar" label="Adar"/>
<link wikidata="Q748523" start="3215" end="3220" title="Kebbi State" label="Kebbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q145793" start="3241" end="3248" title="Zamfara" label="Zamfara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3281" end="3287" title="Kurfey" label="Kurfey"/>
<link wikidata="Q657821" start="3298" end="3305" title="Katsina" label="Katsina"/>
<link wikidata="Q503941" start="3360" end="3366" title="Sokoto" label="Sokoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q108067984" start="3401" end="3417" title="Hausa literature" label="Hausa literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789122" start="3509" end="3514" title="Arewa" label="Arewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8067629" start="3601" end="3607" title="Zazzau" label="Zazzau"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="3736" end="3739" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q153770" start="3741" end="3755" title="Deutsche Welle" label="Deutsche Welle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19912" start="3757" end="3784" title="Radio France Internationale" label="Radio France Internationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q228389" start="3789" end="3805" title="Voice of America" label="Voice of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="4292" end="4297" title="sahel" label="sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="4306" end="4312" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="4342" end="4347" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011866" start="4355" end="4364" title="Tillaberi" label="Tillaberi"/>
<link wikidata="Q877122" start="4366" end="4372" title="Tahoua" label="Tahoua"/>
<link wikidata="Q850055" start="4374" end="4379" title="Dosso Region" label="Dosso"/>
<link wikidata="Q850036" start="4381" end="4387" title="Maradi Region" label="Maradi"/>
<link wikidata="Q320049" start="4389" end="4395" title="Agadez" label="Agadez"/>
<link wikidata="Q204365" start="4400" end="4406" title="Zinder" label="Zinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q148004" start="4658" end="4663" title="Zarma people" label="Zarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q202575" start="4665" end="4669" title="Fula people" label="Fula"/>
<link wikidata="Q58843" start="4675" end="4681" title="Tuareg people" label="Tuareg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441804" start="4851" end="4863" title="pitch accent" label="pitch accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q505198" start="5072" end="5088" title="Songhay language" label="Songhay language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33600" start="5137" end="5149" title="Koyra Chiini" label="Koyra Chiini"/>
<link wikidata="Q9427" start="5153" end="5161" title="Timbuktu" label="Timbuktu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35655" start="5166" end="5181" title="Koyraboro Senni" label="Koyraboro Senni"/>
<link wikidata="Q188904" start="5185" end="5188" title="Gao" label="Gao"/>
<link wikidata="Q36990" start="5213" end="5218" title="Zarma language" label="Zarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="5248" end="5253" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="5266" end="5271" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="5289" end="5305" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660486" start="5354" end="5362" title="Imraguen language" label="Imraguen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5367" end="5373" title="Nemadi" label="Nemadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025" start="5397" end="5407" title="Mauritania" label="Mauritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="5444" end="5451" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="5453" end="5457" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="5466" end="5471" title="Sahel" label="Sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15307583" start="5510" end="5518" title="Ghanaian" label="Ghanaian"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="5567" end="5572" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="5577" end="5581" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="5785" end="5797" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q5651523" start="5810" end="5825" title="Haoussa Foulane" label="Haoussa Foulane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620152" start="5862" end="5869" title="Ansongo" label="Ansongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="5896" end="5900" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466276" start="6402" end="6414" title="Hausa-Fulani" label="Hausa-Fulani"/>
<link wikidata="Q22082421" start="6438" end="6443" title="Zongo settlements" label="zongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q722071" start="6500" end="6506" title="Ashanti Empire" label="Asante"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477754" start="6508" end="6513" title="Gonja people" label="Gonja"/>
<link wikidata="Q592821" start="6518" end="6525" title="Dagomba people" label="Dagomba"/>
<link wikidata="Q66065" start="6555" end="6560" title="sahel" label="sahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761" start="6609" end="6614" title="Accra" label="Accra"/>
<link wikidata="Q105721369" start="6616" end="6627" title="Sabon Zango" label="Sabon Zango"/>
<link wikidata="Q15045727" start="6629" end="6633" title="Nima, Accra" label="Nima"/>
<link wikidata="Q243293" start="6636" end="6644" title="Takoradi" label="Takoradi"/>
<link wikidata="Q221283" start="6649" end="6659" title="Cape Coast" label="Cape Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q36990" start="6711" end="6716" title="Zarma language" label="Zarma"/>
<link wikidata="Q33536" start="6718" end="6721" title="Gur languages" label="Gur"/>
<link wikidata="Q32706" start="6723" end="6727" title="Dyula language" label="Jula"/>
<link wikidata="Q33243" start="6728" end="6735" title="Bambara language" label="Bambara"/>
<link wikidata="Q28026" start="6737" end="6741" title="Akan language" label="Akan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36660" start="6747" end="6754" title="Soninke language" label="Soninke"/>
<link wikidata="Q22082421" start="6920" end="6925" title="Zongo settlements" label="zango"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="6975" end="6979" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="6984" end="6996" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q33938" start="7053" end="7065" title="Hausa people" label="Hausa people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="7142" end="7160" title="Côte d&amp;#x27;Ivoire" label="Côte d&amp;#x27;Ivoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q32706" start="7213" end="7219" title="Dioula language" label="Dioula"/>
<link wikidata="Q33243" start="7220" end="7227" title="Bambara language" label="Bambara"/>
<link wikidata="Q35772" start="7299" end="7306" title="Manding languages" label="Manding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658486" start="7430" end="7434" title="Central Tano languages" label="Akan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668284" start="7436" end="7439" title="Gbe languages" label="Gbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33536" start="7441" end="7444" title="Gur languages" label="Gur"/>
<link wikidata="Q33681" start="7449" end="7464" title="Mande languages" label="Mande languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33536" start="7825" end="7828" title="Gur languages" label="Gur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407391" start="7834" end="7839" title="Mandé peoples" label="Mandé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509092" start="8080" end="8096" title="Northern Nigeria" label="Northern Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="8255" end="8266" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="8290" end="8303" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q849417" start="8422" end="8431" title="Implosive consonant" label="implosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q827454" start="8436" end="8444" title="Ejective consonant" label="ejective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110362" start="8924" end="8936" title="vowel length" label="vowel length"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="8973" end="8977" title="tonal languages" label="tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q202575" start="9024" end="9030" title="Fulani" label="Fulani"/>
<link wikidata="Q58843" start="9035" end="9041" title="Tuareg people" label="Tuareg"/>
<link wikidata="Q33536" start="9106" end="9109" title="Gur languages" label="Gur"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="9113" end="9119" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="9120" end="9133" title="mother tongue" label="mother tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="9249" end="9255" title="Grammatical gender" label="gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q33831" start="9812" end="9818" title="pidgin" label="pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3450802" start="9835" end="9845" title="Barikanchi" label="Barikanchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q250774" start="9871" end="9884" title="military of Nigeria" label="colonial army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707534" start="9940" end="9944" title="Jega, Nigeria" label="Jega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591030" start="10157" end="10166" title="Hausaland" label="Hausaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q231978" start="10306" end="10314" title="Palatal consonant" label="palatals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4026169" start="10714" end="10733" title="glottalic consonant" label="glottalic consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q214090" start="10778" end="10800" title="place of articulation" label="places of articulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184377" start="10873" end="10886" title="pronunciation" label="pronunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q466944" start="10898" end="10906" title="staccato" label="staccato"/>
<link wikidata="Q436048" start="11006" end="11016" title="apostrophe" label="apostrophe"/>
<link wikidata="Q849417" start="11101" end="11120" title="implosive consonant" label="implosive consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q827454" start="11193" end="11211" title="ejective consonant" label="ejective consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q231978" start="11378" end="11385" title="Palatal consonant" label="palatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q51606" start="11386" end="11397" title="approximant" label="approximant"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084827" start="11403" end="11415" title="creaky voice" label="creaky voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q932126" start="11684" end="11695" title="monophthong" label="monophthong"/>
<link wikidata="Q102532" start="11726" end="11735" title="diphthong" label="diphthong"/>
<link wikidata="Q190627" start="11877" end="11892" title="mid-centralized" label="mid-centralized"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="12214" end="12228" title="tonal language" label="tonal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="12247" end="12252" title="vowel" label="vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q627319" start="12450" end="12462" title="grave accent" label="grave accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11175" start="12486" end="12496" title="circumflex" label="circumflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q216042" start="12504" end="12516" title="acute accent" label="acute accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q147975" start="12646" end="12651" title="Zaria" label="Zaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q503936" start="12656" end="12662" title="Bauchi" label="Bauchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q182984" start="12688" end="12692" title="Kano (city)" label="Kano"/>
<link wikidata="Q33184" start="12783" end="12799" title="Chadic languages" label="Chadic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q25268" start="12818" end="12840" title="Afroasiatic languages" label="Afro-Asiatic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905" start="13480" end="13484" title="verb" label="verb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774805" start="13644" end="13654" title="transitive verbs" label="transitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166153" start="13736" end="13748" title="intransitive verbs" label="intransitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q43091" start="14182" end="14193" title="orthography" label="orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="14199" end="14219" title="Latin script" label="Latin-based alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q891226" start="14233" end="14237" title="Boko (alphabet)" label="boko"/>
<link wikidata="Q394733" start="14336" end="14337" title="ƴ" label="ƴ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="14382" end="14387" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="14392" end="14399" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q125701119" start="14817" end="14822" title="Hausa Ajami" label="ajami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828555" start="14833" end="14848" title="Arabic script" label="Arabic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q775724" start="15153" end="15163" title="ḥarakāt" label="vowel mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2209578" start="15295" end="15315" title="Timbuktu Manuscripts" label="Timbuktu Manuscripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="15375" end="15388" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28892" start="15394" end="15402" title="Islamic calendars" label="calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q125701119" start="15409" end="15420" title="Hausa Ajami" label="Hausa Ajami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="15703" end="15708" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="15713" end="15720" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5940162" start="15925" end="15942" title="Hafs" label="Hafs ibn Sulayman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12250893" start="16032" end="16037" title="Warsh" label="Warsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="16097" end="16109" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim world"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="16129" end="16134" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="16140" end="16146" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="16156" end="16173" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="16251" end="16263" title="Muslim world" label="Muslim world"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="16300" end="16312" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="16314" end="16325" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="16331" end="16340" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q891226" start="16806" end="16819" title="Boko alphabet" label="Boko alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12250893" start="17247" end="17252" title="Warsh" label="Warsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5940162" start="17257" end="17261" title="Hafs" label="Hafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="17471" end="17486" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033034" start="17591" end="17598" title="Hausa Braille" label="braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q850036" start="17897" end="17903" title="Maradi Region" label="Maradi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158925" start="20446" end="20459" title="Robert Sutherland Rattray" label="R. S. Rattray"/>
<link wikidata="Q182984" start="20615" end="20619" title="Kano (city)" label="Kano"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21514" end="21549" title="Cultural depictions of spiders#Africa" label="trickster spider of Hausa tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756789" start="21664" end="21674" title="James Schön" label="J.F. Schon"/>
<link wikidata="Q710044" start="21830" end="21846" title="Arthur John Newman Tremearne" label="A.J.N. Tremearne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480307" start="22339" end="22355" title="History of Niger" label="History of Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435215" start="22358" end="22376" title="History of Nigeria" label="History of Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139762" start="22379" end="22391" title="Kanem Empire" label="Kanem Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139762" start="22394" end="22406" title="Bornu Empire" label="Bornu Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q654091" start="22409" end="22418" title="Bayajidda (mythology)" label="Bayajidda"/>
<link wikidata="Q104761991" start="22455" end="22475" title="John Edward Philips" label="Philips, John Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="22639" end="22652" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q165980" start="22819" end="22839" title="University of Vienna" label="University of Vienna"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14220" wikidata="Q185264" url="?curid=14220" title="History of mathematics">
<text>The history of mathematics deals with the origin of discoveries in mathematics and the mathematical methods and notation of the past. Before the modern age and the worldwide spread of knowledge, written examples of new mathematical developments have come to light only in a few locales. From 3000 BC the Mesopotamian states of Sumer, Akkad and Assyria, followed closely by Ancient Egypt and the Levantine state of Ebla began using arithmetic, algebra and geometry for purposes of taxation, commerce, trade and also in the field of astronomy to record time and formulate calendars.

The earliest mathematical texts available are from Mesopotamia and Egypt – &quot;Plimpton 322&quot; (Babylonian – 1900 BC), the &quot;Rhind Mathematical Papyrus&quot; (Egyptian c. 1800 BC) and the &quot;Moscow Mathematical Papyrus&quot; (Egyptian c. 1890 BC). All of these texts mention the so-called Pythagorean triples, so, by inference, the Pythagorean theorem seems to be the most ancient and widespread mathematical development after basic arithmetic and geometry.

The study of mathematics as a &quot;demonstrative discipline&quot; began in the 6th century BC with the Pythagoreans, who coined the term &quot;mathematics&quot; from the ancient Greek &quot;μάθημα&quot; (&quot;mathema&quot;), meaning &quot;subject of instruction&quot;. Greek mathematics greatly refined the methods (especially through the introduction of deductive reasoning and mathematical rigor in proofs) and expanded the subject matter of mathematics. The ancient Romans used applied mathematics in surveying, structural engineering, mechanical engineering, bookkeeping, creation of lunar and solar calendars, and even arts and crafts. Chinese mathematics made early contributions, including a place value system and the first use of negative numbers. The Hindu–Arabic numeral system and the rules for the use of its operations, in use throughout the world today evolved over the course of the first millennium AD in India and were transmitted to the Western world via Islamic mathematics through the work of Muḥammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī. Islamic mathematics, in turn, developed and expanded the mathematics known to these civilizations. Contemporaneous with but independent of these traditions were the mathematics developed by the Maya civilization of Mexico and Central America, where the concept of zero was given a standard symbol in Maya numerals.

Many Greek and Arabic texts on mathematics were translated into Latin from the 12th century onward, leading to further development of mathematics in Medieval Europe. From ancient times through the Middle Ages, periods of mathematical discovery were often followed by centuries of stagnation. Beginning in Renaissance Italy in the 15th century, new mathematical developments, interacting with new scientific discoveries, were made at an increasing pace that continues through the present day. This includes the groundbreaking work of both Isaac Newton and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz in the development of infinitesimal calculus during the course of the 17th century and following discoveries of German mathematicians like Carl Friedrich Gauss and David Hilbert.

== Prehistoric ==
The origins of mathematical thought lie in the concepts of number, patterns in nature, magnitude, and form. Modern studies of animal cognition have shown that these concepts are not unique to humans. Such concepts would have been part of everyday life in hunter-gatherer societies. The idea of the &quot;number&quot; concept evolving gradually over time is supported by the existence of languages which preserve the distinction between &quot;one&quot;, &quot;two&quot;, and &quot;many&quot;, but not of numbers larger than two.

The use of yarn by Neanderthals some 40,000 years ago at a site in Abri du Maras in the south of France suggests they knew basic concepts in mathematics. The Ishango bone, found near the headwaters of the Nile river (northeastern Congo), may be more than 20,000 years old and consists of a series of marks carved in three columns running the length of the bone. Common interpretations are that the Ishango bone shows either a &quot;tally&quot; of the earliest known demonstration of sequences of prime numbers or a six-month lunar calendar. Peter Rudman argues that the development of the concept of prime numbers could only have come about after the concept of division, which he dates to after 10,000 BC, with prime numbers probably not being understood until about 500 BC. He also writes that &quot;no attempt has been made to explain why a tally of something should exhibit multiples of two, prime numbers between 10 and 20, and some numbers that are almost multiples of 10.&quot; The Ishango bone, according to scholar Alexander Marshack, may have influenced the later development of mathematics in Egypt as, like some entries on the Ishango bone, Egyptian arithmetic also made use of multiplication by 2; this however, is disputed.

Predynastic Egyptians of the 5th millennium BC pictorially represented geometric designs. It has been claimed that megalithic monuments in England and Scotland, dating from the 3rd millennium BC, incorporate geometric ideas such as circles, ellipses, and Pythagorean triples in their design. All of the above are disputed however, and the currently oldest undisputed mathematical documents are from Babylonian and dynastic Egyptian sources.

== Babylonian ==
Babylonian mathematics refers to any mathematics of the peoples of Mesopotamia (modern Iraq) from the days of the early Sumerians through the Hellenistic period almost to the dawn of Christianity. The majority of Babylonian mathematical work comes from two widely separated periods: The first few hundred years of the second millennium BC (Old Babylonian period), and the last few centuries of the first millennium BC (Seleucid period). It is named Babylonian mathematics due to the central role of Babylon as a place of study. Later under the Arab Empire, Mesopotamia, especially Baghdad, once again became an important center of study for Islamic mathematics.
In contrast to the sparsity of sources in Egyptian mathematics, knowledge of Babylonian mathematics is derived from more than 400 clay tablets unearthed since the 1850s. Written in Cuneiform script, tablets were inscribed whilst the clay was moist, and baked hard in an oven or by the heat of the sun. Some of these appear to be graded homework.

The earliest evidence of written mathematics dates back to the ancient Sumerians, who built the earliest civilization in Mesopotamia. They developed a complex system of metrology from 3000 BC that was chiefly concerned with administrative/financial counting, such as grain allotments, workers, weights of silver, or even liquids, among other things. From around 2500 BC onward, the Sumerians wrote multiplication tables on clay tablets and dealt with geometrical exercises and division problems. The earliest traces of the Babylonian numerals also date back to this period.
Babylonian mathematics were written using a sexagesimal (base-60) numeral system. From this derives the modern-day usage of 60 seconds in a minute, 60 minutes in an hour, and 360 (60 × 6) degrees in a circle, as well as the use of seconds and minutes of arc to denote fractions of a degree. It is thought the sexagesimal system was initially used by Sumerian scribes because 60 can be evenly divided by 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 10, 12, 15, 20 and 30, and for scribes (doling out the aforementioned grain allotments, recording weights of silver, etc.) being able to easily calculate by hand was essential, and so a sexagesimal system is pragmatically easier to calculate by hand with; however, there is the possibility that using a sexagesimal system was an ethno-linguistic phenomenon (that might not ever be known), and not a mathematical/practical decision. Also, unlike the Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans, the Babylonians had a place-value system, where digits written in the left column represented larger values, much as in the decimal system. The power of the Babylonian notational system lay in that it could be used to represent fractions as easily as whole numbers; thus multiplying two numbers that contained fractions was no different from multiplying integers, similar to modern notation. The notational system of the Babylonians was the best of any civilization until the Renaissance, and its power allowed it to achieve remarkable computational accuracy; for example, the Babylonian tablet YBC 7289 gives an approximation of accurate to five decimal places. The Babylonians lacked, however, an equivalent of the decimal point, and so the place value of a symbol often had to be inferred from the context. By the Seleucid period, the Babylonians had developed a zero symbol as a placeholder for empty positions; however it was only used for intermediate positions. This zero sign does not appear in terminal positions, thus the Babylonians came close but did not develop a true place value system.

Other topics covered by Babylonian mathematics include fractions, algebra, quadratic and cubic equations, and the calculation of regular numbers, and their reciprocal pairs. The tablets also include multiplication tables and methods for solving linear, quadratic equations and cubic equations, a remarkable achievement for the time. Tablets from the Old Babylonian period also contain the earliest known statement of the Pythagorean theorem. However, as with Egyptian mathematics, Babylonian mathematics shows no awareness of the difference between exact and approximate solutions, or the solvability of a problem, and most importantly, no explicit statement of the need for proofs or logical principles.

== Egyptian ==
Egyptian mathematics refers to mathematics written in the Egyptian language. From the Hellenistic period, Greek replaced Egyptian as the written language of Egyptian scholars. Mathematical study in Egypt later continued under the Arab Empire as part of Islamic mathematics, when Arabic became the written language of Egyptian scholars. Archaeological evidence has suggested that the Ancient Egyptian counting system had origins in Sub-Saharan Africa. Also, fractal geometry designs which are widespread among Sub-Saharan African cultures are also found in Egyptian architecture and cosmological signs.

The most extensive Egyptian mathematical text is the Rhind papyrus (sometimes also called the Ahmes Papyrus after its author), dated to c. 1650 BC but likely a copy of an older document from the Middle Kingdom of about 2000–1800 BC. It is an instruction manual for students in arithmetic and geometry. In addition to giving area formulas and methods for multiplication, division and working with unit fractions, it also contains evidence of other mathematical knowledge, including composite and prime numbers; arithmetic, geometric and harmonic means; and simplistic understandings of both the Sieve of Eratosthenes and perfect number theory (namely, that of the number 6). It also shows how to solve first order linear equations as well as arithmetic and geometric series.

Another significant Egyptian mathematical text is the Moscow papyrus, also from the Middle Kingdom period, dated to c. 1890 BC. It consists of what are today called &quot;word problems&quot; or &quot;story problems&quot;, which were apparently intended as entertainment. One problem is considered to be of particular importance because it gives a method for finding the volume of a frustum (truncated pyramid).

Finally, the Berlin Papyrus 6619 (c. 1800 BC) shows that ancient Egyptians could solve a second-order algebraic equation.

== Greek ==
Greek mathematics refers to the mathematics written in the Greek language from the time of Thales of Miletus (~600 BC) to the closure of the Academy of Athens in 529 AD. Greek mathematicians lived in cities spread over the entire Eastern Mediterranean, from Italy to North Africa, but were united by culture and language. Greek mathematics of the period following Alexander the Great is sometimes called Hellenistic mathematics.

Greek mathematics was much more sophisticated than the mathematics that had been developed by earlier cultures. All surviving records of pre-Greek mathematics show the use of inductive reasoning, that is, repeated observations used to establish rules of thumb. Greek mathematicians, by contrast, used deductive reasoning. The Greeks used logic to derive conclusions from definitions and axioms, and used mathematical rigor to prove them.

Greek mathematics is thought to have begun with Thales of Miletus (c. 624–c.546 BC) and Pythagoras of Samos (c. 582–c. 507 BC). Although the extent of the influence is disputed, they were probably inspired by Egyptian and Babylonian mathematics. According to legend, Pythagoras traveled to Egypt to learn mathematics, geometry, and astronomy from Egyptian priests.

Thales used geometry to solve problems such as calculating the height of pyramids and the distance of ships from the shore. He is credited with the first use of deductive reasoning applied to geometry, by deriving four corollaries to Thales&#x27; Theorem. As a result, he has been hailed as the first true mathematician and the first known individual to whom a mathematical discovery has been attributed. Pythagoras established the Pythagorean School, whose doctrine it was that mathematics ruled the universe and whose motto was &quot;All is number&quot;. It was the Pythagoreans who coined the term &quot;mathematics&quot;, and with whom the study of mathematics for its own sake begins. The Pythagoreans are credited with the first proof of the Pythagorean theorem, though the statement of the theorem has a long history, and with the proof of the existence of irrational numbers. Although he was preceded by the Babylonians, Indians and the Chinese, the Neopythagorean mathematician Nicomachus (60–120 AD) provided one of the earliest Greco-Roman multiplication tables, whereas the oldest extant Greek multiplication table is found on a wax tablet dated to the 1st century AD (now found in the British Museum). The association of the Neopythagoreans with the Western invention of the multiplication table is evident in its later Medieval name: the &quot;mensa Pythagorica&quot;.

Plato (428/427 BC – 348/347 BC) is important in the history of mathematics for inspiring and guiding others. His Platonic Academy, in Athens, became the mathematical center of the world in the 4th century BC, and it was from this school that the leading mathematicians of the day, such as Eudoxus of Cnidus (c. 390 - c. 340 BC), came. Plato also discussed the foundations of mathematics, clarified some of the definitions (e.g. that of a line as &quot;breadthless length&quot;).

Eudoxus developed the method of exhaustion, a precursor of modern integration and a theory of ratios that avoided the problem of incommensurable magnitudes. The former allowed the calculations of areas and volumes of curvilinear figures, while the latter enabled subsequent geometers to make significant advances in geometry. Though he made no specific technical mathematical discoveries, Aristotle (384–) contributed significantly to the development of mathematics by laying the foundations of logic.
In the 3rd century BC, the premier center of mathematical education and research was the Musaeum of Alexandria. It was there that Euclid () taught, and wrote the &quot;Elements&quot;, widely considered the most successful and influential textbook of all time. The &quot;Elements&quot; introduced mathematical rigor through the axiomatic method and is the earliest example of the format still used in mathematics today, that of definition, axiom, theorem, and proof. Although most of the contents of the &quot;Elements&quot; were already known, Euclid arranged them into a single, coherent logical framework. The &quot;Elements&quot; was known to all educated people in the West up through the middle of the 20th century and its contents are still taught in geometry classes today. In addition to the familiar theorems of Euclidean geometry, the &quot;Elements&quot; was meant as an introductory textbook to all mathematical subjects of the time, such as number theory, algebra and solid geometry, including proofs that the square root of two is irrational and that there are infinitely many prime numbers. Euclid also wrote extensively on other subjects, such as conic sections, optics, spherical geometry, and mechanics, but only half of his writings survive.
Archimedes (–212 BC) of Syracuse, widely considered the greatest mathematician of antiquity, used the method of exhaustion to calculate the area under the arc of a parabola with the summation of an infinite series, in a manner not too dissimilar from modern calculus. He also showed one could use the method of exhaustion to calculate the value of π with as much precision as desired, and obtained the most accurate value of π then known, . He also studied the spiral bearing his name, obtained formulas for the volumes of surfaces of revolution (paraboloid, ellipsoid, hyperboloid), and an ingenious method of exponentiation for expressing very large numbers. While he is also known for his contributions to physics and several advanced mechanical devices, Archimedes himself placed far greater value on the products of his thought and general mathematical principles. He regarded as his greatest achievement his finding of the surface area and volume of a sphere, which he obtained by proving these are 2/3 the surface area and volume of a cylinder circumscribing the sphere.
Apollonius of Perga (–190 BC) made significant advances to the study of conic sections, showing that one can obtain all three varieties of conic section by varying the angle of the plane that cuts a double-napped cone. He also coined the terminology in use today for conic sections, namely parabola (&quot;place beside&quot; or &quot;comparison&quot;), &quot;ellipse&quot; (&quot;deficiency&quot;), and &quot;hyperbola&quot; (&quot;a throw beyond&quot;). His work &quot;Conics&quot; is one of the best known and preserved mathematical works from antiquity, and in it he derives many theorems concerning conic sections that would prove invaluable to later mathematicians and astronomers studying planetary motion, such as Isaac Newton. While neither Apollonius nor any other Greek mathematicians made the leap to coordinate geometry, Apollonius&#x27; treatment of curves is in some ways similar to the modern treatment, and some of his work seems to anticipate the development of analytical geometry by Descartes some 1800 years later.

Around the same time, Eratosthenes of Cyrene (–194 BC) devised the Sieve of Eratosthenes for finding prime numbers. The 3rd century BC is generally regarded as the &quot;Golden Age&quot; of Greek mathematics, with advances in pure mathematics henceforth in relative decline. Nevertheless, in the centuries that followed significant advances were made in applied mathematics, most notably trigonometry, largely to address the needs of astronomers. Hipparchus of Nicaea (–120 BC) is considered the founder of trigonometry for compiling the first known trigonometric table, and to him is also due the systematic use of the 360 degree circle. Heron of Alexandria (–70 AD) is credited with Heron&#x27;s formula for finding the area of a scalene triangle and with being the first to recognize the possibility of negative numbers possessing square roots. Menelaus of Alexandria () pioneered spherical trigonometry through Menelaus&#x27; theorem. The most complete and influential trigonometric work of antiquity is the &quot;Almagest&quot; of Ptolemy (–168), a landmark astronomical treatise whose trigonometric tables would be used by astronomers for the next thousand years. Ptolemy is also credited with Ptolemy&#x27;s theorem for deriving trigonometric quantities, and the most accurate value of π outside of China until the medieval period, 3.1416.
Following a period of stagnation after Ptolemy, the period between 250 and 350 AD is sometimes referred to as the &quot;Silver Age&quot; of Greek mathematics. During this period, Diophantus made significant advances in algebra, particularly indeterminate analysis, which is also known as &quot;Diophantine analysis&quot;. The study of Diophantine equations and Diophantine approximations is a significant area of research to this day. His main work was the &quot;Arithmetica&quot;, a collection of 150 algebraic problems dealing with exact solutions to determinate and indeterminate equations. The &quot;Arithmetica&quot; had a significant influence on later mathematicians, such as Pierre de Fermat, who arrived at his famous Last Theorem after trying to generalize a problem he had read in the &quot;Arithmetica&quot; (that of dividing a square into two squares). Diophantus also made significant advances in notation, the &quot;Arithmetica&quot; being the first instance of algebraic symbolism and syncopation.
Among the last great Greek mathematicians is Pappus of Alexandria (4th century AD). He is known for his hexagon theorem and centroid theorem, as well as the Pappus configuration and Pappus graph. His &quot;Collection&quot; is a major source of knowledge on Greek mathematics as most of it has survived. Pappus is considered the last major innovator in Greek mathematics, with subsequent work consisting mostly of commentaries on earlier work.

The first woman mathematician recorded by history was Hypatia of Alexandria (AD 350–415). She succeeded her father (Theon of Alexandria) as Librarian at the Great Library and wrote many works on applied mathematics. Because of a political dispute, the Christian community in Alexandria had her stripped publicly and executed. Her death is sometimes taken as the end of the era of the Alexandrian Greek mathematics, although work did continue in Athens for another century with figures such as Proclus, Simplicius and Eutocius. Although Proclus and Simplicius were more philosophers than mathematicians, their commentaries on earlier works are valuable sources on Greek mathematics. The closure of the neo-Platonic Academy of Athens by the emperor Justinian in 529 AD is traditionally held as marking the end of the era of Greek mathematics, although the Greek tradition continued unbroken in the Byzantine empire with mathematicians such as Anthemius of Tralles and Isidore of Miletus, the architects of the Hagia Sophia. Nevertheless, Byzantine mathematics consisted mostly of commentaries, with little in the way of innovation, and the centers of mathematical innovation were to be found elsewhere by this time.

==Roman==
Although ethnic Greek mathematicians continued under the rule of the late Roman Republic and subsequent Roman Empire, there were no noteworthy native Latin mathematicians in comparison. Ancient Romans such as Cicero (106–43 BC), an influential Roman statesman who studied mathematics in Greece, believed that Roman surveyors and calculators were far more interested in applied mathematics than the theoretical mathematics and geometry that were prized by the Greeks. It is unclear if the Romans first derived their numerical system directly from the Greek precedent or from Etruscan numerals used by the Etruscan civilization centered in what is now Tuscany, central Italy.

Using calculation, Romans were adept at both instigating and detecting financial fraud, as well as managing taxes for the treasury. Siculus Flaccus, one of the Roman &quot;gromatici&quot; (i.e. land surveyor), wrote the &quot;Categories of Fields&quot;, which aided Roman surveyors in measuring the surface areas of allotted lands and territories. Aside from managing trade and taxes, the Romans also regularly applied mathematics to solve problems in engineering, including the erection of architecture such as bridges, road-building, and preparation for military campaigns. Arts and crafts such as Roman mosaics, inspired by previous Greek designs, created illusionist geometric patterns and rich, detailed scenes that required precise measurements for each tessera tile, the opus tessellatum pieces on average measuring eight millimeters square and the finer opus vermiculatum pieces having an average surface of four millimeters square.

The creation of the Roman calendar also necessitated basic mathematics. The first calendar allegedly dates back to 8th century BC during the Roman Kingdom and included 356 days plus a leap year every other year. In contrast, the lunar calendar of the Republican era contained 355 days, roughly ten-and-one-fourth days shorter than the solar year, a discrepancy that was solved by adding an extra month into the calendar after the 23rd of February. This calendar was supplanted by the Julian calendar, a solar calendar organized by Julius Caesar (100–44 BC) and devised by Sosigenes of Alexandria to include a leap day every four years in a 365-day cycle. This calendar, which contained an error of 11 minutes and 14 seconds, was later corrected by the Gregorian calendar organized by Pope Gregory XIII (), virtually the same solar calendar used in modern times as the international standard calendar.

At roughly the same time, the Han Chinese and the Romans both invented the wheeled odometer device for measuring distances traveled, the Roman model first described by the Roman civil engineer and architect Vitruvius (). The device was used at least until the reign of emperor Commodus (), but its design seems to have been lost until experiments were made during the 15th century in Western Europe. Perhaps relying on similar gear-work and technology found in the Antikythera mechanism, the odometer of Vitruvius featured chariot wheels measuring 4 feet (1.2 m) in diameter turning four-hundred times in one Roman mile (roughly 4590 ft/1400 m). With each revolution, a pin-and-axle device engaged a 400-tooth cogwheel that turned a second gear responsible for dropping pebbles into a box, each pebble representing one mile traversed.

== Chinese ==


An analysis of early Chinese mathematics has demonstrated its unique development compared to other parts of the world, leading scholars to assume an entirely independent development. The oldest extant mathematical text from China is the &quot;Zhoubi Suanjing&quot; (周髀算經), variously dated to between 1200 BC and 100 BC, though a date of about 300 BC during the Warring States Period appears reasonable. However, the Tsinghua Bamboo Slips, containing the earliest known decimal multiplication table (although ancient Babylonians had ones with a base of 60), is dated around 305 BC and is perhaps the oldest surviving mathematical text of China.
Of particular note is the use in Chinese mathematics of a decimal positional notation system, the so-called &quot;rod numerals&quot; in which distinct ciphers were used for numbers between 1 and 10, and additional ciphers for powers of ten. Thus, the number 123 would be written using the symbol for &quot;1&quot;, followed by the symbol for &quot;100&quot;, then the symbol for &quot;2&quot; followed by the symbol for &quot;10&quot;, followed by the symbol for &quot;3&quot;. This was the most advanced number system in the world at the time, apparently in use several centuries before the common era and well before the development of the Indian numeral system. Rod numerals allowed the representation of numbers as large as desired and allowed calculations to be carried out on the &quot;suan pan&quot;, or Chinese abacus. The date of the invention of the &quot;suan pan&quot; is not certain, but the earliest written mention dates from AD 190, in Xu Yue&#x27;s &quot;Supplementary Notes on the Art of Figures&quot;.

The oldest extant work on geometry in China comes from the philosophical Mohist canon , compiled by the followers of Mozi (470–390 BC). The &quot;Mo Jing&quot; described various aspects of many fields associated with physical science, and provided a small number of geometrical theorems as well. It also defined the concepts of circumference, diameter, radius, and volume.
In 212 BC, the Emperor Qin Shi Huang commanded all books in the Qin Empire other than officially sanctioned ones be burned. This decree was not universally obeyed, but as a consequence of this order little is known about ancient Chinese mathematics before this date. After the book burning of 212 BC, the Han dynasty (202 BC–220 AD) produced works of mathematics which presumably expanded on works that are now lost. The most important of these is &quot;The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art&quot;, the full title of which appeared by AD 179, but existed in part under other titles beforehand. It consists of 246 word problems involving agriculture, business, employment of geometry to figure height spans and dimension ratios for Chinese pagoda towers, engineering, surveying, and includes material on right triangles. It created mathematical proof for the Pythagorean theorem, and a mathematical formula for Gaussian elimination. The treatise also provides values of π, which Chinese mathematicians originally approximated as 3 until Liu Xin (d. 23 AD) provided a figure of 3.1457 and subsequently Zhang Heng (78–139) approximated pi as 3.1724, as well as 3.162 by taking the square root of 10. Liu Hui commented on the &quot;Nine Chapters&quot; in the 3rd century AD and gave a value of π accurate to 5 decimal places (i.e. 3.14159). Though more of a matter of computational stamina than theoretical insight, in the 5th century AD Zu Chongzhi computed the value of π to seven decimal places (between 3.1415926 and 3.1415927), which remained the most accurate value of π for almost the next 1000 years. He also established a method which would later be called Cavalieri&#x27;s principle to find the volume of a sphere.

The high-water mark of Chinese mathematics occurred in the 13th century during the latter half of the Song dynasty (960–1279), with the development of Chinese algebra. The most important text from that period is the &quot;Precious Mirror of the Four Elements&quot; by Zhu Shijie (1249–1314), dealing with the solution of simultaneous higher order algebraic equations using a method similar to Horner&#x27;s method. The &quot;Precious Mirror&quot; also contains a diagram of Pascal&#x27;s triangle with coefficients of binomial expansions through the eighth power, though both appear in Chinese works as early as 1100. The Chinese also made use of the complex combinatorial diagram known as the magic square and magic circles, described in ancient times and perfected by Yang Hui (AD 1238–1298).

Even after European mathematics began to flourish during the Renaissance, European and Chinese mathematics were separate traditions, with significant Chinese mathematical output in decline from the 13th century onwards. Jesuit missionaries such as Matteo Ricci carried mathematical ideas back and forth between the two cultures from the 16th to 18th centuries, though at this point far more mathematical ideas were entering China than leaving.

Japanese mathematics, Korean mathematics, and Vietnamese mathematics are traditionally viewed as stemming from Chinese mathematics and belonging to the Confucian-based East Asian cultural sphere. Korean and Japanese mathematics were heavily influenced by the algebraic works produced during China&#x27;s Song dynasty, whereas Vietnamese mathematics was heavily indebted to popular works of China&#x27;s Ming dynasty (1368–1644). For instance, although Vietnamese mathematical treatises were written in either Chinese or the native Vietnamese Chữ Nôm script, all of them followed the Chinese format of presenting a collection of problems with algorithms for solving them, followed by numerical answers. Mathematics in Vietnam and Korea were mostly associated with the professional court bureaucracy of mathematicians and astronomers, whereas in Japan it was more prevalent in the realm of private schools.

== Indian ==

The earliest civilization on the Indian subcontinent is the Indus Valley civilization (mature second phase: 2600 to 1900 BC) that flourished in the Indus river basin. Their cities were laid out with geometric regularity, but no known mathematical documents survive from this civilization.

The oldest extant mathematical records from India are the Sulba Sutras (dated variously between the 8th century BC and the 2nd century AD), appendices to religious texts which give simple rules for constructing altars of various shapes, such as squares, rectangles, parallelograms, and others. As with Egypt, the preoccupation with temple functions points to an origin of mathematics in religious ritual. The Sulba Sutras give methods for constructing a circle with approximately the same area as a given square, which imply several different approximations of the value of π. In addition, they compute the square root of 2 to several decimal places, list Pythagorean triples, and give a statement of the Pythagorean theorem. All of these results are present in Babylonian mathematics, indicating Mesopotamian influence. It is not known to what extent the Sulba Sutras influenced later Indian mathematicians. As in China, there is a lack of continuity in Indian mathematics; significant advances are separated by long periods of inactivity.

Pāṇini (c. 5th century BC) formulated the rules for Sanskrit grammar. His notation was similar to modern mathematical notation, and used metarules, transformations, and recursion. Pingala (roughly 3rd–1st centuries BC) in his treatise of prosody uses a device corresponding to a binary numeral system. His discussion of the combinatorics of meters corresponds to an elementary version of the binomial theorem. Pingala&#x27;s work also contains the basic ideas of Fibonacci numbers (called &quot;mātrāmeru&quot;).

The next significant mathematical documents from India after the &quot;Sulba Sutras&quot; are the &quot;Siddhantas&quot;, astronomical treatises from the 4th and 5th centuries AD (Gupta period) showing strong Hellenistic influence. They are significant in that they contain the first instance of trigonometric relations based on the half-chord, as is the case in modern trigonometry, rather than the full chord, as was the case in Ptolemaic trigonometry. Through a series of translation errors, the words &quot;sine&quot; and &quot;cosine&quot; derive from the Sanskrit &quot;jiya&quot; and &quot;kojiya&quot;.
Around 500 AD, Aryabhata wrote the &quot;Aryabhatiya&quot;, a slim volume, written in verse, intended to supplement the rules of calculation used in astronomy and mathematical mensuration, though with no feeling for logic or deductive methodology. It is in the &quot;Aryabhatiya&quot; that the decimal place-value system first appears. Several centuries later, the Muslim mathematician Abu Rayhan Biruni described the &quot;Aryabhatiya&quot; as a &quot;mix of common pebbles and costly crystals&quot;.

In the 7th century, Brahmagupta identified the Brahmagupta theorem, Brahmagupta&#x27;s identity and Brahmagupta&#x27;s formula, and for the first time, in &quot;Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta&quot;, he lucidly explained the use of zero as both a placeholder and decimal digit, and explained the Hindu–Arabic numeral system. It was from a translation of this Indian text on mathematics (c. 770) that Islamic mathematicians were introduced to this numeral system, which they adapted as Arabic numerals. Islamic scholars carried knowledge of this number system to Europe by the 12th century, and it has now displaced all older number systems throughout the world. Various symbol sets are used to represent numbers in the Hindu–Arabic numeral system, all of which evolved from the Brahmi numerals. Each of the roughly dozen major scripts of India has its own numeral glyphs. In the 10th century, Halayudha&#x27;s commentary on Pingala&#x27;s work contains a study of the Fibonacci sequence and Pascal&#x27;s triangle, and describes the formation of a matrix.

In the 12th century, Bhāskara II, who lived in southern India, wrote extensively on all then known branches of mathematics. His work contains mathematical objects equivalent or approximately equivalent to infinitesimals, the mean value theorem and the derivative of the sine function although he did not develop the notion of a derivative. In the 14th century, Narayana Pandita completed his &quot;Ganita Kaumudi&quot;.

Also in the 14th century, Madhava of Sangamagrama, the founder of the Kerala School of Mathematics, found the Madhava–Leibniz series and obtained from it a transformed series, whose first 21 terms he used to compute the value of π as 3.14159265359. Madhava also found the Madhava-Gregory series to determine the arctangent, the Madhava-Newton power series to determine sine and cosine and the Taylor approximation for sine and cosine functions. In the 16th century, Jyesthadeva consolidated many of the Kerala School&#x27;s developments and theorems in the &quot;Yukti-bhāṣā&quot;. It has been argued that certain ideas of calculus like infinite series and taylor series of some trigonometry functions, were transmitted to Europe in the 16th century via Jesuit missionaries and traders who were active around the ancient port of Muziris at the time and, as a result, directly influenced later European developments in analysis and calculus. However, other scholars argue that the Kerala School did not formulate a systematic theory of differentiation and integration, and that there is not any direct evidence of their results being transmitted outside Kerala.

== Islamic empires ==

The Islamic Empire established across the Middle East, Central Asia, North Africa, Iberia, and in parts of India in the 8th century made significant contributions towards mathematics. Although most Islamic texts on mathematics were written in Arabic, they were not all written by Arabs, since much like the status of Greek in the Hellenistic world, Arabic was used as the written language of non-Arab scholars throughout the Islamic world at the time.

In the 9th century, the Persian mathematician Muḥammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī wrote an important book on the Hindu–Arabic numerals and one on methods for solving equations. His book &quot;On the Calculation with Hindu Numerals&quot;, written about 825, along with the work of Al-Kindi, were instrumental in spreading Indian mathematics and Indian numerals to the West. The word &quot;algorithm&quot; is derived from the Latinization of his name, Algoritmi, and the word &quot;algebra&quot; from the title of one of his works, &quot;Al-Kitāb al-mukhtaṣar fī hīsāb al-ğabr wa’l-muqābala&quot; (&quot;The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing&quot;). He gave an exhaustive explanation for the algebraic solution of quadratic equations with positive roots, and he was the first to teach algebra in an elementary form and for its own sake. He also discussed the fundamental method of &quot;reduction&quot; and &quot;balancing&quot;, referring to the transposition of subtracted terms to the other side of an equation, that is, the cancellation of like terms on opposite sides of the equation. This is the operation which al-Khwārizmī originally described as &quot;al-jabr&quot;. His algebra was also no longer concerned &quot;with a series of problems to be resolved, but an exposition which starts with primitive terms in which the combinations must give all possible prototypes for equations, which henceforward explicitly constitute the true object of study.&quot; He also studied an equation for its own sake and &quot;in a generic manner, insofar as it does not simply emerge in the course of solving a problem, but is specifically called on to define an infinite class of problems.&quot;

In Egypt, Abu Kamil extended algebra to the set of irrational numbers, accepting square roots and fourth roots as solutions and coefficients to quadratic equations. He also developed techniques used to solve three non-linear simultaneous equations with three unknown variables. One unique feature of his works was trying to find all the possible solutions to some of his problems, including one where he found 2676 solutions. His works formed an important foundation for the development of algebra and influenced later mathematicians, such as al-Karaji and Fibonacci.

Further developments in algebra were made by Al-Karaji in his treatise &quot;al-Fakhri&quot;, where he extends the methodology to incorporate integer powers and integer roots of unknown quantities. Something close to a proof by mathematical induction appears in a book written by Al-Karaji around 1000 AD, who used it to prove the binomial theorem, Pascal&#x27;s triangle, and the sum of integral cubes. The historian of mathematics, F. Woepcke, praised Al-Karaji for being &quot;the first who introduced the theory of algebraic calculus.&quot; Also in the 10th century, Abul Wafa translated the works of Diophantus into Arabic. Ibn al-Haytham was the first mathematician to derive the formula for the sum of the fourth powers, using a method that is readily generalizable for determining the general formula for the sum of any integral powers. He performed an integration in order to find the volume of a paraboloid, and was able to generalize his result for the integrals of polynomials up to the fourth degree. He thus came close to finding a general formula for the integrals of polynomials, but he was not concerned with any polynomials higher than the fourth degree.

In the late 11th century, Omar Khayyam wrote &quot;Discussions of the Difficulties in Euclid&quot;, a book about what he perceived as flaws in Euclid&#x27;s &quot;Elements&quot;, especially the parallel postulate. He was also the first to find the general geometric solution to cubic equations. He was also very influential in calendar reform.

In the 13th century, Nasir al-Din Tusi (Nasireddin) made advances in spherical trigonometry. He also wrote influential work on Euclid&#x27;s parallel postulate. In the 15th century, Ghiyath al-Kashi computed the value of π to the 16th decimal place. Kashi also had an algorithm for calculating &quot;n&quot;th roots, which was a special case of the methods given many centuries later by Ruffini and Horner.

Other achievements of Muslim mathematicians during this period include the addition of the decimal point notation to the Arabic numerals, the discovery of all the modern trigonometric functions besides the sine, al-Kindi&#x27;s introduction of cryptanalysis and frequency analysis, the development of analytic geometry by Ibn al-Haytham, the beginning of algebraic geometry by Omar Khayyam and the development of an algebraic notation by al-Qalasādī.

During the time of the Ottoman Empire and Safavid Empire from the 15th century, the development of Islamic mathematics became stagnant.

== Maya ==

In the Pre-Columbian Americas, the Maya civilization that flourished in Mexico and Central America during the 1st millennium AD developed a unique tradition of mathematics that, due to its geographic isolation, was entirely independent of existing European, Egyptian, and Asian mathematics. Maya numerals used a base of twenty, the vigesimal system, instead of a base of ten that forms the basis of the decimal system used by most modern cultures. The Maya used mathematics to create the Maya calendar as well as to predict astronomical phenomena in their native Maya astronomy. While the concept of zero had to be inferred in the mathematics of many contemporary cultures, the Maya developed a standard symbol for it.

== Medieval European ==

Medieval European interest in mathematics was driven by concerns quite different from those of modern mathematicians. One driving element was the belief that mathematics provided the key to understanding the created order of nature, frequently justified by Plato&#x27;s &quot;Timaeus&quot; and the biblical passage (in the &quot;Book of Wisdom&quot;) that God had &quot;ordered all things in measure, and number, and weight&quot;.

Boethius provided a place for mathematics in the curriculum in the 6th century when he coined the term &quot;quadrivium&quot; to describe the study of arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and music. He wrote &quot;De institutione arithmetica&quot;, a free translation from the Greek of Nicomachus&#x27;s &quot;Introduction to Arithmetic&quot;; &quot;De institutione musica&quot;, also derived from Greek sources; and a series of excerpts from Euclid&#x27;s &quot;Elements&quot;. His works were theoretical, rather than practical, and were the basis of mathematical study until the recovery of Greek and Arabic mathematical works.

In the 12th century, European scholars traveled to Spain and Sicily seeking scientific Arabic texts, including al-Khwārizmī&#x27;s &quot;The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing&quot;, translated into Latin by Robert of Chester, and the complete text of Euclid&#x27;s &quot;Elements&quot;, translated in various versions by Adelard of Bath, Herman of Carinthia, and Gerard of Cremona. These and other new sources sparked a renewal of mathematics.

Leonardo of Pisa, now known as Fibonacci, serendipitously learned about the Hindu–Arabic numerals on a trip to what is now Béjaïa, Algeria with his merchant father. (Europe was still using Roman numerals.) There, he observed a system of arithmetic (specifically algorism) which due to the positional notation of Hindu–Arabic numerals was much more efficient and greatly facilitated commerce. Leonardo wrote &quot;Liber Abaci&quot; in 1202 (updated in 1254) introducing the technique to Europe and beginning a long period of popularizing it. The book also brought to Europe what is now known as the Fibonacci sequence (known to Indian mathematicians for hundreds of years before that) which Fibonacci used as an unremarkable example.

The 14th century saw the development of new mathematical concepts to investigate a wide range of problems. One important contribution was development of mathematics of local motion.

Thomas Bradwardine proposed that speed (V) increases in arithmetic proportion as the ratio of force (F) to resistance (R) increases in geometric proportion. Bradwardine expressed this by a series of specific examples, but although the logarithm had not yet been conceived, we can express his conclusion anachronistically by writing:
V = log (F/R). Bradwardine&#x27;s analysis is an example of transferring a mathematical technique used by al-Kindi and Arnald of Villanova to quantify the nature of compound medicines to a different physical problem.

One of the 14th-century Oxford Calculators, William Heytesbury, lacking differential calculus and the concept of limits, proposed to measure instantaneous speed &quot;by the path that would be described by [a body] if... it were moved uniformly at the same degree of speed with which it is moved in that given instant&quot;.

Heytesbury and others mathematically determined the distance covered by a body undergoing uniformly accelerated motion (today solved by integration), stating that &quot;a moving body uniformly acquiring or losing that increment [of speed] will traverse in some given time a [distance] completely equal to that which it would traverse if it were moving continuously through the same time with the mean degree [of speed]&quot;.

Nicole Oresme at the University of Paris and the Italian Giovanni di Casali independently provided graphical demonstrations of this relationship, asserting that the area under the line depicting the constant acceleration, represented the total distance traveled. In a later mathematical commentary on Euclid&#x27;s &quot;Elements&quot;, Oresme made a more detailed general analysis in which he demonstrated that a body will acquire in each successive increment of time an increment of any quality that increases as the odd numbers. Since Euclid had demonstrated the sum of the odd numbers are the square numbers, the total quality acquired by the body increases as the square of the time.

== Renaissance ==

During the Renaissance, the development of mathematics and of accounting were intertwined. While there is no direct relationship between algebra and accounting, the teaching of the subjects and the books published often intended for the children of merchants who were sent to reckoning schools (in Flanders and Germany) or abacus schools (known as &quot;abbaco&quot; in Italy), where they learned the skills useful for trade and commerce. There is probably no need for algebra in performing bookkeeping operations, but for complex bartering operations or the calculation of compound interest, a basic knowledge of arithmetic was mandatory and knowledge of algebra was very useful.

Piero della Francesca (c. 1415–1492) wrote books on solid geometry and linear perspective, including &quot;De Prospectiva Pingendi (On Perspective for Painting)&quot;, &quot;Trattato d’Abaco (Abacus Treatise)&quot;, and &quot;De quinque corporibus regularibus (On the Five Regular Solids)&quot;.
Luca Pacioli&#x27;s &quot;Summa de Arithmetica, Geometria, Proportioni et Proportionalità&quot; (Italian: &quot;Review of Arithmetic, Geometry, Ratio and Proportion&quot;) was first printed and published in Venice in 1494. It included a 27-page treatise on bookkeeping, &quot;Particularis de Computis et Scripturis&quot; (Italian: &quot;Details of Calculation and Recording&quot;). It was written primarily for, and sold mainly to, merchants who used the book as a reference text, as a source of pleasure from the mathematical puzzles it contained, and to aid the education of their sons. In &quot;Summa Arithmetica&quot;, Pacioli introduced symbols for plus and minus for the first time in a printed book, symbols that became standard notation in Italian Renaissance mathematics. &quot;Summa Arithmetica&quot; was also the first known book printed in Italy to contain algebra. Pacioli obtained many of his ideas from Piero Della Francesca whom he plagiarized.

In Italy, during the first half of the 16th century, Scipione del Ferro and Niccolò Fontana Tartaglia discovered solutions for cubic equations. Gerolamo Cardano published them in his 1545 book &quot;Ars Magna&quot;, together with a solution for the quartic equations, discovered by his student Lodovico Ferrari. In 1572 Rafael Bombelli published his &quot;L&#x27;Algebra&quot; in which he showed how to deal with the imaginary quantities that could appear in Cardano&#x27;s formula for solving cubic equations.

Simon Stevin&#x27;s &quot;De Thiende&quot; (&#x27;the art of tenths&#x27;), first published in Dutch in 1585, contained the first systematic treatment of decimal notation in Europe, which influenced all later work on the real number system.

Driven by the demands of navigation and the growing need for accurate maps of large areas, trigonometry grew to be a major branch of mathematics. Bartholomaeus Pitiscus was the first to use the word, publishing his &quot;Trigonometria&quot; in 1595. Regiomontanus&#x27;s table of sines and cosines was published in 1533.

During the Renaissance the desire of artists to represent the natural world realistically, together with the rediscovered philosophy of the Greeks, led artists to study mathematics. They were also the engineers and architects of that time, and so had need of mathematics in any case. The art of painting in perspective, and the developments in geometry that were involved, were studied intensely.

==Mathematics during the Scientific Revolution==
===17th century===
The 17th century saw an unprecedented increase of mathematical and scientific ideas across Europe. Tycho Brahe had gathered a large quantity of mathematical data describing the positions of the planets in the sky. By his position as Brahe&#x27;s assistant, Johannes Kepler was first exposed to and seriously interacted with the topic of planetary motion. Kepler&#x27;s calculations were made simpler by the contemporaneous invention of logarithms by John Napier and Jost Bürgi. Kepler succeeded in formulating mathematical laws of planetary motion.
The analytic geometry developed by René Descartes (1596–1650) allowed those orbits to be plotted on a graph, in Cartesian coordinates.

Building on earlier work by many predecessors, Isaac Newton discovered the laws of physics that explain Kepler&#x27;s Laws, and brought together the concepts now known as calculus. Independently, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, developed calculus and much of the calculus notation still in use today. He also refined the binary number system, which is the foundation of nearly all digital (electronic, solid-state, discrete logic) computers.

Science and mathematics had become an international endeavor, which would soon spread over the entire world.

In addition to the application of mathematics to the studies of the heavens, applied mathematics began to expand into new areas, with the correspondence of Pierre de Fermat and Blaise Pascal. Pascal and Fermat set the groundwork for the investigations of probability theory and the corresponding rules of combinatorics in their discussions over a game of gambling. Pascal, with his wager, attempted to use the newly developing probability theory to argue for a life devoted to religion, on the grounds that even if the probability of success was small, the rewards were infinite. In some sense, this foreshadowed the development of utility theory in the 18th and 19th centuries.

=== 18th century ===
The most influential mathematician of the 18th century was arguably Leonhard Euler (1707–1783). His contributions range from founding the study of graph theory with the Seven Bridges of Königsberg problem to standardizing many modern mathematical terms and notations. For example, he named the square root of minus 1 with the symbol &quot;i&quot;, and he popularized the use of the Greek letter formula_1 to stand for the ratio of a circle&#x27;s circumference to its diameter. He made numerous contributions to the study of topology, graph theory, calculus, combinatorics, and complex analysis, as evidenced by the multitude of theorems and notations named for him.

Other important European mathematicians of the 18th century included Joseph Louis Lagrange, who did pioneering work in number theory, algebra, differential calculus, and the calculus of variations, and Pierre-Simon Laplace, who, in the age of Napoleon, did important work on the foundations of celestial mechanics and on statistics.

== Modern ==
=== 19th century ===
Throughout the 19th century mathematics became increasingly abstract. Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855) epitomizes this trend. He did revolutionary work on functions of complex variables, in geometry, and on the convergence of series, leaving aside his many contributions to science. He also gave the first satisfactory proofs of the fundamental theorem of algebra and of the quadratic reciprocity law.
This century saw the development of the two forms of non-Euclidean geometry, where the parallel postulate of Euclidean geometry no longer holds.
The Russian mathematician Nikolai Ivanovich Lobachevsky and his rival, the Hungarian mathematician János Bolyai, independently defined and studied hyperbolic geometry, where uniqueness of parallels no longer holds. In this geometry the sum of angles in a triangle add up to less than 180°. Elliptic geometry was developed later in the 19th century by the German mathematician Bernhard Riemann; here no parallel can be found and the angles in a triangle add up to more than 180°. Riemann also developed Riemannian geometry, which unifies and vastly generalizes the three types of geometry, and he defined the concept of a manifold, which generalizes the ideas of curves and surfaces, and set the mathematical foundations for the theory of general relativity.

The 19th century saw the beginning of a great deal of abstract algebra. Hermann Grassmann in Germany gave a first version of vector spaces, William Rowan Hamilton in Ireland developed noncommutative algebra. The British mathematician George Boole devised an algebra that soon evolved into what is now called Boolean algebra, in which the only numbers were 0 and 1. Boolean algebra is the starting point of mathematical logic and has important applications in electrical engineering and computer science. 
Augustin-Louis Cauchy, Bernhard Riemann, and Karl Weierstrass reformulated the calculus in a more rigorous fashion.

Also, for the first time, the limits of mathematics were explored. Niels Henrik Abel, a Norwegian, and Évariste Galois, a Frenchman, proved that there is no general algebraic method for solving polynomial equations of degree greater than four (Abel–Ruffini theorem). Other 19th-century mathematicians used this in their proofs that straight edge and compass alone are not sufficient to trisect an arbitrary angle, to construct the side of a cube twice the volume of a given cube, nor to construct a square equal in area to a given circle. Mathematicians had vainly attempted to solve all of these problems since the time of the ancient Greeks. On the other hand, the limitation of three dimensions in geometry was surpassed in the 19th century through considerations of parameter space and hypercomplex numbers.

Abel and Galois&#x27;s investigations into the solutions of various polynomial equations laid the groundwork for further developments of group theory, and the associated fields of abstract algebra. In the 20th century physicists and other scientists have seen group theory as the ideal way to study symmetry.
In the later 19th century, Georg Cantor established the first foundations of set theory, which enabled the rigorous treatment of the notion of infinity and has become the common language of nearly all mathematics. Cantor&#x27;s set theory, and the rise of mathematical logic in the hands of Peano, L.E.J. Brouwer, David Hilbert, Bertrand Russell, and A.N. Whitehead, initiated a long running debate on the foundations of mathematics.

The 19th century saw the founding of a number of national mathematical societies: the London Mathematical Society in 1865, the Société Mathématique de France in 1872, the Circolo Matematico di Palermo in 1884, the Edinburgh Mathematical Society in 1883, and the American Mathematical Society in 1888. The first international, special-interest society, the Quaternion Society, was formed in 1899, in the context of a vector controversy.

In 1897, Kurt Hensel introduced p-adic numbers.

=== 20th century === 
The 20th century saw mathematics become a major profession. By the end of the century, thousands of new Ph.D.s in mathematics were being awarded every year, and jobs were available in both teaching and industry. An effort to catalogue the areas and applications of mathematics was undertaken in Klein&#x27;s encyclopedia.

In a 1900 speech to the International Congress of Mathematicians, David Hilbert set out a list of 23 unsolved problems in mathematics. These problems, spanning many areas of mathematics, formed a central focus for much of 20th-century mathematics. Today, 10 have been solved, 7 are partially solved, and 2 are still open. The remaining 4 are too loosely formulated to be stated as solved or not.
Notable historical conjectures were finally proven. In 1976, Wolfgang Haken and Kenneth Appel proved the four color theorem, controversial at the time for the use of a computer to do so. Andrew Wiles, building on the work of others, proved Fermat&#x27;s Last Theorem in 1995. Paul Cohen and Kurt Gödel proved that the continuum hypothesis is independent of (could neither be proved nor disproved from) the standard axioms of set theory. In 1998, Thomas Callister Hales proved the Kepler conjecture, also using a computer.

Mathematical collaborations of unprecedented size and scope took place. An example is the classification of finite simple groups (also called the &quot;enormous theorem&quot;), whose proof between 1955 and 2004 required 500-odd journal articles by about 100 authors, and filling tens of thousands of pages. A group of French mathematicians, including Jean Dieudonné and André Weil, publishing under the pseudonym &quot;Nicolas Bourbaki&quot;, attempted to exposit all of known mathematics as a coherent rigorous whole. The resulting several dozen volumes has had a controversial influence on mathematical education.
Differential geometry came into its own when Albert Einstein used it in general relativity. Entirely new areas of mathematics such as mathematical logic, topology, and John von Neumann&#x27;s game theory changed the kinds of questions that could be answered by mathematical methods. All kinds of structures were abstracted using axioms and given names like metric spaces, topological spaces etc. As mathematicians do, the concept of an abstract structure was itself abstracted and led to category theory. Grothendieck and Serre recast algebraic geometry using sheaf theory. Large advances were made in the qualitative study of dynamical systems that Poincaré had begun in the 1890s.
Measure theory was developed in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Applications of measures include the Lebesgue integral, Kolmogorov&#x27;s axiomatisation of probability theory, and ergodic theory. Knot theory greatly expanded. Quantum mechanics led to the development of functional analysis, a branch of mathematics that was greatly developed by Stefan Banach and his collaborators who formed the Lwów School of Mathematics. Other new areas include Laurent Schwartz&#x27;s distribution theory, fixed point theory, singularity theory and René Thom&#x27;s catastrophe theory, model theory, and Mandelbrot&#x27;s fractals. Lie theory with its Lie groups and Lie algebras became one of the major areas of study.

Non-standard analysis, introduced by Abraham Robinson, rehabilitated the infinitesimal approach to calculus, which had fallen into disrepute in favour of the theory of limits, by extending the field of real numbers to the Hyperreal numbers which include infinitesimal and infinite quantities. An even larger number system, the surreal numbers were discovered by John Horton Conway in connection with combinatorial games.

The development and continual improvement of computers, at first mechanical analog machines and then digital electronic machines, allowed industry to deal with larger and larger amounts of data to facilitate mass production and distribution and communication, and new areas of mathematics were developed to deal with this: Alan Turing&#x27;s computability theory; complexity theory; Derrick Henry Lehmer&#x27;s use of ENIAC to further number theory and the Lucas–Lehmer primality test; Rózsa Péter&#x27;s recursive function theory; Claude Shannon&#x27;s information theory; signal processing; data analysis; optimization and other areas of operations research. In the preceding centuries much mathematical focus was on calculus and continuous functions, but the rise of computing and communication networks led to an increasing importance of discrete concepts and the expansion of combinatorics including graph theory. The speed and data processing abilities of computers also enabled the handling of mathematical problems that were too time-consuming to deal with by pencil and paper calculations, leading to areas such as numerical analysis and symbolic computation. Some of the most important methods and algorithms of the 20th century are: the simplex algorithm, the fast Fourier transform, error-correcting codes, the Kalman filter from control theory and the RSA algorithm of public-key cryptography.

At the same time, deep insights were made about the limitations to mathematics. In 1929 and 1930, it was proved the truth or falsity of all statements formulated about the natural numbers plus either addition or multiplication (but not both), was decidable, i.e. could be determined by some algorithm. In 1931, Kurt Gödel found that this was not the case for the natural numbers plus both addition and multiplication; this system, known as Peano arithmetic, was in fact incomplete. (Peano arithmetic is adequate for a good deal of number theory, including the notion of prime number.) A consequence of Gödel&#x27;s two incompleteness theorems is that in any mathematical system that includes Peano arithmetic (including all of analysis and geometry), truth necessarily outruns proof, i.e. there are true statements that cannot be proved within the system. Hence mathematics cannot be reduced to mathematical logic, and David Hilbert&#x27;s dream of making all of mathematics complete and consistent needed to be reformulated.
One of the more colorful figures in 20th-century mathematics was Srinivasa Aiyangar Ramanujan (1887–1920), an Indian autodidact , including properties of highly composite numbers, the partition function and its asymptotics, and mock theta functions. He also made major investigations in the areas of gamma functions, modular forms, divergent series, hypergeometric series and prime number theory.

Paul Erdős published more papers than any other mathematician in history, working with hundreds of collaborators. Mathematicians have a game equivalent to the Kevin Bacon Game, which leads to the Erdős number of a mathematician. This describes the &quot;collaborative distance&quot; between a person and Erdős, as measured by joint authorship of mathematical papers.

Emmy Noether has been described by many as the most important woman in the history of mathematics. She studied the theories of rings, fields, and algebras.

As in most areas of study, the explosion of knowledge in the scientific age has led to specialization: by the end of the century, there were hundreds of specialized areas in mathematics, and the Mathematics Subject Classification was dozens of pages long. More and more mathematical journals were published and, by the end of the century, the development of the World Wide Web led to online publishing.

=== 21st century ===

In 2000, the Clay Mathematics Institute announced the seven Millennium Prize Problems. In 2003 the Poincaré conjecture was solved by Grigori Perelman (who declined to accept an award, as he was critical of the mathematics establishment).

Most mathematical journals now have online versions as well as print versions, and many online-only journals are launched. There is an increasing drive toward open access publishing, first made popular by arXiv.

== Future ==
There are many observable trends in mathematics, the most notable being that the subject is growing ever larger as computers are ever more important and powerful; the volume of data being produced by science and industry, facilitated by computers, continues expanding exponentially. As a result, there is a corresponding growth in the demand for mathematics to help process and understand this big data. Math science careers are also expected to continue to grow, with the US Bureau of Labor Statistics estimating (in 2018) that &quot;employment of mathematical science occupations is projected to grow 27.9 percent from 2016 to 2026.&quot;

==See also==

* Archives of American Mathematics
* Ethnomathematics
* History of algebra
* History of arithmetic
* History of calculus
* History of combinatorics
* History of the function concept
* History of geometry
* History of group theory
* History of logic
* History of mathematicians
* History of mathematical notation
* History of measurement
* History of numbers
** History of ancient numeral systems
** Prehistoric counting
* History of number theory
* History of statistics
* History of trigonometry
* History of writing numbers
* Kenneth O. May Prize
* List of important publications in mathematics
* Lists of mathematicians
* List of mathematics history topics
* Mathematical folklore
* Timeline of mathematics
==Notes==

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== Further reading ==

===General===
* 
* Burton, David M. (1997). &quot;The History of Mathematics: An Introduction&quot;. McGraw Hill.
* Kline, Morris. &quot;Mathematical Thought from Ancient to Modern Times&quot;.
* Struik, D. J. (1987). &quot;A Concise History of Mathematics&quot;, fourth revised edition. Dover Publications, New York.

=== Books on a specific period ===
* 

* van der Waerden, B. L. (1983). &quot;Geometry and Algebra in Ancient Civilizations&quot;, Springer, .

=== Books on a specific topic ===
* 
* 

==External links==
=== Documentaries ===
* BBC (2008). &quot;The Story of Maths&quot;.
* Renaissance Mathematics, BBC Radio 4 discussion with Robert Kaplan, Jim Bennett &amp; Jackie Stedall (&quot;In Our Time&quot;, Jun 2, 2005)

=== Educational material ===
* MacTutor History of Mathematics archive (John J. O&#x27;Connor and Edmund F. Robertson; University of St Andrews, Scotland). An award-winning website containing detailed biographies on many historical and contemporary mathematicians, as well as information on notable curves and various topics in the history of mathematics.
* History of Mathematics Home Page (David E. Joyce; Clark University). Articles on various topics in the history of mathematics with an extensive bibliography.
* The History of Mathematics (David R. Wilkins; Trinity College, Dublin). Collections of material on the mathematics between the 17th and 19th century.
* Earliest Known Uses of Some of the Words of Mathematics (Jeff Miller). Contains information on the earliest known uses of terms used in mathematics.
* Earliest Uses of Various Mathematical Symbols (Jeff Miller). Contains information on the history of mathematical notations.
* Mathematical Words: Origins and Sources (John Aldrich, University of Southampton) Discusses the origins of the modern mathematical word stock.
* Biographies of Women Mathematicians (Larry Riddle; Agnes Scott College).
* Mathematicians of the African Diaspora (Scott W. Williams; University at Buffalo).
* Notes for MAA minicourse: teaching a course in the history of mathematics. (2009) (V. Frederick Rickey &amp; Victor J. Katz).
* Ancient Rome: The Odometer Of Vitruv. Pictorial (moving) re-construction of Vitusius&#x27; Roman ododmeter.

=== Bibliographies ===
* A Bibliography of Collected Works and Correspondence of Mathematicians archive dated 2007/3/17 (Steven W. Rockey; Cornell University Library).

===Organizations===
* International Commission for the History of Mathematics

===Journals===
* &quot;Historia Mathematica&quot;
* Convergence , the Mathematical Association of America&#x27;s online &quot;Math History&quot; Magazine
* History of Mathematics Math Archives (University of Tennessee, Knoxville)
* History/Biography The Math Forum (Drexel University)
* History of Mathematics (Courtright Memorial Library).
* History of Mathematics Web Sites (David Calvis; Baldwin-Wallace College)
* Historia de las Matemáticas (Universidad de La La guna)
* História da Matemática (Universidade de Coimbra)
* Using History in Math Class
* Mathematical Resources: History of Mathematics (Bruno Kevius)
* History of Mathematics (Roberta Tucci)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q185264" start="4" end="26" title="History of mathematics" label="history of mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="67" end="78" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893386" start="87" end="132" title="History of mathematical notation" label="mathematical methods and notation of the past"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281534" start="145" end="155" title="modern age" label="modern age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="304" end="316" title="Mesopotamian" label="Mesopotamian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="327" end="332" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q150996" start="334" end="339" title="Akkad (region)" label="Akkad"/>
<link wikidata="Q41137" start="344" end="351" title="Assyria" label="Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="373" end="386" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5743" start="414" end="418" title="Ebla" label="Ebla"/>
<link wikidata="Q11205" start="431" end="441" title="arithmetic" label="arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968" start="443" end="450" title="algebra" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="455" end="463" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="480" end="488" title="taxation" label="taxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q26643" start="490" end="498" title="commerce" label="commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="531" end="540" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12132" start="570" end="579" title="calendars" label="calendars"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="633" end="644" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="649" end="654" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470425" start="663" end="675" title="Plimpton 322" label="Plimpton 322"/>
<link wikidata="Q787931" start="683" end="693" title="Babylonian mathematics" label="Babylonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q213540" start="716" end="742" title="Rhind Mathematical Papyrus" label="Rhind Mathematical Papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330884" start="750" end="758" title="Egyptian mathematics" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q926547" start="785" end="812" title="Moscow Mathematical Papyrus" label="Moscow Mathematical Papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q208225" start="883" end="901" title="Pythagorean triple" label="Pythagorean triple"/>
<link wikidata="Q11518" start="926" end="945" title="Pythagorean theorem" label="Pythagorean theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q191359" start="1157" end="1169" title="Pythagoreans" label="Pythagoreans"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1232" end="1237" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q58413" start="1324" end="1341" title="Greek mathematics" label="Greek mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890076" start="1434" end="1452" title="mathematical rigor" label="mathematical rigor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11538" start="1456" end="1462" title="mathematical proof" label="proofs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1516" end="1530" title="ancient Romans" label="ancient Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q33521" start="1536" end="1555" title="applied mathematics" label="applied mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="1559" end="1568" title="surveying" label="surveying"/>
<link wikidata="Q633538" start="1570" end="1592" title="structural engineering" label="structural engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q101333" start="1594" end="1616" title="mechanical engineering" label="mechanical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707847" start="1618" end="1629" title="bookkeeping" label="bookkeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q185688" start="1643" end="1648" title="Lunar calendar" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q210953" start="1653" end="1667" title="solar calendar" label="solar calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354732" start="1679" end="1694" title="Roman art" label="arts and crafts"/>
<link wikidata="Q540129" start="1696" end="1715" title="Chinese mathematics" label="Chinese mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747853" start="1754" end="1772" title="place value system" label="place value system"/>
<link wikidata="Q200227" start="1794" end="1810" title="negative numbers" label="negative numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059346" start="1816" end="1843" title="Hindu–Arabic numeral system" label="Hindu–Arabic numeral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279571" start="1977" end="1982" title="Indian mathematics" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="2011" end="2024" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267533" start="2029" end="2048" title="Islamic mathematics" label="Islamic mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9038" start="2069" end="2099" title="Muḥammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī" label="Muḥammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="2295" end="2312" title="Maya civilization" label="Maya civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="2316" end="2322" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="2327" end="2342" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q204" start="2365" end="2369" title="zero" label="zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q335109" start="2401" end="2414" title="Maya numerals" label="Maya numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052959" start="2465" end="2486" title="Latin translations of the 12th century" label="translated into Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="2566" end="2581" title="Middle Ages" label="Medieval Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234117" start="2614" end="2625" title="Postclassical age" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="2722" end="2733" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="2734" end="2739" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q582659" start="2853" end="2868" title="exponential growth" label="increasing pace"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="2955" end="2967" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="2972" end="2997" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz" label="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q149972" start="3034" end="3042" title="calculus" label="calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q52458459" start="3110" end="3131" title="List of German mathematicians" label="German mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="3137" end="3157" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Carl Friedrich Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q41585" start="3162" end="3175" title="David Hilbert" label="David Hilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q11563" start="3255" end="3261" title="number" label="number"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455898" start="3263" end="3281" title="patterns in nature" label="patterns in nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091629" start="3283" end="3292" title="magnitude (mathematics)" label="magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866689" start="3298" end="3302" title="Configuration (geometry)" label="form"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="3451" end="3466" title="hunter-gatherer" label="hunter-gatherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="3744" end="3756" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthals"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3822" end="3828" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077717" start="3883" end="3895" title="Ishango bone" label="Ishango bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="3930" end="3934" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="3955" end="3960" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q479505" start="3980" end="3986" title="Upper Paleolithic" label="20,000"/>
<link wikidata="Q133250" start="4208" end="4216" title="sequence" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="4221" end="4233" title="prime number" label="prime number"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719551" start="4749" end="4767" title="Alexander Marshack" label="Alexander Marshack"/>
<link wikidata="Q208520" start="4964" end="4981" title="Predynastic Egypt" label="Predynastic Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q164240" start="5079" end="5087" title="megalith" label="megalith"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="5103" end="5110" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="5115" end="5123" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17278" start="5196" end="5202" title="circle" label="circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="5205" end="5212" title="ellipse" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q208225" start="5219" end="5237" title="Pythagorean triple" label="Pythagorean triple"/>
<link wikidata="Q47690" start="5423" end="5432" title="Babylonia" label="Babylonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="5490" end="5501" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="5510" end="5514" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="5543" end="5548" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="5565" end="5583" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="5606" end="5618" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="5842" end="5850" title="Seleucid" label="Seleucid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="5922" end="5929" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="5967" end="5978" title="Caliphate" label="Arab Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="6004" end="6011" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267533" start="6064" end="6083" title="Islamic mathematics" label="Islamic mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330884" start="6127" end="6147" title="Egyptian mathematics" label="Egyptian mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q401" start="6266" end="6282" title="Cuneiform script" label="Cuneiform script"/>
<link wikidata="Q35355" start="6503" end="6508" title="Sumer" label="Sumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q394" start="6601" end="6610" title="metrology" label="metrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q206049" start="6830" end="6850" title="multiplication table" label="multiplication table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226939" start="6909" end="6917" title="Division (mathematics)" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q114799" start="7050" end="7061" title="sexagesimal" label="sexagesimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q122653" start="7072" end="7086" title="numeral system" label="numeral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q81365" start="8028" end="8035" title="decimal" label="decimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="8380" end="8391" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178529" start="8499" end="8507" title="YBC 7289" label="YBC 7289"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826416" start="9136" end="9150" title="regular number" label="regular number"/>
<link wikidata="Q216906" start="9163" end="9173" title="Multiplicative inverse" label="reciprocal"/>
<link wikidata="Q600590" start="9174" end="9179" title="tuple" label="pairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q484637" start="9252" end="9258" title="linear equation" label="linear"/>
<link wikidata="Q41299" start="9260" end="9278" title="quadratic equation" label="quadratic equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q203565" start="9284" end="9298" title="cubic equation" label="cubic equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11518" start="9428" end="9447" title="Pythagorean theorem" label="Pythagorean theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q11538" start="9682" end="9688" title="mathematical proof" label="proofs"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="9728" end="9733" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q50868" start="9786" end="9803" title="Egyptian language" label="Egyptian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="9814" end="9832" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="9834" end="9839" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061510" start="9885" end="9893" title="Egyptians" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="9926" end="9931" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="9958" end="9969" title="Caliphate" label="Arab Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267533" start="9981" end="10000" title="Islamic mathematics" label="Islamic mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="10007" end="10013" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q213540" start="10384" end="10397" title="Rhind papyrus" label="Rhind papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q191324" start="10526" end="10540" title="Middle Kingdom of Egypt" label="Middle Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q50707" start="10812" end="10821" title="composite number" label="composite"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="10826" end="10838" title="prime number" label="prime number"/>
<link wikidata="Q19033" start="10841" end="10851" title="arithmetic mean" label="arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q185049" start="10853" end="10862" title="geometric mean" label="geometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q188347" start="10867" end="10880" title="harmonic mean" label="harmonic mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q177898" start="10925" end="10946" title="Sieve of Eratosthenes" label="Sieve of Eratosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q170043" start="10951" end="10972" title="Perfect number" label="perfect number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q484637" start="11044" end="11059" title="linear equation" label="linear equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170008" start="11072" end="11082" title="arithmetic series" label="arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306887" start="11087" end="11103" title="geometric series" label="geometric series"/>
<link wikidata="Q926547" start="11160" end="11174" title="Moscow papyrus" label="Moscow papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q191324" start="11190" end="11204" title="Middle Kingdom of Egypt" label="Middle Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q846235" start="11488" end="11495" title="frustum" label="frustum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052639" start="11531" end="11550" title="Berlin Papyrus 6619" label="Berlin Papyrus 6619"/>
<link wikidata="Q50698" start="11620" end="11638" title="algebraic equation" label="algebraic equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="11712" end="11726" title="Greek language" label="Greek language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36303" start="11744" end="11761" title="Thales of Miletus" label="Thales of Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193093" start="11794" end="11811" title="Platonic Academy" label="Academy of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="12017" end="12036" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="12057" end="12068" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q484511" start="12258" end="12277" title="inductive reasoning" label="inductive reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q484284" start="12384" end="12403" title="deductive reasoning" label="deductive reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890076" start="12487" end="12505" title="mathematical rigor" label="mathematical rigor"/>
<link wikidata="Q36303" start="12570" end="12587" title="Thales of Miletus" label="Thales of Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10261" start="12610" end="12629" title="Pythagoras of Samos" label="Pythagoras of Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330884" start="12731" end="12739" title="Egyptian mathematics" label="Egyptian"/>
<link wikidata="Q787931" start="12744" end="12766" title="Babylonian mathematics" label="Babylonian mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="12900" end="12908" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12516" start="12961" end="12969" title="pyramids" label="pyramids"/>
<link wikidata="Q285719" start="13122" end="13142" title="Thales&amp;#x27; Theorem" label="Thales&amp;#x27; Theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q191359" start="13320" end="13338" title="Pythagoreans" label="Pythagorean School"/>
<link wikidata="Q11518" start="13636" end="13655" title="Pythagorean theorem" label="Pythagorean theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q607728" start="13752" end="13770" title="irrational numbers" label="irrational numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q787931" start="13804" end="13815" title="Babylonian mathematics" label="Babylonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279571" start="13817" end="13824" title="Indian mathematics" label="Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q540129" start="13833" end="13840" title="Chinese mathematics" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147651" start="13846" end="13860" title="Neopythagorean" label="Neopythagorean"/>
<link wikidata="Q360366" start="13875" end="13885" title="Nicomachus" label="Nicomachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q937284" start="13927" end="13938" title="Greco-Roman" label="Greco-Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q206049" start="13939" end="13959" title="multiplication table" label="multiplication table"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="14086" end="14100" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="14221" end="14229" title="Middle Ages" label="Medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="14272" end="14277" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q193093" start="14385" end="14401" title="Platonic Academy" label="Platonic Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="14406" end="14412" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q185150" start="14561" end="14578" title="Eudoxus of Cnidus" label="Eudoxus of Cnidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q865019" start="14774" end="14794" title="method of exhaustion" label="method of exhaustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q80091" start="14818" end="14829" title="Integral" label="integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q607728" start="14881" end="14907" title="incommensurable magnitudes" label="incommensurable magnitudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="15141" end="15150" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="15247" end="15252" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q684645" start="15343" end="15350" title="Musaeum" label="Musaeum"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="15354" end="15364" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8747" start="15384" end="15390" title="Euclid" label="Euclid"/>
<link wikidata="Q172891" start="15422" end="15430" title="Euclid&amp;#x27;s Elements" label="Elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890076" start="15550" end="15568" title="mathematical rigor" label="mathematical rigor"/>
<link wikidata="Q792542" start="15581" end="15597" title="axiomatic method" label="axiomatic method"/>
<link wikidata="Q162886" start="16075" end="16093" title="Euclidean geometry" label="Euclidean geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="16208" end="16221" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968" start="16223" end="16230" title="algebra" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q207648" start="16235" end="16249" title="solid geometry" label="solid geometry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16372" end="16389" title="Euclid#Other works" label="wrote extensively"/>
<link wikidata="Q124255" start="16417" end="16431" title="conic sections" label="conic sections"/>
<link wikidata="Q14620" start="16433" end="16439" title="optics" label="optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q326905" start="16441" end="16459" title="spherical geometry" label="spherical geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8739" start="16515" end="16525" title="Archimedes" label="Archimedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13670" start="16539" end="16547" title="Syracuse, Italy" label="Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q865019" start="16617" end="16637" title="method of exhaustion" label="method of exhaustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11500" start="16655" end="16659" title="area" label="area"/>
<link wikidata="Q48297" start="16679" end="16687" title="parabola" label="parabola"/>
<link wikidata="Q170198" start="16697" end="16728" title="Series (mathematics)" label="summation of an infinite series"/>
<link wikidata="Q28967" start="16976" end="16982" title="Archimedes spiral" label="spiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q39297" start="17027" end="17033" title="volume" label="volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q849425" start="17038" end="17060" title="surface of revolution" label="surfaces of revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q33456" start="17126" end="17140" title="exponentiation" label="exponentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q180109" start="17593" end="17612" title="Apollonius of Perga" label="Apollonius of Perga"/>
<link wikidata="Q124255" start="17665" end="17679" title="conic sections" label="conic sections"/>
<link wikidata="Q48297" start="17883" end="17891" title="parabola" label="parabola"/>
<link wikidata="Q43182" start="18651" end="18673" title="Eratosthenes of Cyrene" label="Eratosthenes of Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q177898" start="18696" end="18717" title="Sieve of Eratosthenes" label="Sieve of Eratosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="18730" end="18743" title="prime numbers" label="prime numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084" start="19017" end="19029" title="trigonometry" label="trigonometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q159905" start="19076" end="19096" title="Hipparchus of Nicaea" label="Hipparchus of Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q161853" start="19268" end="19287" title="Heron of Alexandria" label="Heron of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q182714" start="19314" end="19334" title="Heron&amp;#x27;s formula" label="Heron&amp;#x27;s formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q451572" start="19477" end="19499" title="Menelaus of Alexandria" label="Menelaus of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q46463" start="19513" end="19535" title="spherical trigonometry" label="spherical trigonometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q193882" start="19544" end="19566" title="Menelaus&amp;#x27; theorem" label="Menelaus&amp;#x27; theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q155952" start="19647" end="19655" title="Almagest" label="Almagest"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="19665" end="19672" title="Claudius Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q459547" start="19829" end="19851" title="Ptolemy&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Ptolemy&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q178217" start="20155" end="20165" title="Diophantus" label="Diophantus"/>
<link wikidata="Q544643" start="20217" end="20239" title="indeterminate equation" label="indeterminate analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q905896" start="20311" end="20332" title="Diophantine equations" label="Diophantine equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227061" start="20337" end="20363" title="Diophantine approximations" label="Diophantine approximations"/>
<link wikidata="Q544643" start="20545" end="20567" title="indeterminate equation" label="indeterminate equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q75655" start="20659" end="20675" title="Pierre de Fermat" label="Pierre de Fermat"/>
<link wikidata="Q132469" start="20703" end="20715" title="Fermat&amp;#x27;s Last Theorem" label="Last Theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q211783" start="21035" end="21055" title="Pappus of Alexandria" label="Pappus of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q851166" start="21094" end="21109" title="Pappus&amp;#x27;s hexagon theorem" label="hexagon theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q845088" start="21114" end="21130" title="Pappus&amp;#x27;s centroid theorem" label="centroid theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7133115" start="21147" end="21167" title="Pappus configuration" label="Pappus configuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115526" start="21172" end="21184" title="Pappus graph" label="Pappus graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q11903" start="21488" end="21495" title="Hypatia" label="Hypatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q354384" start="21550" end="21569" title="Theon of Alexandria" label="Theon of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="21686" end="21705" title="Christianity in the Roman Empire" label="Christian community"/>
<link wikidata="Q271809" start="21927" end="21934" title="Proclus" label="Proclus"/>
<link wikidata="Q351518" start="21936" end="21946" title="Simplicius of Cilicia" label="Simplicius"/>
<link wikidata="Q510719" start="21951" end="21959" title="Eutocius" label="Eutocius"/>
<link wikidata="Q193093" start="22148" end="22165" title="Platonic Academy" label="Academy of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="22181" end="22190" title="Justinian" label="Justinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="22330" end="22346" title="Byzantine empire" label="Byzantine empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q298226" start="22375" end="22395" title="Anthemius of Tralles" label="Anthemius of Tralles"/>
<link wikidata="Q310028" start="22400" end="22418" title="Isidore of Miletus" label="Isidore of Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="22442" end="22454" title="Hagia Sophia" label="Hagia Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="22668" end="22680" title="Greeks" label="ethnic Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="22733" end="22747" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="22763" end="22775" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q202335" start="22802" end="22814" title="Latins (Italic tribe)" label="native Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="22845" end="22859" title="Ancient Rome" label="Ancient Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="22868" end="22874" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="22974" end="22982" title="surveyor" label="surveyor"/>
<link wikidata="Q372646" start="22988" end="22999" title="Mental calculator" label="calculators"/>
<link wikidata="Q33521" start="23028" end="23047" title="applied mathematics" label="applied mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q837863" start="23057" end="23080" title="theoretical mathematics" label="theoretical mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q38918" start="23168" end="23190" title="Roman numerals" label="their numerical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q108645" start="23205" end="23224" title="Greek numerals" label="the Greek precedent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398931" start="23233" end="23250" title="Etruscan numerals" label="Etruscan numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="23263" end="23284" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscan civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273" start="23309" end="23316" title="Tuscany" label="Tuscany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127320" start="23318" end="23331" title="central Italy" label="central Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q28813" start="23415" end="23420" title="fraud" label="fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q27676284" start="23433" end="23447" title="List of Roman taxes" label="managing taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10756188" start="23456" end="23464" title="treasury" label="treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624745" start="23466" end="23481" title="Siculus Flaccus" label="Siculus Flaccus"/>
<link wikidata="Q396762" start="23506" end="23515" title="gromatici" label="gromatici"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379273" start="23633" end="23645" title="surface area" label="surface area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413460" start="23786" end="23797" title="Roman engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q223750" start="23825" end="23837" title="Roman architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223230" start="23846" end="23853" title="Roman bridge" label="bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q194029" start="23855" end="23868" title="Roman roads" label="road-building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650194" start="23874" end="23908" title="Roman military engineering" label="preparation for military campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354732" start="23910" end="23925" title="Roman art" label="Arts and crafts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253440" start="23934" end="23946" title="Roman mosaic" label="Roman mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33306191" start="23970" end="23983" title="Mosaics of Delos" label="Greek designs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484793" start="24094" end="24101" title="tessera" label="tessera"/>
<link wikidata="Q644084" start="24112" end="24128" title="opus tessellatum" label="opus tessellatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q370670" start="24196" end="24213" title="opus vermiculatum" label="opus vermiculatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q200966" start="24296" end="24310" title="Roman calendar" label="Roman calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q201038" start="24417" end="24430" title="Roman Kingdom" label="Roman Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q19828" start="24460" end="24469" title="leap year" label="leap year"/>
<link wikidata="Q185688" start="24505" end="24519" title="lunar calendar" label="lunar calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q189607" start="24611" end="24621" title="solar year" label="solar year"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="24760" end="24775" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q210953" start="24779" end="24793" title="solar calendar" label="solar calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="24807" end="24820" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q316867" start="24848" end="24871" title="Sosigenes of Alexandria" label="Sosigenes of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q19828" start="24885" end="24893" title="leap day" label="leap day"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="25028" end="25046" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83029" start="25060" end="25077" title="Pope Gregory XIII" label="Pope Gregory XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433671" start="25204" end="25219" title="Science and technology of the Han dynasty" label="the Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q745105" start="25261" end="25269" title="odometer" label="odometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q126017" start="25291" end="25299" title="distance" label="distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q47163" start="25385" end="25394" title="Vitruvius" label="Vitruvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434" start="25455" end="25463" title="Commodus" label="Commodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q282413" start="25619" end="25629" title="Roman technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q182324" start="25643" end="25664" title="Antikythera mechanism" label="Antikythera mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q253276" start="25787" end="25797" title="Roman mile" label="Roman mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q143873" start="25888" end="25896" title="cogwheel" label="cogwheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q198052" start="26273" end="26288" title="Zhoubi Suanjing" label="Zhoubi Suanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="26391" end="26412" title="Warring States Period" label="Warring States Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849730" start="26446" end="26467" title="Tsinghua Bamboo Slips" label="Tsinghua Bamboo Slips"/>
<link wikidata="Q81365" start="26499" end="26506" title="decimal" label="decimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q206049" start="26507" end="26527" title="multiplication table" label="multiplication table"/>
<link wikidata="Q583473" start="27339" end="27351" title="Counting rods" label="Rod numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997913" start="27466" end="27474" title="suanpan" label="suan pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12159141" start="27626" end="27632" title="Xu Yue (mathematician)" label="Xu Yue"/>
<link wikidata="Q720866" start="27769" end="27775" title="Mohism" label="Mohist"/>
<link wikidata="Q272411" start="27813" end="27817" title="Mozi" label="Mozi"/>
<link wikidata="Q843905" start="28024" end="28037" title="circumference" label="circumference"/>
<link wikidata="Q37221" start="28039" end="28047" title="diameter" label="diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q173817" start="28049" end="28055" title="radius" label="radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q39297" start="28061" end="28067" title="volume" label="volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192" start="28092" end="28105" title="Qin Shi Huang" label="Qin Shi Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="28133" end="28143" title="Qin Empire" label="Qin Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147887" start="28346" end="28358" title="Burning of books and burying of scholars" label="book burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="28374" end="28385" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q657057" start="28523" end="28564" title="The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art" label="The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q199451" start="28804" end="28818" title="Chinese pagoda" label="Chinese pagoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="28840" end="28849" title="surveying" label="surveying"/>
<link wikidata="Q158688" start="28876" end="28890" title="right triangle" label="right triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11518" start="28931" end="28950" title="Pythagorean theorem" label="Pythagorean theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658" start="28983" end="29003" title="Gaussian elimination" label="Gaussian elimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q167" start="29042" end="29043" title="Pi" label="π"/>
<link wikidata="Q453449" start="29109" end="29116" title="Liu Xin (scholar)" label="Liu Xin"/>
<link wikidata="Q197206" start="29173" end="29183" title="Zhang Heng" label="Zhang Heng"/>
<link wikidata="Q134237" start="29251" end="29262" title="square root" label="square root"/>
<link wikidata="Q316304" start="29270" end="29277" title="Liu Hui" label="Liu Hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q10899270" start="29347" end="29364" title="Liu Hui&amp;#x27;s π algorithm" label="gave a value of π"/>
<link wikidata="Q227444" start="29507" end="29518" title="Zu Chongzhi" label="Zu Chongzhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858176" start="29528" end="29542" title="Milü" label="the value of π"/>
<link wikidata="Q586686" start="29735" end="29761" title="Cavalieri&amp;#x27;s principle" label="Cavalieri&amp;#x27;s principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="29786" end="29792" title="sphere" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="29897" end="29909" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q14566684" start="30017" end="30053" title="Jade Mirror of the Four Unknowns" label="Precious Mirror of the Four Elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q198126" start="30063" end="30073" title="Zhu Shijie" label="Zhu Shijie"/>
<link wikidata="Q944658" start="30188" end="30208" title="Horner&amp;#x27;s method" label="Horner&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q177051" start="30269" end="30291" title="Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle" label="Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q192089" start="30489" end="30501" title="magic square" label="magic square"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314872" start="30506" end="30519" title="Magic circle (mathematics)" label="magic circles"/>
<link wikidata="Q574521" start="30565" end="30573" title="Yang Hui" label="Yang Hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="30652" end="30663" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="30811" end="30817" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q233340" start="30839" end="30851" title="Matteo Ricci" label="Matteo Ricci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735738" start="31036" end="31056" title="Japanese mathematics" label="Japanese mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q182017" start="31058" end="31076" title="Korean numerals" label="Korean mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617714" start="31082" end="31104" title="Vietnamese numerals" label="Vietnamese mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="31188" end="31197" title="Confucian" label="Confucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q716566" start="31204" end="31230" title="East Asian cultural sphere" label="East Asian cultural sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="31439" end="31451" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="31545" end="31552" title="Chinese characters" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q875344" start="31578" end="31585" title="Chữ Nôm" label="Chữ Nôm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="31678" end="31687" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q50056" start="31837" end="31867" title="History of astronomy" label="mathematicians and astronomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q423208" start="31924" end="31938" title="private school" label="private school"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="32016" end="32041" title="Indus Valley civilization" label="Indus Valley civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="32104" end="32115" title="Indus river" label="Indus river"/>
<link wikidata="Q84052" start="32304" end="32316" title="Sulba Sutras" label="Sulba Sutras"/>
<link wikidata="Q193394" start="32700" end="32757" title="squaring the circle" label="circle with approximately the same area as a given square"/>
<link wikidata="Q134237" start="32853" end="32864" title="square root" label="square root"/>
<link wikidata="Q11518" start="32951" end="32970" title="Pythagorean theorem" label="Pythagorean theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q189725" start="33288" end="33294" title="Pāṇini" label="Pāṇini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608067" start="33340" end="33356" title="Sanskrit grammar" label="Sanskrit grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196371" start="33436" end="33451" title="Transformation (geometry)" label="transformations"/>
<link wikidata="Q179976" start="33457" end="33466" title="recursion" label="recursion"/>
<link wikidata="Q527384" start="33468" end="33475" title="Pingala" label="Pingala"/>
<link wikidata="Q192624" start="33526" end="33533" title="Prosody (poetry)" label="prosody"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913" start="33567" end="33588" title="binary numeral system" label="binary numeral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q76592" start="33612" end="33625" title="combinatorics" label="combinatorics"/>
<link wikidata="Q630649" start="33629" end="33635" title="Metre (music)" label="meters"/>
<link wikidata="Q26708" start="33680" end="33696" title="binomial theorem" label="binomial theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q23835349" start="33751" end="33767" title="Fibonacci number" label="Fibonacci number"/>
<link wikidata="Q11774" start="33982" end="33994" title="Gupta period" label="Gupta period"/>
<link wikidata="Q11359" start="34428" end="34437" title="Aryabhata" label="Aryabhata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518429" start="34454" end="34465" title="Aryabhatiya" label="Aryabhatiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267533" start="34778" end="34798" title="Islamic mathematics" label="Muslim mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q11826" start="34799" end="34816" title="Abu Rayhan Biruni" label="Abu Rayhan Biruni"/>
<link wikidata="Q202943" start="34936" end="34947" title="Brahmagupta" label="Brahmagupta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425308" start="34963" end="34982" title="Brahmagupta theorem" label="Brahmagupta theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005467" start="34984" end="35011" title="Brahmagupta&amp;#x27;s identity" label="Brahmagupta&amp;#x27;s identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149348" start="35016" end="35042" title="Brahmagupta&amp;#x27;s formula" label="Brahmagupta&amp;#x27;s formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290001" start="35077" end="35100" title="Brahmasphutasiddhanta" label="Brahma-sphuta-siddhanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q204" start="35140" end="35144" title="0 (number)" label="zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q82990" start="35171" end="35184" title="decimal digit" label="decimal digit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059346" start="35204" end="35231" title="Hindu–Arabic numeral system" label="Hindu–Arabic numeral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q29961325" start="35393" end="35408" title="Arabic numerals" label="Arabic numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q430595" start="35686" end="35700" title="Brahmi numeral" label="Brahmi numeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635178" start="35801" end="35810" title="Halayudha" label="Halayudha"/>
<link wikidata="Q527384" start="35832" end="35839" title="Pingala" label="Pingala"/>
<link wikidata="Q23835349" start="35876" end="35894" title="Fibonacci sequence" label="Fibonacci sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q177051" start="35899" end="35921" title="Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle" label="Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44337" start="35956" end="35962" title="matrix (mathematics)" label="matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q213385" start="35986" end="35997" title="Bhāskara II" label="Bhāskara II"/>
<link wikidata="Q189136" start="36186" end="36208" title="Mean value theorem" label="the mean value theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q606014" start="36326" end="36342" title="Narayana Pandita (mathematician)" label="Narayana Pandita"/>
<link wikidata="Q12423184" start="36363" end="36377" title="Ganita Kaumudi" label="Ganita Kaumudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q115590" start="36412" end="36435" title="Madhava of Sangamagrama" label="Madhava of Sangamagrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765138" start="36456" end="36484" title="Kerala School of Astronomy and Mathematics" label="Kerala School of Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q97226587" start="36496" end="36518" title="Leibniz formula for pi" label="Madhava–Leibniz series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36542" end="36560" title="Approximations of π#Middle Ages" label="transformed series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606780" start="36654" end="36680" title="Gregory&amp;#x27;s series" label="the Madhava-Gregory series"/>
<link wikidata="Q206925" start="36729" end="36741" title="power series" label="power series"/>
<link wikidata="Q131187" start="36775" end="36799" title="Taylor series" label="the Taylor approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595755" start="36852" end="36863" title="Jyesthadeva" label="Jyesthadeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="37140" end="37146" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974112" start="37215" end="37222" title="Muziris" label="Muziris"/>
<link wikidata="Q29175" start="37421" end="37436" title="derivative" label="differentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q80091" start="37441" end="37452" title="integral" label="integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="37575" end="37589" title="Caliphate" label="Islamic Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="37613" end="37624" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="37626" end="37638" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="37640" end="37652" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="37654" end="37660" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133136" start="37678" end="37683" title="History of India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="37814" end="37820" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="37851" end="37855" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q9038" start="38070" end="38100" title="Muḥammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī" label="Muḥammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059346" start="38132" end="38153" title="Hindu–Arabic numerals" label="Hindu–Arabic numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q179759" start="38299" end="38307" title="Al-Kindi" label="Al-Kindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279571" start="38340" end="38358" title="Indian mathematics" label="Indian mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059346" start="38363" end="38378" title="Hindu–Arabic numeral system" label="Indian numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="38407" end="38416" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8369" start="38555" end="38607" title="The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing" label="Al-Kitāb al-mukhtaṣar fī hīsāb al-ğabr wa’l-muqābala"/>
<link wikidata="Q211294" start="38842" end="38857" title="Elementary algebra" label="elementary form"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454686" start="38930" end="38939" title="Reduction (mathematics)" label="reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320446" start="39315" end="39325" title="Expository writing" label="exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q335103" start="39745" end="39754" title="Abu Kamil" label="Abu Kamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q607728" start="39786" end="39804" title="irrational numbers" label="irrational numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q461062" start="40349" end="40358" title="Al-Karaji" label="Al-Karaji"/>
<link wikidata="Q11538" start="40523" end="40528" title="Mathematical proof" label="proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q178377" start="40532" end="40554" title="mathematical induction" label="mathematical induction"/>
<link wikidata="Q26708" start="40635" end="40651" title="binomial theorem" label="binomial theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q177051" start="40653" end="40675" title="Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle" label="Pascal&amp;#x27;s triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q861555" start="40701" end="40706" title="Cube (algebra)" label="cubes"/>
<link wikidata="Q201788" start="40712" end="40721" title="historian" label="historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17737" start="40813" end="40819" title="theory" label="theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968" start="40823" end="40830" title="algebra" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q149972" start="40833" end="40841" title="calculus" label="calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q298439" start="40875" end="40884" title="Abul Wafa" label="Abul Wafa"/>
<link wikidata="Q178217" start="40909" end="40919" title="Diophantus" label="Diophantus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11104" start="40933" end="40947" title="Ibn al-Haytham" label="Ibn al-Haytham"/>
<link wikidata="Q192768" start="41210" end="41220" title="paraboloid" label="paraboloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="41281" end="41291" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420049" start="41303" end="41316" title="Quartic polynomial" label="fourth degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q35900" start="41504" end="41516" title="Omar Khayyam" label="Omar Khayyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q172891" start="41621" end="41655" title="Euclid&amp;#x27;s Elements" label="Euclid&amp;#x27;s &amp;quot;Elements&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q207014" start="41672" end="41690" title="parallel postulate" label="parallel postulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q203565" start="41756" end="41770" title="cubic equation" label="cubic equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329260" start="41805" end="41820" title="calendar reform" label="calendar reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q302835" start="41844" end="41861" title="Nasir al-Din Tusi" label="Nasir al-Din Tusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q46463" start="41892" end="41914" title="spherical trigonometry" label="spherical trigonometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q207014" start="41964" end="41982" title="parallel postulate" label="parallel postulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q115466" start="42005" end="42021" title="Ghiyath al-Kashi" label="Ghiyath al-Kashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q318057" start="42210" end="42217" title="Paolo Ruffini (mathematician)" label="Ruffini"/>
<link wikidata="Q441228" start="42222" end="42228" title="William George Horner" label="Horner"/>
<link wikidata="Q427968" start="42322" end="42335" title="decimal point" label="decimal point"/>
<link wikidata="Q29961325" start="42352" end="42367" title="Arabic numerals" label="Arabic numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q93344" start="42401" end="42423" title="trigonometric function" label="trigonometric function"/>
<link wikidata="Q179759" start="42443" end="42451" title="al-Kindi" label="al-Kindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q897511" start="42475" end="42488" title="cryptanalysis" label="cryptanalysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q565636" start="42493" end="42511" title="frequency analysis" label="frequency analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q134787" start="42532" end="42549" title="analytic geometry" label="analytic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11104" start="42553" end="42567" title="Ibn al-Haytham" label="Ibn al-Haytham"/>
<link wikidata="Q180969" start="42586" end="42604" title="algebraic geometry" label="algebraic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q35900" start="42608" end="42620" title="Omar Khayyam" label="Omar Khayyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140046" start="42647" end="42665" title="Mathematical notation" label="algebraic notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462319" start="42669" end="42680" title="Abū al-Hasan ibn Alī al-Qalasādī" label="al-Qalasādī"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="42706" end="42720" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q18234383" start="42725" end="42739" title="Safavid Empire" label="Safavid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="42839" end="42861" title="Pre-Columbian Americas" label="Pre-Columbian Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q28567" start="42867" end="42884" title="Maya civilization" label="Maya civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="42904" end="42910" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="42915" end="42930" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q335109" start="43123" end="43136" title="Maya numerals" label="Maya numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q843684" start="43144" end="43148" title="Radix" label="base"/>
<link wikidata="Q842387" start="43164" end="43173" title="vigesimal" label="vigesimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q81365" start="43235" end="43242" title="decimal" label="decimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012" start="43320" end="43333" title="Maya calendar" label="Maya calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q18358287" start="43395" end="43409" title="Maya astronomy" label="Maya astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q204" start="43432" end="43436" title="zero" label="zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="43834" end="43839" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q371884" start="43853" end="43860" title="Timaeus (dialogue)" label="Timaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q202135" start="43906" end="43920" title="Book of Wisdom" label="Book of Wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q102851" start="44009" end="44017" title="Boethius" label="Boethius"/>
<link wikidata="Q273822" start="44118" end="44128" title="quadrivium" label="quadrivium"/>
<link wikidata="Q360366" start="44291" end="44301" title="Nicomachus" label="Nicomachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052959" start="44704" end="44735" title="Latin translations of the 12th century" label="seeking scientific Arabic texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q9038" start="44747" end="44759" title="al-Khwārizmī" label="al-Khwārizmī"/>
<link wikidata="Q8369" start="44773" end="44836" title="The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing" label="The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q715419" start="44869" end="44886" title="Robert of Chester" label="Robert of Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q312372" start="44983" end="44998" title="Adelard of Bath" label="Adelard of Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q725859" start="45000" end="45019" title="Herman of Carinthia" label="Herman of Carinthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q367240" start="45025" end="45042" title="Gerard of Cremona" label="Gerard of Cremona"/>
<link wikidata="Q8763" start="45138" end="45147" title="Fibonacci" label="Fibonacci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059346" start="45183" end="45204" title="Hindu–Arabic numerals" label="Hindu–Arabic numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q59975" start="45230" end="45236" title="Béjaïa" label="Béjaïa"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="45238" end="45245" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q38918" start="45296" end="45310" title="Roman numerals" label="Roman numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q11205" start="45344" end="45354" title="arithmetic" label="arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q864014" start="45369" end="45377" title="algorism" label="algorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747853" start="45396" end="45415" title="positional notation" label="positional notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044496" start="45520" end="45531" title="Liber Abaci" label="Liber Abaci"/>
<link wikidata="Q23835349" start="45705" end="45723" title="Fibonacci sequence" label="Fibonacci sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q461116" start="46024" end="46042" title="Thomas Bradwardine" label="Thomas Bradwardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q179759" start="46463" end="46471" title="al-Kindi" label="al-Kindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q356568" start="46476" end="46495" title="Arnald of Villanova" label="Arnald of Villanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591169" start="46599" end="46617" title="Oxford Calculators" label="Oxford Calculators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856133" start="46619" end="46637" title="William Heytesbury" label="William Heytesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q149999" start="46647" end="46668" title="differential calculus" label="differential calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q33540" start="46688" end="46694" title="Limit of a function" label="limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q310777" start="47328" end="47341" title="Nicole Oresme" label="Nicole Oresme"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="47349" end="47368" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698735" start="47385" end="47403" title="Giovanni di Casali" label="Giovanni di Casali"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="48048" end="48059" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116214" start="48099" end="48109" title="accounting" label="accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="48335" end="48343" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="48348" end="48355" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q4663184" start="48360" end="48373" title="abacus school" label="abacus school"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707847" start="48528" end="48539" title="bookkeeping" label="bookkeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q959606" start="48611" end="48628" title="compound interest" label="compound interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5822" start="48719" end="48740" title="Piero della Francesca" label="Piero della Francesca"/>
<link wikidata="Q207648" start="48771" end="48785" title="solid geometry" label="solid geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900281" start="48790" end="48808" title="Perspective (graphical)" label="linear perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704153" start="48826" end="48849" title="De Prospectiva Pingendi" label="De Prospectiva Pingendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704155" start="48945" end="48978" title="De quinque corporibus regularibus" label="De quinque corporibus regularibus"/>
<link wikidata="Q87620" start="49015" end="49027" title="Luca Pacioli" label="Luca Pacioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q19321855" start="49041" end="49104" title="Summa de arithmetica" label="Summa de Arithmetica, Geometria, Proportioni et Proportionalità"/>
<link wikidata="Q11205" start="49137" end="49147" title="Arithmetic" label="Arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="49149" end="49157" title="Geometry" label="Geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481047" start="49159" end="49164" title="Ratio" label="Ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q51379" start="49169" end="49179" title="Proportionality (mathematics)" label="Proportion"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="49222" end="49228" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151643" start="49529" end="49549" title="mathematical puzzles" label="mathematical puzzles"/>
<link wikidata="Q747083" start="49669" end="49683" title="plus and minus" label="plus and minus"/>
<link wikidata="Q318083" start="50030" end="50048" title="Scipione del Ferro" label="Scipione del Ferro"/>
<link wikidata="Q201543" start="50053" end="50078" title="Niccolò Fontana Tartaglia" label="Niccolò Fontana Tartaglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q203565" start="50104" end="50118" title="cubic equation" label="cubic equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184530" start="50121" end="50137" title="Gerolamo Cardano" label="Gerolamo Cardano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231083" start="50176" end="50185" title="Ars Magna (Gerolamo Cardano)" label="Ars Magna"/>
<link wikidata="Q476776" start="50226" end="50242" title="quartic equation" label="quartic equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q310783" start="50271" end="50287" title="Lodovico Ferrari" label="Lodovico Ferrari"/>
<link wikidata="Q358547" start="50297" end="50312" title="Rafael Bombelli" label="Rafael Bombelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165172" start="50394" end="50414" title="imaginary number" label="imaginary quantities"/>
<link wikidata="Q23696" start="50489" end="50501" title="Simon Stevin" label="Simon Stevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4414473" start="50515" end="50525" title="De Thiende" label="De Thiende"/>
<link wikidata="Q81365" start="50643" end="50659" title="decimal notation" label="decimal notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="50710" end="50728" title="real number system" label="real number system"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084" start="50822" end="50834" title="trigonometry" label="trigonometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q65187" start="50877" end="50899" title="Bartholomaeus Pitiscus" label="Bartholomaeus Pitiscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36620" start="51618" end="51629" title="Tycho Brahe" label="Tycho Brahe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963" start="51776" end="51791" title="Johannes Kepler" label="Johannes Kepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197" start="51955" end="51964" title="logarithm" label="logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q159592" start="51969" end="51980" title="John Napier" label="John Napier"/>
<link wikidata="Q124025" start="51985" end="51995" title="Jost Bürgi" label="Jost Bürgi"/>
<link wikidata="Q134787" start="52072" end="52089" title="analytic geometry" label="analytic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="52103" end="52117" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="52180" end="52201" title="Cartesian coordinates" label="Cartesian coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="52251" end="52263" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q83219" start="52308" end="52326" title="Kepler&amp;#x27;s Laws" label="Kepler&amp;#x27;s Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q149972" start="52375" end="52383" title="calculus" label="calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="52400" end="52425" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz" label="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913" start="52520" end="52533" title="binary number" label="binary number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933722" start="52589" end="52599" title="Scientific calculator" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q611957" start="52601" end="52612" title="Solid-state electronics" label="solid-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q170451" start="52614" end="52628" title="Logic gate" label="discrete logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="52630" end="52638" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q33521" start="52829" end="52848" title="applied mathematics" label="applied mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q75655" start="52908" end="52924" title="Pierre de Fermat" label="Pierre de Fermat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290" start="52929" end="52942" title="Blaise Pascal" label="Blaise Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5862903" start="53007" end="53025" title="probability theory" label="probability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q76592" start="53057" end="53070" title="combinatorics" label="combinatorics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11416" start="53107" end="53115" title="gambling" label="gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q830200" start="53134" end="53139" title="Pascal&amp;#x27;s Wager" label="wager"/>
<link wikidata="Q466707" start="53384" end="53398" title="utility theory" label="utility theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="53521" end="53535" title="Leonhard Euler" label="Leonhard Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="53600" end="53612" title="graph theory" label="graph theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q33100" start="53622" end="53649" title="Seven Bridges of Königsberg" label="Seven Bridges of Königsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q193796" start="53786" end="53799" title="Imaginary unit" label="&amp;quot;i&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q80222" start="54190" end="54211" title="Joseph Louis Lagrange" label="Joseph Louis Lagrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q44481" start="54323" end="54343" title="Pierre-Simon Laplace" label="Pierre-Simon Laplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="54364" end="54372" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q184274" start="54415" end="54434" title="celestial mechanics" label="celestial mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="54442" end="54452" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="54559" end="54579" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Carl Friedrich Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="54644" end="54653" title="function (mathematics)" label="functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q193756" start="54657" end="54673" title="complex variable" label="complex variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="54679" end="54687" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q170198" start="54715" end="54721" title="series (mathematics)" label="series"/>
<link wikidata="Q192760" start="54822" end="54852" title="fundamental theorem of algebra" label="fundamental theorem of algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q472883" start="54864" end="54889" title="quadratic reciprocity law" label="quadratic reciprocity law"/>
<link wikidata="Q233858" start="54944" end="54966" title="non-Euclidean geometry" label="non-Euclidean geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q207014" start="54978" end="54996" title="parallel postulate" label="parallel postulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q129199" start="55062" end="55091" title="Nikolai Ivanovich Lobachevsky" label="Nikolai Ivanovich Lobachevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q16924" start="55135" end="55147" title="János Bolyai" label="János Bolyai"/>
<link wikidata="Q209306" start="55183" end="55202" title="hyperbolic geometry" label="hyperbolic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332450" start="55326" end="55343" title="Elliptic geometry" label="Elliptic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q42299" start="55412" end="55428" title="Bernhard Riemann" label="Bernhard Riemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q761383" start="55538" end="55557" title="Riemannian geometry" label="Riemannian geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q203920" start="55657" end="55665" title="manifold" label="manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q161973" start="55698" end="55703" title="curve" label="curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q484298" start="55709" end="55717" title="Surface (topology)" label="surfaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="55764" end="55792" title="General relativity" label="theory of general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q159943" start="55849" end="55865" title="abstract algebra" label="abstract algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q77219" start="55867" end="55884" title="Hermann Grassmann" label="Hermann Grassmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q125977" start="55920" end="55932" title="vector space" label="vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q11887" start="55935" end="55957" title="William Rowan Hamilton" label="William Rowan Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049224" start="55979" end="56001" title="noncommutative algebra" label="noncommutative algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q134661" start="56029" end="56041" title="George Boole" label="George Boole"/>
<link wikidata="Q173183" start="56103" end="56118" title="Boolean algebra" label="Boolean algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166618" start="56201" end="56219" title="mathematical logic" label="mathematical logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="56254" end="56276" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="56281" end="56297" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q8814" start="56300" end="56321" title="Augustin-Louis Cauchy" label="Augustin-Louis Cauchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42299" start="56323" end="56339" title="Bernhard Riemann" label="Bernhard Riemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q57103" start="56345" end="56361" title="Karl Weierstrass" label="Karl Weierstrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q124115" start="56484" end="56501" title="Niels Henrik Abel" label="Niels Henrik Abel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091" start="56520" end="56535" title="Évariste Galois" label="Évariste Galois"/>
<link wikidata="Q657482" start="56661" end="56681" title="Abel–Ruffini theorem" label="Abel–Ruffini theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q733081" start="56803" end="56829" title="trisect an arbitrary angle" label="trisect an arbitrary angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193394" start="56897" end="56954" title="Squaring the circle" label="nor to construct a square equal in area to a given circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4440864" start="57104" end="57113" title="dimension" label="dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600211" start="57187" end="57202" title="parameter space" label="parameter space"/>
<link wikidata="Q837414" start="57207" end="57226" title="hypercomplex number" label="hypercomplex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q874429" start="57367" end="57379" title="group theory" label="group theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q159943" start="57410" end="57426" title="abstract algebra" label="abstract algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12485" start="57529" end="57537" title="symmetry" label="symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q76420" start="57566" end="57578" title="Georg Cantor" label="Georg Cantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="57616" end="57626" title="set theory" label="set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166618" start="57795" end="57813" title="mathematical logic" label="mathematical logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191029" start="57830" end="57835" title="Peano" label="Peano"/>
<link wikidata="Q155887" start="57837" end="57851" title="L.E.J. Brouwer" label="L.E.J. Brouwer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41585" start="57853" end="57866" title="David Hilbert" label="David Hilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q33760" start="57868" end="57884" title="Bertrand Russell" label="Bertrand Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q183372" start="57890" end="57904" title="A.N. Whitehead" label="A.N. Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q833585" start="57945" end="57971" title="foundations of mathematics" label="foundations of mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810244" start="58060" end="58087" title="London Mathematical Society" label="London Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726704" start="58101" end="58131" title="Société Mathématique de France" label="Société Mathématique de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q516426" start="58145" end="58174" title="Circolo Matematico di Palermo" label="Circolo Matematico di Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284744" start="58188" end="58218" title="Edinburgh Mathematical Society" label="Edinburgh Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q465654" start="58236" end="58265" title="American Mathematical Society" label="American Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269565" start="58330" end="58348" title="Quaternion Society" label="Quaternion Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58390" end="58408" title="hyperbolic quaternion#Historical review" label="vector controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q61756" start="58420" end="58431" title="Kurt Hensel" label="Kurt Hensel"/>
<link wikidata="Q311627" start="58443" end="58456" title="p-adic number" label="p-adic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346193" start="58777" end="58802" title="Klein&amp;#x27;s encyclopedia" label="Klein&amp;#x27;s encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q860611" start="58829" end="58869" title="International Congress of Mathematicians" label="International Congress of Mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q41585" start="58871" end="58884" title="David Hilbert" label="David Hilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q273167" start="58903" end="58938" title="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s problems" label="23 unsolved problems in mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q65082" start="59262" end="59276" title="Wolfgang Haken" label="Wolfgang Haken"/>
<link wikidata="Q224787" start="59281" end="59294" title="Kenneth Appel" label="Kenneth Appel"/>
<link wikidata="Q184410" start="59306" end="59324" title="four color theorem" label="four color theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q184433" start="59388" end="59400" title="Andrew Wiles" label="Andrew Wiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q132469" start="59441" end="59467" title="Fermat&amp;#x27;s Last Theorem" label="Fermat&amp;#x27;s Last Theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q216809" start="59477" end="59487" title="Paul Cohen (mathematician)" label="Paul Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q41390" start="59492" end="59502" title="Kurt Gödel" label="Kurt Gödel"/>
<link wikidata="Q208416" start="59519" end="59539" title="continuum hypothesis" label="continuum hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705017" start="59543" end="59554" title="logical independence" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q191849" start="59607" end="59636" title="ZFC" label="standard axioms of set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398901" start="59647" end="59669" title="Thomas Callister Hales" label="Thomas Callister Hales"/>
<link wikidata="Q966873" start="59681" end="59698" title="Kepler conjecture" label="Kepler conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340623" start="59814" end="59852" title="classification of finite simple groups" label="classification of finite simple groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q371957" start="60075" end="60089" title="Jean Dieudonné" label="Jean Dieudonné"/>
<link wikidata="Q323232" start="60094" end="60104" title="André Weil" label="André Weil"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="60127" end="60136" title="pseudonym" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q190529" start="60143" end="60159" title="Nicolas Bourbaki" label="Nicolas Bourbaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q188444" start="60340" end="60361" title="Differential geometry" label="Differential geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="60385" end="60400" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="60412" end="60430" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166618" start="60474" end="60492" title="mathematical logic" label="mathematical logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="60494" end="60502" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="60508" end="60524" title="John von Neumann" label="John von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q44455" start="60532" end="60543" title="game theory" label="game theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q748349" start="60636" end="60646" title="Mathematical structure" label="structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="60697" end="60709" title="metric space" label="metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="60712" end="60729" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q217413" start="60828" end="60843" title="category theory" label="category theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q77141" start="60845" end="60857" title="Grothendieck" label="Grothendieck"/>
<link wikidata="Q212063" start="60862" end="60867" title="Jean-Pierre Serre" label="Serre"/>
<link wikidata="Q180969" start="60875" end="60893" title="algebraic geometry" label="algebraic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q595298" start="60900" end="60912" title="Sheaf (mathematics)" label="sheaf theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174497" start="60967" end="60984" title="dynamical systems theory" label="dynamical systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q81082" start="60990" end="60998" title="Henri Poincaré" label="Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q192276" start="61023" end="61037" title="Measure theory" label="Measure theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q853831" start="61132" end="61149" title="Lebesgue integral" label="Lebesgue integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q153224" start="61151" end="61161" title="Kolmogorov" label="Kolmogorov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5862903" start="61187" end="61205" title="probability theory" label="probability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498822" start="61211" end="61225" title="ergodic theory" label="ergodic theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q849798" start="61227" end="61238" title="Knot theory" label="Knot theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="61257" end="61274" title="Quantum mechanics" label="Quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q190549" start="61301" end="61320" title="functional analysis" label="functional analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q180217" start="61376" end="61389" title="Stefan Banach" label="Stefan Banach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260135" start="61427" end="61453" title="Lwów School of Mathematics" label="Lwów School of Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q212081" start="61479" end="61495" title="Laurent Schwartz" label="Laurent Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q865811" start="61503" end="61522" title="Distribution (mathematics)" label="distribution theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422068" start="61524" end="61542" title="Fixed-point theorem" label="fixed point theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4245771" start="61544" end="61562" title="singularity theory" label="singularity theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q164428" start="61567" end="61576" title="René Thom" label="René Thom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345659" start="61584" end="61602" title="catastrophe theory" label="catastrophe theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q467606" start="61604" end="61616" title="model theory" label="model theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q101740" start="61622" end="61632" title="Benoit Mandelbrot" label="Mandelbrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q81392" start="61640" end="61648" title="fractals" label="fractals"/>
<link wikidata="Q357300" start="61650" end="61660" title="Lie theory" label="Lie theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q622679" start="61670" end="61679" title="Lie group" label="Lie group"/>
<link wikidata="Q664495" start="61685" end="61696" title="Lie algebra" label="Lie algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503766" start="61739" end="61760" title="Non-standard analysis" label="Non-standard analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q330567" start="61776" end="61792" title="Abraham Robinson" label="Abraham Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q193885" start="61812" end="61825" title="infinitesimal" label="infinitesimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q33540" start="61907" end="61913" title="Limit of a function" label="limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958543" start="61961" end="61977" title="Hyperreal number" label="Hyperreal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q875333" start="62066" end="62080" title="surreal number" label="surreal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q268961" start="62101" end="62119" title="John Horton Conway" label="John Horton Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320931" start="62139" end="62157" title="combinatorial game" label="combinatorial game"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="62206" end="62214" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="62299" end="62307" title="Private industry" label="industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251" start="62484" end="62495" title="Alan Turing" label="Alan Turing"/>
<link wikidata="Q818930" start="62503" end="62523" title="computability theory" label="computability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q205084" start="62525" end="62542" title="Computational complexity theory" label="complexity theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200338" start="62544" end="62564" title="Derrick Henry Lehmer" label="Derrick Henry Lehmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q169399" start="62579" end="62584" title="ENIAC" label="ENIAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138992" start="62618" end="62645" title="Lucas–Lehmer primality test" label="Lucas–Lehmer primality test"/>
<link wikidata="Q453518" start="62647" end="62658" title="Rózsa Péter" label="Rózsa Péter"/>
<link wikidata="Q284164" start="62666" end="62691" title="recursive function theory" label="recursive function theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q92760" start="62693" end="62707" title="Claude Shannon" label="Claude Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131222" start="62715" end="62733" title="information theory" label="information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q208163" start="62735" end="62752" title="signal processing" label="signal processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988917" start="62754" end="62767" title="data analysis" label="data analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q141495" start="62769" end="62781" title="Mathematical optimization" label="optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q194292" start="62801" end="62820" title="operations research" label="operations research"/>
<link wikidata="Q121416" start="63003" end="63011" title="discrete mathematics" label="discrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q76592" start="63042" end="63055" title="combinatorics" label="combinatorics"/>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="63066" end="63078" title="graph theory" label="graph theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11216" start="63285" end="63303" title="numerical analysis" label="numerical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670846" start="63308" end="63328" title="symbolic computation" label="symbolic computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="63369" end="63378" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q134164" start="63409" end="63426" title="simplex algorithm" label="simplex algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q623950" start="63432" end="63454" title="fast Fourier transform" label="fast Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611017" start="63456" end="63477" title="error-correcting code" label="error-correcting code"/>
<link wikidata="Q846780" start="63484" end="63497" title="Kalman filter" label="Kalman filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501221" start="63503" end="63517" title="control theory" label="control theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q181551" start="63526" end="63539" title="RSA algorithm" label="RSA algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q201339" start="63543" end="63566" title="public-key cryptography" label="public-key cryptography"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="63741" end="63755" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q430001" start="63816" end="63825" title="Decidability (logic)" label="decidable"/>
<link wikidata="Q41390" start="63880" end="63890" title="Kurt Gödel" label="Kurt Gödel"/>
<link wikidata="Q842755" start="64009" end="64025" title="Peano arithmetic" label="Peano arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q200787" start="64039" end="64049" title="incompleteness theorem" label="incomplete"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="64100" end="64113" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="64139" end="64151" title="prime number" label="prime number"/>
<link wikidata="Q200787" start="64188" end="64210" title="incompleteness theorem" label="incompleteness theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754" start="64296" end="64304" title="mathematical analysis" label="analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q200787" start="64389" end="64405" title="Incompleteness theorem" label="cannot be proved"/>
<link wikidata="Q41585" start="64488" end="64501" title="David Hilbert" label="David Hilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q83163" start="64660" end="64688" title="Srinivasa Aiyangar Ramanujan" label="Srinivasa Aiyangar Ramanujan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207650" start="64712" end="64722" title="autodidact" label="autodidact"/>
<link wikidata="Q629958" start="64749" end="64772" title="highly composite number" label="highly composite number"/>
<link wikidata="Q15846551" start="64779" end="64797" title="partition function (number theory)" label="partition function"/>
<link wikidata="Q752718" start="64806" end="64817" title="asymptotics" label="asymptotics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630765" start="64823" end="64843" title="Ramanujan theta function" label="mock theta functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q190573" start="64895" end="64909" title="gamma function" label="gamma function"/>
<link wikidata="Q870797" start="64912" end="64924" title="modular form" label="modular form"/>
<link wikidata="Q906520" start="64927" end="64943" title="divergent series" label="divergent series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532351" start="64945" end="64966" title="General hypergeometric function" label="hypergeometric series"/>
<link wikidata="Q173746" start="64993" end="65003" title="Paul Erdős" label="Paul Erdős"/>
<link wikidata="Q117054" start="65152" end="65168" title="Kevin Bacon Game" label="Kevin Bacon Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q243972" start="65189" end="65201" title="Erdős number" label="Erdős number"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099" start="65361" end="65373" title="Emmy Noether" label="Emmy Noether"/>
<link wikidata="Q161172" start="65488" end="65493" title="ring (mathematics)" label="rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="65495" end="65501" title="field (mathematics)" label="fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000660" start="65507" end="65515" title="algebra over a field" label="algebras"/>
<link wikidata="Q967960" start="65713" end="65747" title="Mathematics Subject Classification" label="Mathematics Subject Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633421" start="65788" end="65808" title="mathematical journal" label="mathematical journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="65880" end="65894" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q857975" start="65957" end="65983" title="Clay Mathematics Institute" label="Clay Mathematics Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q727000" start="66004" end="66029" title="Millennium Prize Problems" label="Millennium Prize Problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q203586" start="66043" end="66062" title="Poincaré conjecture" label="Poincaré conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q117346" start="66077" end="66093" title="Grigori Perelman" label="Grigori Perelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q232932" start="66342" end="66364" title="Open access (publishing)" label="open access publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q118398" start="66388" end="66393" title="arXiv" label="arXiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q858810" start="66803" end="66811" title="big data" label="big data"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928428" start="66885" end="66911" title="Bureau of Labor Statistics" label="Bureau of Labor Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q55263586" start="67067" end="67099" title="Archives of American Mathematics" label="Archives of American Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q282213" start="67102" end="67118" title="Ethnomathematics" label="Ethnomathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018842" start="67121" end="67139" title="History of algebra" label="History of algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11205" start="67142" end="67163" title="History of arithmetic" label="History of arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338709" start="67166" end="67185" title="History of calculus" label="History of calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124551" start="67188" end="67212" title="History of combinatorics" label="History of combinatorics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870804" start="67215" end="67246" title="History of the function concept" label="History of the function concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393733" start="67249" end="67268" title="History of geometry" label="History of geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053855" start="67271" end="67294" title="History of group theory" label="History of group theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q468620" start="67297" end="67313" title="History of logic" label="History of logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="67316" end="67341" title="History of mathematicians" label="History of mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3893386" start="67344" end="67376" title="History of mathematical notation" label="History of mathematical notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q206567" start="67379" end="67401" title="History of measurement" label="History of measurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11563" start="67404" end="67422" title="History of numbers" label="History of numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12702745" start="67426" end="67460" title="History of ancient numeral systems" label="History of ancient numeral systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860391" start="67464" end="67484" title="Prehistoric counting" label="Prehistoric counting"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="67487" end="67511" title="History of number theory" label="History of number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444687" start="67514" end="67535" title="History of statistics" label="History of statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344515" start="67538" end="67561" title="History of trigonometry" label="History of trigonometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q122653" start="67564" end="67590" title="History of writing numbers" label="History of writing numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140149" start="67593" end="67613" title="Kenneth O. May Prize" label="Kenneth O. May Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q6623911" start="67616" end="67661" title="List of important publications in mathematics" label="List of important publications in mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q66777993" start="67664" end="67687" title="Lists of mathematicians" label="Lists of mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627368" start="67690" end="67724" title="List of mathematics history topics" label="List of mathematics history topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080465" start="67727" end="67748" title="Mathematical folklore" label="Mathematical folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q737279" start="67751" end="67774" title="Timeline of mathematics" label="Timeline of mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67865" end="67881" title="David M. Burton" label="Burton, David M."/>
<link wikidata="Q222850" start="67962" end="67975" title="Morris Kline" label="Kline, Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q932815" start="68042" end="68055" title="Dirk Jan Struik" label="Struik, D. J."/>
<link wikidata="Q287097" start="68206" end="68228" title="Bartel Leendert van der Waerden" label="van der Waerden, B. L."/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="68393" end="68396" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522870" start="68411" end="68429" title="The Story of Maths" label="The Story of Maths"/>
<link wikidata="Q102174077" start="68972" end="68986" title="David E. Joyce (mathematician)" label="David E. Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q31781751" start="69915" end="69934" title="V. Frederick Rickey" label="V. Frederick Rickey"/>
<link wikidata="Q26202476" start="69941" end="69955" title="Victor J. Katz" label="Victor J. Katz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330664" start="70340" end="70360" title="Historia Mathematica" label="Historia Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813899" start="70387" end="70422" title="Mathematical Association of America" label="Mathematical Association of America"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14223" wikidata="Q1270572" url="?curid=14223" title="HSK">
<text>HSK may refer to:

== Sport ==
* Helsingfors Segelklubb, a Finnish sailing club
* Helsingfors Skridskoklubb, a Finnish figure skating club
*Henderson Silver Knights, an American hockey team

== Transport ==
* Hassocks railway station, Sussex, England
* Hung Shui Kiu station, Hong Kong
* Hung Shui Kiu stop, Hong Kong
* Huesca–Pirineos Airport, Aragon, Spain
* Handels-Stör-Kreuzer, a German auxiliary cruiser

== Other uses ==
* H. S. Krishnaswamy Iyengar
* &quot;Hanyu Shuiping Kaoshi&quot; or Chinese Proficiency Test
* Homoserine kinase, an enzyme
* Horrendous Space Kablooie, a &quot;Calvin and Hobbes&quot; reference to the Big Bang
* Hohlschaftkegel (&quot;hollow shank taper&quot;), a form of machine taper</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1270572" start="0" end="3" title="HSK" label="HSK"/>
<link wikidata="Q21162270" start="33" end="55" title="Helsingfors Segelklubb" label="Helsingfors Segelklubb"/>
<link wikidata="Q627889" start="82" end="107" title="Helsingfors Skridskoklubb" label="Helsingfors Skridskoklubb"/>
<link wikidata="Q95731406" start="140" end="164" title="Henderson Silver Knights" label="Henderson Silver Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831648" start="209" end="233" title="Hassocks railway station" label="Hassocks railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5942631" start="253" end="274" title="Hung Shui Kiu station" label="Hung Shui Kiu station"/>
<link wikidata="Q8427262" start="288" end="306" title="Hung Shui Kiu stop" label="Hung Shui Kiu stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q537632" start="320" end="343" title="Huesca–Pirineos Airport" label="Huesca–Pirineos Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569963" start="392" end="409" title="auxiliary cruiser" label="auxiliary cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q81764680" start="430" end="456" title="H. S. Krishnaswamy Iyengar" label="H. S. Krishnaswamy Iyengar"/>
<link wikidata="Q535477" start="465" end="486" title="Hanyu Shuiping Kaoshi" label="Hanyu Shuiping Kaoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8120316" start="523" end="540" title="Homoserine kinase" label="Homoserine kinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q211035" start="554" end="579" title="Horrendous Space Kablooie" label="Horrendous Space Kablooie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="701" end="714" title="machine taper#HSK taper" label="machine taper"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14225" wikidata="Q6643508" url="?curid=14225" title="Hydrogen atom">
<text>A hydrogen atom is an atom of the chemical element hydrogen. The electrically neutral hydrogen atom contains a single positively charged proton in the nucleus, and a single negatively charged electron bound to the nucleus by the Coulomb force. Atomic hydrogen constitutes about 75% of the baryonic mass of the universe.

In everyday life on Earth, isolated hydrogen atoms (called &quot;atomic hydrogen&quot;) are extremely rare. Instead, a hydrogen atom tends to combine with other atoms in compounds, or with another hydrogen atom to form ordinary (diatomic) hydrogen gas, H2. &quot;Atomic hydrogen&quot; and &quot;hydrogen atom&quot; in ordinary English use have overlapping, yet distinct, meanings. For example, a water molecule contains two hydrogen atoms, but does not contain atomic hydrogen (which would refer to isolated hydrogen atoms).

Atomic spectroscopy shows that there is a discrete infinite set of states in which a hydrogen (or any) atom can exist, contrary to the predictions of classical physics. Attempts to develop a theoretical understanding of the states of the hydrogen atom have been important to the history of quantum mechanics, since all other atoms can be roughly understood by knowing in detail about this simplest atomic structure.

==Isotopes==

The most abundant isotope, protium (1H), or light hydrogen, contains no neutrons and is simply a proton and an electron. Protium is stable and makes up 99.985% of naturally occurring hydrogen atoms.

Deuterium (2H) contains one neutron and one proton in its nucleus. Deuterium is stable, makes up 0.0156% of naturally occurring hydrogen, and is used in industrial processes like nuclear reactors and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance.

Tritium (3H) contains two neutrons and one proton in its nucleus and is not stable, decaying with a half-life of 12.32 years. Because of its short half-life, tritium does not exist in nature except in trace amounts.

Heavier isotopes of hydrogen are only created artificially in particle accelerators and have half-lives on the order of 10−22 seconds. They are unbound resonances located beyond the neutron drip line; this results in prompt emission of a neutron.

The formulas below are valid for all three isotopes of hydrogen, but slightly different values of the Rydberg constant (correction formula given below) must be used for each hydrogen isotope.

==Hydrogen ion==

Lone neutral hydrogen atoms are rare under normal conditions. However, neutral hydrogen is common when it is covalently bound to another atom, and hydrogen atoms can also exist in cationic and anionic forms.

If a neutral hydrogen atom loses its electron, it becomes a cation. The resulting ion, which consists solely of a proton for the usual isotope, is written as &quot;H+&quot; and sometimes called &quot;hydron&quot;. Free protons are common in the interstellar medium, and solar wind. In the context of aqueous solutions of classical Brønsted–Lowry acids, such as hydrochloric acid, it is actually hydronium, H3O+, that is meant. Instead of a literal ionized single hydrogen atom being formed, the acid transfers the hydrogen to H2O, forming H3O+.

If instead a hydrogen atom gains a second electron, it becomes an anion. The hydrogen anion is written as &quot;H–&quot; and called &quot;hydride&quot;.

==Theoretical analysis==
The hydrogen atom has special significance in quantum mechanics and quantum field theory as a simple two-body problem physical system which has yielded many simple analytical solutions in closed-form.

=== Failed classical description ===
Experiments by Ernest Rutherford in 1909 showed the structure of the atom to be a dense, positive nucleus with a tenuous negative charge cloud around it. This immediately raised questions about how such a system could be stable. Classical electromagnetism had shown that any accelerating charge radiates energy, as shown by the Larmor formula. If the electron is assumed to orbit in a perfect circle and radiates energy continuously, the electron would rapidly spiral into the nucleus with a fall time of:
formula_1
where formula_2 is the Bohr radius and formula_3 is the classical electron radius. If this were true, all atoms would instantly collapse. However, atoms seem to be stable. Furthermore, the spiral inward would release a smear of electromagnetic frequencies as the orbit got smaller. Instead, atoms were observed to emit only discrete frequencies of radiation. The resolution would lie in the development of quantum mechanics.

=== Bohr–Sommerfeld Model ===

In 1913, Niels Bohr obtained the energy levels and spectral frequencies of the hydrogen atom after making a number of simple assumptions in order to correct the failed classical model. The assumptions included:

# Electrons can only be in certain, discrete circular orbits or &quot;stationary states&quot;, thereby having a discrete set of possible radii and energies.
# Electrons do not emit radiation while in one of these stationary states.
# An electron can gain or lose energy by jumping from one discrete orbit to another.

Bohr supposed that the electron&#x27;s angular momentum is quantized with possible values:
formula_4 where formula_5
and formula_6 is Planck constant over formula_7. He also supposed that the centripetal force which keeps the electron in its orbit is provided by the Coulomb force, and that energy is conserved. Bohr derived the energy of each orbit of the hydrogen atom to be:
formula_8
where formula_9 is the electron mass, formula_10 is the electron charge, formula_11 is the vacuum permittivity, and formula_12 is the quantum number (now known as the principal quantum number). Bohr&#x27;s predictions matched experiments measuring the hydrogen spectral series to the first order, giving more confidence to a theory that used quantized values.

For formula_13, the value
formula_14
is called the Rydberg unit of energy. It is related to the Rydberg constant formula_15 of atomic physics by formula_16

The exact value of the Rydberg constant assumes that the nucleus is infinitely massive with respect to the electron. For hydrogen-1, hydrogen-2 (deuterium), and hydrogen-3 (tritium) which have finite mass, the constant must be slightly modified to use the reduced mass of the system, rather than simply the mass of the electron. This includes the kinetic energy of the nucleus in the problem, because the total (electron plus nuclear) kinetic energy is equivalent to the kinetic energy of the reduced mass moving with a velocity equal to the electron velocity relative to the nucleus. However, since the nucleus is much heavier than the electron, the electron mass and reduced mass are nearly the same. The Rydberg constant &quot;RM&quot; for a hydrogen atom (one electron), &quot;R&quot; is given by
formula_17
where formula_18 is the mass of the atomic nucleus. For hydrogen-1, the quantity formula_19 is about 1/1836 (i.e. the electron-to-proton mass ratio). For deuterium and tritium, the ratios are about 1/3670 and 1/5497 respectively. These figures, when added to 1 in the denominator, represent very small corrections in the value of &quot;R&quot;, and thus only small corrections to all energy levels in corresponding hydrogen isotopes.

There were still problems with Bohr&#x27;s model:

# it failed to predict other spectral details such as fine structure and hyperfine structure
# it could only predict energy levels with any accuracy for single–electron atoms (hydrogen-like atoms)
# the predicted values were only correct to formula_20, where formula_21 is the fine-structure constant.

Most of these shortcomings were resolved by Arnold Sommerfeld&#x27;s modification of the Bohr model. Sommerfeld introduced two additional degrees of freedom, allowing an electron to move on an elliptical orbit characterized by its eccentricity and declination with respect to a chosen axis. This introduced two additional quantum numbers, which correspond to the orbital angular momentum and its projection on the chosen axis. Thus the correct multiplicity of states (except for the factor 2 accounting for the yet unknown electron spin) was found. Further, by applying special relativity to the elliptic orbits, Sommerfeld succeeded in deriving the correct expression for the fine structure of hydrogen spectra (which happens to be exactly the same as in the most elaborate Dirac theory). However, some observed phenomena, such as the anomalous Zeeman effect, remained unexplained. These issues were resolved with the full development of quantum mechanics and the Dirac equation. It is often alleged that the Schrödinger equation is superior to the Bohr–Sommerfeld theory in describing hydrogen atom. This is not the case, as most of the results of both approaches coincide or are very close (a remarkable exception is the problem of hydrogen atom in crossed electric and magnetic fields, which cannot be self-consistently solved in the framework of the Bohr–Sommerfeld theory), and in both theories the main shortcomings result from the absence of the electron spin. It was the complete failure of the Bohr–Sommerfeld theory to explain many-electron systems (such as helium atom or hydrogen molecule) which demonstrated its inadequacy in describing quantum phenomena.

=== Schrödinger equation ===
The Schrödinger equation is the standard quantum-mechanics model; it allows one to calculate the stationary states and also the time evolution of quantum systems. Exact analytical answers are available for the nonrelativistic hydrogen atom. Before we go to present a formal account, here we give an elementary overview.

Given that the hydrogen atom contains a nucleus and an electron, quantum mechanics allows one to predict the probability of finding the electron at any given radial distance formula_22. It is given by the square of a mathematical function known as the &quot;wavefunction&quot;, which is a solution of the Schrödinger equation. The lowest energy equilibrium state of the hydrogen atom is known as the ground state. The ground state wave function is known as the formula_23 wavefunction. It is written as:
formula_24

Here, formula_2 is the numerical value of the Bohr radius. The probability density of finding the electron at a distance formula_22 in any radial direction is the squared value of the wavefunction:
formula_27

The formula_28 wavefunction is spherically symmetric, and the surface area of a shell at distance formula_22 is formula_30, so the total probability formula_31 of the electron being in a shell at a distance formula_22 and thickness formula_33 is
formula_34

It turns out that this is a maximum at formula_35. That is, the Bohr picture of an electron orbiting the nucleus at radius formula_2 corresponds to the most probable radius. Actually, there is a finite probability that the electron may be found at any place formula_22, with the
probability indicated by the square of the wavefunction. Since the probability of finding the electron &quot;somewhere&quot; in the whole volume is unity, the integral of formula_38 is unity. Then we say that the wavefunction is properly normalized.

As discussed below, the ground state formula_28 is also indicated by the quantum numbers formula_40. The second lowest energy states, just above the ground state, are given by the quantum numbers formula_41, formula_42, and formula_43. These formula_44 states all have the same energy and are known as the formula_45 and formula_46 states. There is one formula_45 state:
formula_48
and there are three formula_46 states:
formula_50
formula_51

An electron in the formula_45 or formula_46 state is most likely to be found in the second Bohr orbit with energy given by the Bohr formula.

==== Wavefunction ====
The Hamiltonian of the hydrogen atom is the radial kinetic energy operator plus the Coulomb electrostatic potential energy between the positive proton and the negative electron. Using the time-independent Schrödinger equation, ignoring all spin-coupling interactions and using the reduced mass formula_54, the equation is written as:
formula_55

Expanding the Laplacian in spherical coordinates:
formula_56

This is a separable, partial differential equation which can be solved in terms of special functions. When the wavefunction is separated as product of functions formula_57, formula_58, and formula_59 three independent differential functions appears with A and B being the separation constants:
* radial: formula_60
* polar: formula_61
* azimuth: formula_62

The normalized position wavefunctions, given in spherical coordinates are:
formula_63
where:
* formula_64,
* formula_65 is the reduced Bohr radius, formula_66,
* formula_67 is a generalized Laguerre polynomial of degree formula_68, and
* formula_69 is a spherical harmonic function of degree formula_70 and order formula_71. 

Note that the generalized Laguerre polynomials are defined differently by different authors. The usage here is consistent with the definitions used by Messiah, and Mathematica. In other places, the Laguerre polynomial includes a factor of formula_72, or the generalized Laguerre polynomial appearing in the hydrogen wave function is formula_73 instead.

The quantum numbers can take the following values:
* formula_74 (principal quantum number)
* formula_75 (azimuthal quantum number)
* formula_76 (magnetic quantum number).

Additionally, these wavefunctions are &quot;normalized&quot; (i.e., the integral of their modulus square equals 1) and orthogonal:
formula_77
where formula_78 is the state represented by the wavefunction formula_79 in Dirac notation, and formula_80 is the Kronecker delta function.

The wavefunctions in momentum space are related to the wavefunctions in position space through a Fourier transform
formula_81
which, for the bound states, results in
formula_82
where formula_83 denotes a Gegenbauer polynomial and formula_84 is in units of formula_85.

The solutions to the Schrödinger equation for hydrogen are analytical, giving a simple expression for the hydrogen energy levels and thus the frequencies of the hydrogen spectral lines and fully reproduced the Bohr model and went beyond it. It also yields two other quantum numbers and the shape of the electron&#x27;s wave function (&quot;orbital&quot;) for the various possible quantum-mechanical states, thus explaining the anisotropic character of atomic bonds.

The Schrödinger equation also applies to more complicated atoms and molecules. When there is more than one electron or nucleus the solution is not analytical and either computer calculations are necessary or simplifying assumptions must be made.

Since the Schrödinger equation is only valid for non-relativistic quantum mechanics, the solutions it yields for the hydrogen atom are not entirely correct. The Dirac equation of relativistic quantum theory improves these solutions (see below).

==== Results of Schrödinger equation ====
The solution of the Schrödinger equation (wave equation) for the hydrogen atom uses the fact that the Coulomb potential produced by the nucleus is isotropic (it is radially symmetric in space and only depends on the distance to the nucleus). Although the resulting energy eigenfunctions (the &quot;orbitals&quot;) are not necessarily isotropic themselves, their dependence on the angular coordinates follows completely generally from this isotropy of the underlying potential: the eigenstates of the Hamiltonian (that is, the energy eigenstates) can be chosen as simultaneous eigenstates of the angular momentum operator. This corresponds to the fact that angular momentum is conserved in the orbital motion of the electron around the nucleus. Therefore, the energy eigenstates may be classified by two angular momentum quantum numbers, formula_70 and formula_71 (both are integers). The angular momentum quantum number formula_88 determines the magnitude of the angular momentum. The magnetic quantum number formula_89 determines the projection of the angular momentum on the (arbitrarily chosen) formula_90-axis.

In addition to mathematical expressions for total angular momentum and angular momentum projection of wavefunctions, an expression for the radial dependence of the wave functions must be found. It is only here that the details of the formula_91 Coulomb potential enter (leading to Laguerre polynomials in formula_22). This leads to a third quantum number, the principal quantum number formula_74. The principal quantum number in hydrogen is related to the atom&#x27;s total energy.

Note that the maximum value of the angular momentum quantum number is limited by the principal quantum number: it can run only up to formula_94, i.e., formula_95.

Due to angular momentum conservation, states of the same formula_70 but different formula_71 have the same energy (this holds for all problems with rotational symmetry). In addition, for the hydrogen atom, states of the same formula_98 but different formula_70 are also degenerate (i.e., they have the same energy). However, this is a specific property of hydrogen and is no longer true for more complicated atoms which have an (effective) potential differing from the form formula_91 (due to the presence of the inner electrons shielding the nucleus potential).

Taking into account the spin of the electron adds a last quantum number, the projection of the electron&#x27;s spin angular momentum along the formula_90-axis, which can take on two values. Therefore, any eigenstate of the electron in the hydrogen atom is described fully by four quantum numbers. According to the usual rules of quantum mechanics, the actual state of the electron may be any superposition of these states. This explains also why the choice of formula_90-axis for the directional quantization of the angular momentum vector is immaterial: an orbital of given formula_70 and formula_104 obtained for another preferred axis formula_105 can always be represented as a suitable superposition of the various states of different formula_71 (but same formula_70) that have been obtained for formula_90.

==== Mathematical summary of eigenstates of hydrogen atom ====
In 1928, Paul Dirac found an equation that was fully compatible with special relativity, and (as a consequence) made the wave function a 4-component &quot;Dirac spinor&quot; including &quot;up&quot; and &quot;down&quot; spin components, with both positive and &quot;negative&quot; energy (or matter and antimatter). The solution to this equation gave the following results, more accurate than the Schrödinger solution.

=====Energy levels=====
The energy levels of hydrogen, including fine structure (excluding Lamb shift and hyperfine structure), are given by the Sommerfeld fine-structure expression:
formula_109
where formula_21 is the fine-structure constant and formula_111 is the total angular momentum quantum number, which is equal to formula_112, depending on the orientation of the electron spin relative to the orbital angular momentum. This formula represents a small correction to the energy obtained by Bohr and Schrödinger as given above. The factor in square brackets in the last expression is nearly one; the extra term arises from relativistic effects (for details, see #Features going beyond the Schrödinger solution). It is worth noting that this expression was first obtained by A. Sommerfeld in 1916 based on the relativistic version of the old Bohr theory. Sommerfeld has however used different notation for the quantum numbers.

=== Visualizing the hydrogen electron orbitals ===
The image to the right shows the first few hydrogen atom orbitals (energy eigenfunctions). These are cross-sections of the probability density that are color-coded (black represents zero density and white represents the highest density). The angular momentum (orbital) quantum number &quot;ℓ&quot; is denoted in each column, using the usual spectroscopic letter code (&quot;s&quot; means &quot;ℓ&quot; = 0, &quot;p&quot; means &quot;ℓ&quot; = 1, &quot;d&quot; means &quot;ℓ&quot; = 2). The main (principal) quantum number &quot;n&quot; (= 1, 2, 3, ...) is marked to the right of each row. For all pictures the magnetic quantum number &quot;m&quot; has been set to 0, and the cross-sectional plane is the &quot;xz&quot;-plane (&quot;z&quot; is the vertical axis). The probability density in three-dimensional space is obtained by rotating the one shown here around the &quot;z&quot;-axis.

The &quot;ground state&quot;, i.e. the state of lowest energy, in which the electron is usually found, is the first one, the 1&quot;s&quot; state (principal quantum level &quot;n&quot; = 1, &quot;ℓ&quot; = 0).

Black lines occur in each but the first orbital: these are the nodes of the wavefunction, i.e. where the probability density is zero. (More precisely, the nodes are spherical harmonics that appear as a result of solving the Schrödinger equation in spherical coordinates.)

The quantum numbers determine the layout of these nodes. There are:

* formula_113 total nodes,
* formula_70 of which are angular nodes:
** formula_71 angular nodes go around the formula_116 axis (in the &quot;xy&quot; plane). 
** formula_117 (the remaining angular nodes) occur on the formula_118 (vertical) axis.
* formula_68 (the remaining non-angular nodes) are radial nodes.

==== Oscillation of orbitals ====

The frequency of a state in level n is formula_120, so in case of a superposition of multiple orbitals, they would oscillate due to the difference in frequency. For example two states, ψ1and ψ2: The wavefunction is given by formula_121 and the probability function is 
formula_122 formula_123 

The result is a rotating wavefunction. The movement of electrons and change of quantum states radiates light at a frequency of the cosine.

==== Features going beyond the Schrödinger solution ====
There are several important effects that are neglected by the Schrödinger equation and which are responsible for certain small but measurable deviations of the real spectral lines from the predicted ones:

* Although the mean speed of the electron in hydrogen is only 1/137th of the speed of light, many modern experiments are sufficiently precise that a complete theoretical explanation requires a fully relativistic treatment of the problem. A relativistic treatment results in a momentum increase of about 1 part in 37,000 for the electron. Since the electron&#x27;s wavelength is determined by its momentum, orbitals containing higher speed electrons show contraction due to smaller wavelengths.
* Even when there is no external magnetic field, in the inertial frame of the moving electron, the electromagnetic field of the nucleus has a magnetic component. The spin of the electron has an associated magnetic moment which interacts with this magnetic field. This effect is also explained by special relativity, and it leads to the so-called &quot;spin–orbit coupling&quot;, i.e., an interaction between the electron&#x27;s orbital motion around the nucleus, and its spin.

Both of these features (and more) are incorporated in the relativistic Dirac equation, with predictions that come still closer to experiment. Again the Dirac equation may be solved analytically in the special case of a two-body system, such as the hydrogen atom. The resulting solution quantum states now must be classified by the total angular momentum number (arising through the coupling between electron spin and orbital angular momentum). States of the same and the same are still degenerate. Thus, direct analytical solution of Dirac equation predicts 2S() and 2P() levels of hydrogen to have exactly the same energy, which is in a contradiction with observations (Lamb–Retherford experiment).

* There are always vacuum fluctuations of the electromagnetic field, according to quantum mechanics. Due to such fluctuations degeneracy between states of the same but different is lifted, giving them slightly different energies. This has been demonstrated in the famous Lamb–Retherford experiment and was the starting point for the development of the theory of quantum electrodynamics (which is able to deal with these vacuum fluctuations and employs the famous Feynman diagrams for approximations using perturbation theory). This effect is now called Lamb shift.

For these developments, it was essential that the solution of the Dirac equation for the hydrogen atom could be worked out exactly, such that any experimentally observed deviation had to be taken seriously as a signal of failure of the theory.

== Alternatives to the Schrödinger theory ==
In the language of Heisenberg&#x27;s matrix mechanics, the hydrogen atom was first solved by Wolfgang Pauli using a rotational symmetry in four dimensions [O(4)-symmetry] generated by the angular momentum
and the Laplace–Runge–Lenz vector. By extending the symmetry group O(4) to the dynamical group O(4,2),
the entire spectrum and all transitions were embedded in a single irreducible group representation.

In 1979 the (non-relativistic) hydrogen atom was solved for the first time within Feynman&#x27;s path integral formulation
of quantum mechanics by Duru and Kleinert. This work greatly extended the range of applicability of Feynman&#x27;s method.

Further alternative models are Bohm mechanics and the complex Hamilton-Jacobi formulation of quantum mechanics.

==See also==

* Antihydrogen
* Atomic orbital
* Balmer series
* Helium atom
* Hydrogen molecular ion
* List of quantum-mechanical systems with analytical solutions
* Lithium atom
* Proton decay
* Quantum chemistry
* Quantum state
* Trihydrogen cation

==References==
==Books==
* Section 4.2 deals with the hydrogen atom specifically, but all of Chapter 4 is relevant.
* Kleinert, H. (2009). &quot;Path Integrals in Quantum Mechanics, Statistics, Polymer Physics, and Financial Markets&quot;, 4th edition, Worldscibooks.com, World Scientific, Singapore (also available online physik.fu-berlin.de)

==External links==
*The Hydrogen Atom and The Periodic Table - The Feynman Lectures on Physics
*Physics of hydrogen atom on Scienceworld</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6643508" start="2" end="15" title="Hydrogen atom" label="hydrogen atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="22" end="26" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="34" end="50" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="51" end="59" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111" start="65" end="77" title="Electric charge" label="electrically"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="137" end="143" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="192" end="200" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q83152" start="229" end="242" title="Coulomb force" label="Coulomb force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643508" start="244" end="259" title="Hydrogen atom" label="Atomic hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q428867" start="272" end="281" title="abundance of the chemical elements" label="about 75%"/>
<link wikidata="Q159731" start="289" end="295" title="baryon" label="baryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751859" start="550" end="558" title="diatomic" label="diatomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14068679" start="847" end="866" title="Atomic spectroscopy" label="Atomic spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81745" start="997" end="1014" title="classical physics" label="classical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358974" start="1126" end="1154" title="history of quantum mechanics" label="history of quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q428867" start="1287" end="1295" title="Abundance of the chemical elements" label="abundant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25276" start="1296" end="1303" title="isotope" label="isotope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="1350" end="1357" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="1375" end="1381" title="proton" label="proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="1389" end="1397" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065997" start="1410" end="1416" title="Proton decay" label="stable"/>
<link wikidata="Q102296" start="1478" end="1487" title="Deuterium" label="Deuterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="1657" end="1672" title="nuclear reactor" label="nuclear reactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16965936" start="1678" end="1704" title="Deuterium NMR" label="Nuclear Magnetic Resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q54389" start="1707" end="1714" title="Tritium" label="Tritium"/>
<link wikidata="Q47270" start="1807" end="1816" title="half-life" label="half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q130825" start="1986" end="2007" title="particle accelerators" label="particle accelerators"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145840" start="2076" end="2086" title="resonance (particle physics)" label="resonances"/>
<link wikidata="Q12354166" start="2106" end="2123" title="neutron drip line" label="neutron drip line"/>
<link wikidata="Q898923" start="2148" end="2169" title="neutron emission" label="emission of a neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q658065" start="2274" end="2290" title="Rydberg constant" label="Rydberg constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q127920" start="2492" end="2508" title="covalent bond" label="covalently bound"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2563" end="2583" title="Ion#Anions and cations" label="cationic and anionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q506710" start="2792" end="2798" title="Hydron (chemistry)" label="hydron"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="2837" end="2856" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q79833" start="2862" end="2872" title="solar wind" label="solar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q906356" start="2892" end="2908" title="aqueous solution" label="aqueous solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q556036" start="2923" end="2942" title="Brønsted–Lowry acid" label="Brønsted–Lowry acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="2953" end="2970" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q849881" start="2987" end="2996" title="hydronium" label="hydronium"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="2998" end="2999" title="hydrogen" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="3000" end="3001" title="oxygen" label="O"/>
<link wikidata="Q29004" start="3215" end="3229" title="hydrogen anion" label="hydrogen anion"/>
<link wikidata="Q106520" start="3276" end="3283" title="hydride" label="hydride"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="3363" end="3380" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q54505" start="3385" end="3405" title="quantum field theory" label="quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q232976" start="3418" end="3434" title="two-body problem" label="two-body problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q777407" start="3481" end="3491" title="closed-form expression" label="analytical"/>
<link wikidata="Q275411" start="3556" end="3567" title="Rutherford model" label="Experiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q9123" start="3571" end="3588" title="Ernest Rutherford" label="Ernest Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q377930" start="3785" end="3811" title="Classical electromagnetism" label="Classical electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064493" start="3884" end="3898" title="Larmor formula" label="Larmor formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q652571" start="4095" end="4106" title="Bohr radius" label="Bohr radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152581" start="4128" end="4153" title="classical electron radius" label="classical electron radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="4478" end="4495" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085" start="4538" end="4548" title="Niels Bohr" label="Niels Bohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q122894" start="5193" end="5208" title="Planck constant" label="Planck constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q172881" start="5251" end="5268" title="centripetal force" label="centripetal force"/>
<link wikidata="Q83152" start="5326" end="5339" title="Coulomb&amp;#x27;s law" label="Coulomb force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814108" start="5470" end="5483" title="electron mass" label="electron mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101" start="5503" end="5518" title="electron charge" label="electron charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6158" start="5538" end="5557" title="vacuum permittivity" label="vacuum permittivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q232431" start="5581" end="5595" title="quantum number" label="quantum number"/>
<link wikidata="Q867448" start="5614" end="5638" title="principal quantum number" label="principal quantum number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613048" start="5699" end="5723" title="hydrogen spectral series" label="hydrogen spectral series"/>
<link wikidata="Q658065" start="5904" end="5920" title="Rydberg constant" label="Rydberg constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q26383" start="5935" end="5949" title="atomic physics" label="atomic physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q102296" start="6110" end="6119" title="deuterium" label="deuterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q54389" start="6138" end="6145" title="tritium" label="tritium"/>
<link wikidata="Q550046" start="6221" end="6233" title="reduced mass" label="reduced mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402041" start="7317" end="7331" title="fine structure" label="fine structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413102" start="7336" end="7355" title="hyperfine structure" label="hyperfine structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5997" start="7540" end="7563" title="fine-structure constant" label="fine-structure constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q77078" start="7610" end="7634" title="Arnold Sommerfeld" label="Arnold Sommerfeld&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q208474" start="7797" end="7809" title="Orbital eccentricity" label="eccentricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q76287" start="7814" end="7825" title="declination" label="declination"/>
<link wikidata="Q161254" start="7937" end="7953" title="angular momentum" label="angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="8136" end="8154" title="special relativity" label="special relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q201805" start="8412" end="8425" title="Zeeman effect" label="Zeeman effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q272621" start="8531" end="8545" title="Dirac equation" label="Dirac equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q165498" start="8576" end="8596" title="Schrödinger equation" label="Schrödinger equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362761" start="9845" end="9857" title="wave function" label="wavefunction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11174" end="11189" title="Quantum number#Electron in an atom" label="quantum numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q477921" start="11714" end="11725" title="Hamiltonian mechanics" label="Hamiltonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q550046" start="11991" end="12003" title="reduced mass" label="reduced mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q203484" start="12070" end="12079" title="Laplace operator" label="Laplacian"/>
<link wikidata="Q913323" start="12128" end="12137" title="Separation of variables" label="separable"/>
<link wikidata="Q271977" start="12139" end="12168" title="partial differential equation" label="partial differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362761" start="12500" end="12512" title="wavefunction" label="wavefunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q203218" start="12524" end="12545" title="spherical coordinates" label="spherical coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q652571" start="12603" end="12622" title="reduced Bohr radius" label="reduced Bohr radius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12654" end="12685" title="Laguerre polynomial#Generalized Laguerre polynomials" label="generalized Laguerre polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q877100" start="12730" end="12748" title="spherical harmonic" label="spherical harmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q867448" start="13222" end="13246" title="principal quantum number" label="principal quantum number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916324" start="13262" end="13286" title="azimuthal quantum number" label="azimuthal quantum number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009727" start="13302" end="13325" title="magnetic quantum number" label="magnetic quantum number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637908" start="13448" end="13458" title="Orthogonal functions" label="orthogonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q59090" start="13547" end="13561" title="Dirac notation" label="Dirac notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192826" start="13585" end="13600" title="Kronecker delta" label="Kronecker delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498246" start="13816" end="13837" title="Gegenbauer polynomial" label="Gegenbauer polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q777407" start="13940" end="13950" title="analytical expression" label="analytical"/>
<link wikidata="Q669532" start="13996" end="14009" title="energy levels" label="energy levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="14051" end="14064" title="spectral line" label="spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q466686" start="14308" end="14319" title="anisotropic" label="anisotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="14416" end="14424" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q272621" start="14756" end="14770" title="Dirac equation" label="Dirac equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83152" start="14985" end="15002" title="Coulomb&amp;#x27;s law" label="Coulomb potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q273163" start="15030" end="15039" title="isotropic" label="isotropic"/>
<link wikidata="Q911951" start="15148" end="15169" title="energy eigenfunctions" label="energy eigenfunctions"/>
<link wikidata="Q203218" start="15263" end="15282" title="Spherical coordinate system" label="angular coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q230883" start="15364" end="15375" title="eigenstates" label="eigenstates"/>
<link wikidata="Q660488" start="15383" end="15394" title="Hamiltonian (quantum mechanics)" label="Hamiltonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190143" start="15478" end="15503" title="angular momentum operator" label="angular momentum operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100079" start="15576" end="15590" title="orbital motion (quantum)" label="orbital motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q232431" start="15703" end="15717" title="quantum number" label="quantum number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124546" start="16280" end="16300" title="Laguerre polynomials" label="Laguerre polynomials"/>
<link wikidata="Q593950" start="16794" end="16813" title="rotational symmetry" label="rotational symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q584304" start="16916" end="16926" title="degenerate energy levels" label="degenerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="17234" end="17238" title="Spin (physics)" label="spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q230883" start="17415" end="17425" title="eigenstate" label="eigenstate"/>
<link wikidata="Q830791" start="17602" end="17615" title="quantum superposition" label="superposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q636027" start="17706" end="17718" title="quantization (physics)" label="quantization"/>
<link wikidata="Q47480" start="18095" end="18105" title="Paul Dirac" label="Paul Dirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q272621" start="18112" end="18123" title="Dirac equation" label="an equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="18155" end="18173" title="special relativity" label="special relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q688945" start="18241" end="18253" title="Dirac spinor" label="Dirac spinor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402041" start="18571" end="18585" title="fine structure" label="fine structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q631614" start="18597" end="18607" title="Lamb shift" label="Lamb shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413102" start="18612" end="18631" title="hyperfine structure" label="hyperfine structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5997" start="18651" end="18676" title="Fine-structure constant" label="Sommerfeld fine-structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5997" start="18725" end="18748" title="fine-structure constant" label="fine-structure constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141095" start="18772" end="18809" title="total angular momentum quantum number" label="total angular momentum quantum number"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19174" end="19221" title="#Features going beyond the Schrödinger solution" label="#Features going beyond the Schrödinger solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q77078" start="19286" end="19299" title="Arnold Sommerfeld" label="A. Sommerfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566926" start="19349" end="19364" title="Old quantum theory" label="old Bohr theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q653850" start="19613" end="19632" title="probability amplitude" label="probability density"/>
<link wikidata="Q4480008" start="20389" end="20401" title="ground state" label="ground state"/>
<link wikidata="Q867448" start="20526" end="20549" title="principal quantum level" label="principal quantum level"/>
<link wikidata="Q877100" start="20755" end="20774" title="spherical harmonics" label="spherical harmonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q165498" start="20814" end="20834" title="Schrödinger equation" label="Schrödinger equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q232431" start="20867" end="20881" title="quantum number" label="quantum number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="22054" end="22068" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="22504" end="22518" title="magnetic field" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q192735" start="22527" end="22541" title="inertial frame" label="inertial frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q242657" start="22676" end="22691" title="magnetic moment" label="magnetic moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570979" start="22823" end="22842" title="spin–orbit interaction" label="spin–orbit coupling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="22883" end="22891" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100079" start="22899" end="22913" title="orbital motion (quantum)" label="orbital motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="22942" end="22946" title="Spin (physics)" label="spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q272621" start="23020" end="23034" title="Dirac equation" label="Dirac equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141095" start="23280" end="23309" title="Total angular momentum quantum number" label="total angular momentum number"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="23348" end="23361" title="electron spin" label="electron spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190143" start="23366" end="23390" title="angular momentum operator" label="orbital angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q272621" start="23483" end="23497" title="Dirac equation" label="Dirac equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q631614" start="23620" end="23646" title="Lamb shift" label="Lamb–Retherford experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193821" start="23669" end="23687" title="quantum fluctuation" label="vacuum fluctuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q177625" start="23696" end="23717" title="electromagnetic field" label="electromagnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q631614" start="23921" end="23947" title="Lamb shift" label="Lamb–Retherford experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q234881" start="24012" end="24035" title="quantum electrodynamics" label="quantum electrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q386272" start="24113" end="24128" title="Feynman diagram" label="Feynman diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q911364" start="24155" end="24174" title="perturbation theory (quantum mechanics)" label="perturbation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q631614" start="24203" end="24213" title="Lamb shift" label="Lamb shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q40904" start="24525" end="24542" title="Werner Heisenberg" label="Heisenberg&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q603198" start="24543" end="24559" title="matrix mechanics" label="matrix mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q65989" start="24599" end="24613" title="Wolfgang Pauli" label="Wolfgang Pauli"/>
<link wikidata="Q593950" start="24622" end="24641" title="rotational symmetry" label="rotational symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q161254" start="24694" end="24710" title="angular momentum" label="angular momentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153324" start="24719" end="24744" title="Laplace–Runge–Lenz vector" label="Laplace–Runge–Lenz vector"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24790" end="24805" title="dynamical group" label="dynamical group"/>
<link wikidata="Q39246" start="24997" end="25011" title="R.P. Feynman" label="Feynman&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q898323" start="25012" end="25037" title="path integral formulation" label="path integral formulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="25041" end="25058" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q39246" start="25138" end="25152" title="R.P. Feynman" label="Feynman&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q899444" start="25193" end="25207" title="de Broglie–Bohm theory" label="Bohm mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25216" end="25272" title="Quantum potential#Quantum Hamilton–Jacobi equation" label="complex Hamilton-Jacobi formulation of quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q216121" start="25291" end="25303" title="Antihydrogen" label="Antihydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q53860" start="25306" end="25320" title="Atomic orbital" label="Atomic orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q653711" start="25323" end="25336" title="Balmer series" label="Balmer series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3877353" start="25339" end="25350" title="Helium atom" label="Helium atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q902508" start="25353" end="25375" title="Dihydrogen cation" label="Hydrogen molecular ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6635748" start="25378" end="25438" title="List of quantum-mechanical systems with analytical solutions" label="List of quantum-mechanical systems with analytical solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q18201918" start="25441" end="25453" title="Lithium atom" label="Lithium atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065997" start="25456" end="25468" title="Proton decay" label="Proton decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q188403" start="25471" end="25488" title="Quantum chemistry" label="Quantum chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q230883" start="25491" end="25504" title="Quantum state" label="Quantum state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345425" start="25507" end="25525" title="Trihydrogen cation" label="Trihydrogen cation"/>
<link wikidata="Q76757" start="25645" end="25657" title="Hagen Kleinert" label="Kleinert, H."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14227" wikidata="Q1762" url="?curid=14227" title="Elagabalus">
<text>Marcus Aurelius Antoninus (born Sextus Varius Avitus Bassianus, 204 – 13 March 222), better known by his posthumous nicknames Elagabalus ( ) and Heliogabalus ( ), was Roman emperor from 218 to 222, while he was still a teenager. His short reign was notorious for religious controversy and alleged sexual debauchery. A close relative to the Severan dynasty, he came from a prominent Syrian Arab family in Emesa (Homs), Syria, where he served as the head priest of the sun god Elagabal from a young age. After the death of his cousin, the emperor Caracalla, Elagabalus was raised to the principate at 14 years of age in an army revolt instigated by his grandmother Julia Maesa against Caracalla&#x27;s short-lived successor, Macrinus. He only posthumously became known by the Latinised name of his god.

Elagabalus is largely known from accounts by the contemporary senator Cassius Dio who was strongly hostile to him, and the much later &quot;Historia Augusta.&quot; The reliability of these accounts, particularly their most salacious elements, has been strongly questioned. Elagabalus showed a disregard for Roman religious traditions. He brought the cult of Elagabal (including the large baetyl stone that represented the god) to Rome, making it a prominent part of religious life in the city. He forced leading members of Rome&#x27;s government to participate in religious rites celebrating this deity, presiding over them in person. According to the accounts of Cassius Dio and the &quot;Augusta&quot;, he married four women, including a Vestal Virgin, in addition to lavishing favours on male courtiers they suggested to have been his lovers, and prostituted himself. His behavior estranged the Praetorian Guard, the Senate, and the common people alike. Amidst growing opposition, at just 18 years of age he was assassinated and replaced by his cousin Severus Alexander in March 222. The assassination plot against Elagabalus was devised by Julia Maesa and carried out by disaffected members of the Praetorian Guard.

Elagabalus developed a posthumous reputation for extreme eccentricity, decadence, zealotry, and sexual promiscuity. Among writers of the early modern age, he endured one of the worst reputations among Roman emperors. Edward Gibbon, notably, wrote that Elagabalus &quot;abandoned himself to the grossest pleasures with ungoverned fury&quot;. According to Barthold Georg Niebuhr, &quot;the name of Elagabalus is branded in history above all others; [...] &quot;Elagabus had nothing at all to make up for his vices, which are of such a kind that it is too disgusting even to allude to them&quot;. An example of a modern historian&#x27;s assessment is Adrian Goldsworthy&#x27;s: &quot;Elagabalus was not a tyrant, but he was an incompetent, probably the least able emperor Rome had ever had&quot;. Despite near-universal condemnation of his reign, some scholars write warmly about his religious innovations, including the 6th-century Byzantine chronicler John Malalas, as well as Warwick Ball, a modern historian who described him as &quot;a tragic enigma lost behind centuries of prejudice&quot;.

Modern scholars have questioned the accuracy of Roman accounts of his reign, with suggestions that the reports of his salacious and homosexual behaviour may have been related to Roman stereotypes regarding people from the Orient as effeminate.

==Family and priesthood==
Elagabalus was born in 203 or 204, to Sextus Varius Marcellus and Julia Soaemias Bassiana, who had probably married around the year 200 (and no later than 204). Elagabalus&#x27;s full birth name was probably (Sextus) Varius Avitus Bassianus, the last name being apparently a cognomen of the Emesene dynasty. Marcellus was an equestrian, later elevated to a senatorial position. Julia Soaemias was a cousin of the emperor Caracalla, and there were rumors (which Soaemias later publicly supported) that Elagabalus was Caracalla&#x27;s child.

Marcellus&#x27;s tombstone attests that Elagabalus had at least one sibling, possibly a brother, about whom nothing is known. Elagabalus&#x27;s grandmother, Julia Maesa, was the widow of the consul Julius Avitus Alexianus, the sister of Julia Domna, and the sister-in-law of the emperor Septimius Severus. Other relatives included Elagabalus&#x27;s aunt Julia Avita Mamaea and uncle Marcus Julius Gessius Marcianus and their son Severus Alexander.

Elagabalus&#x27;s family held hereditary rights to the priesthood of the sun god Elagabal, of whom Elagabalus was the high priest at Emesa (modern Homs) in Roman Syria as part of the Arab Emesene dynasty. The deity&#x27;s Latin name, &quot;Elagabalus&quot;, is a Latinized version of the Arabic إِلٰهُ الْجَبَلِ &quot;Ilāh al-Jabal&quot;, from &quot;ilāh&quot; (&quot;god&quot;) and &quot;jabal&quot; (&quot;mountain&quot;), meaning &quot;God of the Mountain&quot;, the Emesene manifestation of Ba&#x27;al.

Initially venerated at Emesa, the deity&#x27;s cult spread to other parts of the Roman Empire in the second century; a dedication has been found as far away as Woerden (in the Netherlands), near the Roman &quot;limes&quot;. The god was later imported to Rome and assimilated with the sun god known as Sol Indiges in the era of the Roman Republic and as Sol Invictus during the late third century. In Greek, the sun god is Helios, hence Elagabal was later known as &quot;Heliogabalus&quot;, a hybrid of &quot;Helios&quot; and &quot;Elagabalus&quot;.

==Rise to power==
Herodian writes that when the emperor Macrinus came to power, he suppressed the threat to his reign from the family of his assassinated predecessor, Caracalla, by exiling them—Julia Maesa, her two daughters, and her eldest grandson Elagabalus—to their estate at Emesa in Syria. Almost upon arrival in Syria, Maesa began a plot with her advisor and Elagabalus&#x27;s tutor, Gannys, to overthrow Macrinus and elevate the fourteen-year-old Elagabalus to the imperial throne.

Maesa spread a rumor, which Soaemias publicly supported, that Elagabalus was the illegitimate child of Caracalla and so deserved the loyalty of Roman soldiers and senators who had sworn allegiance to Caracalla. The soldiers of the Third Legion &quot;Gallica&quot; at Raphana, who had enjoyed greater privileges under Caracalla and resented Macrinus (and may have been impressed or bribed by Maesa&#x27;s wealth), supported this claim. At sunrise on 16 May 218, Elagabalus was declared emperor by Publius Valerius Comazon, commander of the legion. To strengthen his legitimacy, Elagabalus adopted the same name Caracalla bore as emperor, Marcus Aurelius Antoninus. Cassius Dio states that some officers tried to keep the soldiers loyal to Macrinus, but they were unsuccessful.

Praetorian prefect Ulpius Julianus responded by attacking the Third Legion, most likely on Macrinus&#x27;s orders (though one account says he acted on his own before Macrinus knew of the rebellion). Herodian suggests Macrinus underestimated the threat, considering the rebellion inconsequential. During the fighting, Julianus&#x27;s soldiers killed their officers and joined Elagabalus&#x27;s forces.

Macrinus asked the Roman Senate to denounce Elagabalus as &quot;the False Antoninus&quot;, and they complied, declaring war on Elagabalus and his family. Macrinus made his son Diadumenian co-emperor, and attempted to secure the loyalty of the Second Legion with large cash payments. During a banquet to celebrate this at Apamea, however, a messenger presented Macrinus with the severed head of his defeated prefect Julianus. Macrinus therefore retreated to Antioch, after which the Second Legion shifted its loyalties to Elagabalus.

Elagabalus&#x27;s legionaries, commanded by Gannys, defeated Macrinus and Diadumenian and their Praetorian Guard at the Battle of Antioch on 8 June 218, prevailing when Macrinus&#x27;s troops broke ranks after he fled the battlefield. Macrinus made for Italy, but was intercepted near Chalcedon and executed in Cappadocia, while Diadumenian was captured at Zeugma and executed.

That month, Elagabalus wrote to the Senate, assuming the imperial titles without waiting for senatorial approval, which violated tradition but was a common practice among third-century emperors. Letters of reconciliation were dispatched to Rome extending amnesty to the Senate and recognizing its laws, while also condemning the administration of Macrinus and his son.

The senators responded by acknowledging Elagabalus as emperor and accepting his claim to be the son of Caracalla. Elagabalus was made consul for the year 218 in the middle of June. Caracalla and Julia Domna were both deified by the Senate, both Julia Maesa and Julia Soaemias were elevated to the rank of Augustae, and the memory of Macrinus was expunged by the Senate. (Elagabalus&#x27;s imperial artifacts assert that he succeeded Caracalla directly.) Comazon was appointed commander of the Praetorian Guard. Elagabalus was named &quot;Pater Patriae&quot; by the Senate before 13 July 218. On 14 July, Elagabalus was inducted into the colleges of all the Roman priesthoods, including the College of Pontiffs, of which he was named &quot;pontifex maximus&quot;.

== Emperor (218–222) ==

===Journey to Rome and political appointments===

Elagabalus stayed for a time at Antioch, apparently to quell various mutinies. Dio outlines several, which historian Fergus Millar places prior to the winter of 218–219. These included one by Gellius Maximus, who commanded the Fourth Legion and was executed, and one by Verus, who commanded the Third Legion &quot;Gallica&quot;, which was disbanded once the revolt was put down.

Next, according to Herodian, Elagabalus and his entourage spent the winter of 218–219 in Bithynia at Nicomedia, and then traveled through Thrace and Moesia to Italy in the first half of 219, the year of Elagabalus&#x27;s second consulship. Herodian says that Elagabalus had a painting of himself sent ahead to Rome to be hung over a statue of the goddess Victoria in the Senate House so people would not be surprised by his Eastern garb, but it is unclear if such a painting actually existed, and Dio does not mention it. If the painting was indeed hung over Victoria, it put senators in the position of seeming to make offerings to Elagabalus when they made offerings to Victoria.

On his way to Rome, Elagabalus and his allies executed several prominent supporters of Macrinus, such as Syrian governor Fabius Agrippinus and former Thracian governor C. Claudius Attalus Paterculianus. Arriving at the imperial capital in August or September 219, Elagabalus staged an &quot;adventus&quot;, a ceremonial entrance to the city. In Rome, his offer of amnesty for the Roman upper class was largely honored, though the jurist Ulpian was exiled. Elagabalus made Comazon praetorian prefect, and later consul (220) and prefect of the city (three times, 220–222), which Dio regarded as a violation of Roman norms. Elagabalus himself held a consulship for the third year in a row in 220. Herodian and the &quot;Augustan History&quot; say that Elagabalus alienated many by giving powerful positions to other allies.

He developed the imperial palace at Horti Spei Veteris with the inclusion of the nearby land inherited from his father Sextus Varius Marcellus. Elagabalus made it his favourite retreat and designed it (as for Nero&#x27;s Domus Aurea project) as a vast suburban villa divided into various building and landscape nuclei with the Amphitheatrum Castrense which he built and the Circus Varianus hippodrome fired by his unbridled passion for circuses and his habit of driving chariots inside the villa. He raced chariots under the family name of Varius.

Dio states that Elagabalus wanted to marry a charioteer named Hierocles and to declare him &quot;caesar&quot;, just as (Dio says) he had previously wanted to marry Gannys and name him &quot;caesar&quot;. The athlete Aurelius Zoticus is said by Dio to have been Elagabalus&#x27;s lover and &quot;cubicularius&quot; (a non-administrative role), while the &quot;Augustan History&quot; says Zoticus was a husband to Elagabalus and held greater political influence.

Elagabalus&#x27;s relationships to his mother Julia Soaemias and grandmother Julia Maesa were strong at first; they were influential supporters from the beginning, and Macrinus declared war on them as well as Elagabalus. Accordingly, they became the first women allowed into the Senate, and both received senatorial titles: Soaemias the established title of &quot;Clarissima,&quot; and Maesa the more unorthodox &quot;Mater Castrorum et Senatus&quot; (&quot;Mother of the army camp and of the Senate&quot;). They exercised influence over the young emperor throughout his reign, and are found on many coins and inscriptions, a rare honour for Roman women.

Under Elagabalus, the gradual devaluation of Roman &quot;aurei&quot; and &quot;denarii&quot; continued (with the silver purity of the &quot;denarius&quot; dropping from 58% to 46.5%), though &quot;antoniniani&quot; had a higher metal content than under Caracalla.

=== Religious controversy ===
Since the reign of Septimius Severus, sun worship had increased throughout the Empire. At the end of 220, Elagabalus instated Elagabal as the chief deity of the Roman pantheon, possibly on the date of the winter solstice. In his official titulature, Elagabalus was then entitled in . That a foreign god should be honored above Jupiter, with Elagabalus himself as chief priest, shocked many Romans.

As a token of respect for Roman religion, however, Elagabalus joined either Astarte, Minerva, Urania, or some combination of the three to Elagabal as consort. A union between Elagabal and a traditional goddess would have served to strengthen ties between the new religion and the imperial cult. There may have been an effort to introduce Elagabal, Urania, and Athena as the new Capitoline Triad of Rome—replacing Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva.

He aroused further discontent when he married the Vestal Virgin Aquilia Severa, Vesta&#x27;s high priestess, claiming the marriage would produce &quot;godlike children&quot;. This was a flagrant breach of Roman law and tradition, which held that any Vestal found to have engaged in sexual intercourse was to be buried alive.

A lavish temple called the Elagabalium was built on the east face of the Palatine Hill to house Elagabal, who was represented by a black conical meteorite from Emesa. This was a &quot;baetyl&quot;. Herodian wrote &quot;this stone is worshipped as though it were sent from heaven; on it there are some small projecting pieces and markings that are pointed out, which the people would like to believe are a rough picture of the sun, because this is how they see them&quot;.

Dio writes that in order to increase his piety as high priest of Elagabal atop a new Roman pantheon, Elagabalus had himself circumcised and swore to abstain from swine. He forced senators to watch while he danced circling the altar of Elagabal to the accompaniment of drums and cymbals. Each summer solstice he held a festival dedicated to the god, which became popular with the masses because of the free food distributed on these occasions. During this festival, Elagabalus placed the black stone on a chariot adorned with gold and jewels, which he paraded through the city:

The most sacred relics from the Roman religion were transferred from their respective shrines to the Elagabalium, including the emblem of the Great Mother, the fire of Vesta, the Shields of the Salii, and the Palladium, so that no other god could be worshipped except in association with Elagabal. Although his native cult was widely ridiculed by contemporaries, sun-worship was popular among the soldiers and would be promoted by several later emperors.

===Marriages, sexual orientation and gender identity===
The question of Elagabalus&#x27;s sexual orientation and gender identity is confused, owing to salacious and unreliable sources. Cassius Dio states that Elagabalus was married five times (twice to the same woman). His first wife was Julia Cornelia Paula, whom he married prior to 29 August 219; between then and 28 August 220, he divorced Paula, took the Vestal Virgin Julia Aquilia Severa as his second wife, divorced her, and took a third wife, who Herodian says was Annia Aurelia Faustina, a descendant of Marcus Aurelius and the widow of a man Elagabalus had recently executed, Pomponius Bassus. In the last year of his reign, Elagabalus divorced Annia Faustina and remarried Aquilia Severa.

Dio states that another &quot;husband of this woman [Elagabalus] was Hierocles&quot;, an ex-slave and chariot driver from Caria. The &quot;Augustan History&quot; claims that Elagabalus also married a man named Zoticus, an athlete from Smyrna, while Dio says only that Zoticus was his cubicularius. Dio says that Elagabalus prostituted himself in taverns and brothels.

Some writers suggest that Elagabalus may have identified as female or been transgender, and may have sought sex reassignment surgery. Dio says Elagabalus delighted in being called Hierocles&#x27;s mistress, wife, and queen. The emperor reportedly wore makeup and wigs, preferred to be called a lady and not a lord, and supposedly offered vast sums to any physician who could provide him with a vagina by means of incision. Some historians, including the classicists Mary Beard, Zachary Herz, and Martijn Icks, treat these accounts with caution, as sources for Elagabalus&#x27; life were often antagonistic towards him and largely untrustworthy.

In November 2023, the North Hertfordshire Museum in Hitchin, United Kingdom, announced that Elagabalus would be considered as transgender and hence referred to with female pronouns in its exhibits due to claims that the emperor had said &quot;call me not Lord, for I am a Lady&quot;. The museum has one Elagabalus coin.

===Fall from power===
Elagabalus stoked the animus of Roman elites and the Praetorian Guard through his perceptibly foreign conduct and his religious provocations. When Elagabalus&#x27;s grandmother Julia Maesa perceived that popular support for the emperor was waning, she decided that he and his mother, who had encouraged his religious practices, had to be replaced. As alternatives, she turned to her other daughter, Julia Avita Mamaea, and her daughter&#x27;s son, the fifteen-year-old Severus Alexander.

Prevailing on Elagabalus, she arranged that he appoint his cousin Alexander as his heir and that the boy be given the title of &quot;caesar&quot;. Alexander was elevated to &quot;caesar&quot; in June 221, possibly on 26 June. Elagabalus and Alexander were each named &quot;consul designatus&quot; for the following year, probably on 1 July. Elagabalus took up his fourth consulship for the year of 222. Alexander shared the consulship with the emperor that year. However, Elagabalus reconsidered this arrangement when he began to suspect that the Praetorian Guard preferred his cousin to himself.

Elagabalus ordered various attempts on Alexander&#x27;s life, after failing to obtain approval from the Senate for stripping Alexander of his shared title. According to Dio, Elagabalus invented the rumor that Alexander was near death, in order to see how the Praetorians would react. A riot ensued, and the Guard demanded to see Elagabalus and Alexander in the Praetorian camp.

On 13 March, the emperor complied and publicly presented his cousin along with his own mother, Julia Soaemias. On their arrival the soldiers started cheering Alexander while ignoring Elagabalus, who ordered the summary arrest and execution of anyone who had taken part in this display of insubordination. In response, members of the Praetorian Guard attacked Elagabalus and his mother:

Following his assassination, many associates of Elagabalus were killed or deposed. His lover Hierocles was executed. His religious edicts were reversed and the stone of Elagabal was sent back to Emesa. Women were again barred from attending meetings of the Senate. The practice of &quot;damnatio memoriae&quot;—erasing from the public record a disgraced personage formerly of note—was systematically applied in his case. Several images, including an over-life-size statue of him as Hercules now in Naples, were re-carved with the face of Alexander Severus.

== Sources ==

===Cassius Dio===

The historian Cassius Dio, who lived from the second half of the second century until sometime after 229, wrote a contemporary account of Elagabalus. Born into a patrician family, Dio spent the greater part of his life in public service. He was a senator under emperor Commodus and governor of Smyrna after the death of Septimius Severus, and then he served as suffect consul around 205, and as proconsul in Africa and Pannonia.

Dio&#x27;s &quot;Roman History&quot; spans nearly a millennium, from the arrival of Aeneas in Italy until the year 229. His contemporaneous account of Elagabalus&#x27;s reign is generally considered more reliable than the &quot;Augustan History&quot; or other accounts for this general time period, though by his own admission Dio spent the greater part of the relevant period outside of Rome and had to rely on second-hand information.

Furthermore, the political climate in the aftermath of Elagabalus&#x27;s reign, as well as Dio&#x27;s own position within the government of Severus Alexander, who held him in high esteem and made him consul again, likely influenced the truth of this part of his history for the worse. Dio regularly refers to Elagabalus as Sardanapalus, partly to distinguish him from his divine namesake, but chiefly to do his part in maintaining the &quot;damnatio memoriae&quot; and to associate him with another autocrat notorious for a dissolute life.

Historian Clare Rowan calls Dio&#x27;s account a mixture of reliable information and &quot;literary exaggeration&quot;, noting that Elagabalus&#x27;s marriages and time as consul are confirmed by numismatic and epigraphic records. In other instances, Dio&#x27;s account is inaccurate, such as when he says Elagabalus appointed entirely unqualified officials and that Comazon had no military experience before being named to head the Praetorian Guard, when in fact Comazon had commanded the Third Legion. Dio also gives different accounts in different places of when and by whom Diadumenian (whose forces Elagabalus fought) was given imperial names and titles. Martin Icks has written that &quot;It is clear that Dio was not attempting an accurate portrayal of the emperor&quot;, an assessment endorsed by Josiah Osgood.

=== Herodian ===

Another contemporary of Elagabalus was Herodian, a minor Roman civil servant who lived from until 240. His work, &quot;History of the Roman Empire since Marcus Aurelius&quot;, commonly abbreviated as &quot;Roman History&quot;, is an eyewitness account of the reign of Commodus until the beginning of the reign of Gordian III. His work largely overlaps with Dio&#x27;s own &quot;Roman History&quot;, and the texts, written independently of each other, agree more often than not about Elagabalus and his short but eventful reign. Herodian may have used Dio&#x27;s work as a source for parts of his account about Elagabalus.

Arrizabalaga writes that Herodian is in most ways &quot;less detailed and punctilious than Dio&quot;, and he is deemed less reliable by many modern scholars, though Rowan considers his account of Elagabalus&#x27;s reign more reliable than Dio&#x27;s and Herodian&#x27;s lack of literary and scholarly pretensions are considered to make him less biased than senatorial historians. He is considered an important source for the religious reforms which took place during the reign of Elagabalus, which have been confirmed by numismatic and archaeological evidence.

=== &quot;Augustan History&quot; ===
The source of many stories of Elagabalus&#x27;s depravity is the &quot;Historia Augusta&quot;, which includes controversial claims. It is most likely that the &quot;Historia Augusta&quot; was written towards the end of the fourth century, during the reign of emperor Theodosius I. The account of Elagabalus in the &quot;Historia Augusta&quot; is of uncertain historical merit. Sections 13 to 17, relating to the fall of Elagabalus, are less controversial among historians. The author of the most scandalous stories in the &quot;Historia Augusta&quot; concedes that &quot;both these matters and some others which pass belief were, I think, invented by people who wanted to depreciate Heliogabalus to win favour with Alexander&quot;. The &quot;Historia Augusta&quot; is widely regarded to have been written by a single author who used multiple pseudonyms throughout the work, and has been described as a &quot;fantasist&quot; who invented large parts of his historical accounts.

=== Modern historians ===

For readers of the modern age, &quot;The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire&quot; by Edward Gibbon (1737–1794) further cemented the scandalous reputation of Elagabalus. Gibbon not only accepted and expressed outrage at the allegations of the ancient historians, but he might have added some details of his own; for example, he is the first historian known to claim that Gannys was a eunuch. Gibbon wrote:

The 20th-century anthropologist James George Frazer (author of &quot;The Golden Bough&quot;) took seriously the monotheistic aspirations of the emperor, but also ridiculed him: &quot;The dainty priest of the Sun [was] the most abandoned reprobate who ever sat upon a throne ... It was the intention of this eminently religious but crack-brained despot to supersede the worship of all the gods, not only at Rome but throughout the world, by the single worship of Elagabalus or the Sun&quot;.
The first book-length biography was &quot;The Amazing Emperor Heliogabalus&quot; (1911) by J. Stuart Hay, &quot;a serious and systematic study&quot; more sympathetic than that of previous historians, which nonetheless stressed the exoticism of Elagabalus, calling his reign one of &quot;enormous wealth and excessive prodigality, luxury and aestheticism, carried to their ultimate extreme, and sensuality in all the refinements of its Eastern habit&quot;.
Some recent historians paint a more favourable picture of the emperor&#x27;s rule. Martijn Icks, in &quot;Images of Elagabalus&quot; (2008; republished as &quot;The Crimes of Elagabalus&quot; in 2011 and 2012), doubts the reliability of the ancient sources and argues that it was the emperor&#x27;s unorthodox religious policies that alienated the power elite of Rome, to the point that his grandmother saw fit to eliminate him and replace him with his cousin. He described ancient stories pertaining to the emperor as &quot;part of a long tradition of &#x27;character assassination&#x27; in ancient historiography and biography&quot;.

Leonardo de Arrizabalaga y Prado, in &quot;The Emperor Elagabalus: Fact or Fiction?&quot; (2008), is also critical of the ancient historians and speculates that neither religion nor sexuality played a role in the fall of the young emperor. Prado instead suggests Elagabalus was the loser in a power struggle within the imperial family, that the loyalty of the Praetorian Guards was up for sale, and that Julia Maesa had the resources to outmaneuver and outbribe her grandson. In this version of events, once Elagabalus, his mother, and his immediate circle had been murdered, a campaign of character assassination began, resulting in a grotesque caricature that has persisted to the present day. Other historians, including Icks, criticized Prado for being overly skeptical of primary sources.

Warwick Ball, in his book &quot;Rome in the East&quot;, writes an apologetic account of the emperor, arguing that descriptions of his religious rites were exaggerated and should be dismissed as propaganda, similar to how pagan descriptions of Christian rites have since been dismissed. Ball describes the emperor&#x27;s ritual processions as sound political and religious policy, arguing that syncretism of eastern and western deities deserves praise rather than ridicule. Ultimately, he paints Elagabalus as a child forced to become emperor who, as expected of the high-priest of a cult, continued his rituals even after becoming emperor. Ball justified Elagabalus&#x27;s executions of prominent Roman figures who criticized his religious activities in the same way. Finally, Ball asserts Elagabalus&#x27;s eventual victory in the sense that his deity would be welcomed by Rome in its Sol Invictus form 50 years later. Ball claims that Sol Invictus came to influence the monotheist Christian beliefs of Constantine, asserting that this influence remains in Christianity to this day.

==Cultural references==
Despite the attempted &quot;damnatio memoriae&quot;, stories about Elagabalus survived and figured in many works of art and literature. In Spanish, his name became a word for &quot;glutton&quot;, &quot;heliogábalo&quot;. Due to the ancient stories about him, he often appears in literature and other creative media as a decadent figure (becoming something of an anti-hero in the Decadent movement of the late 19th century, and inspiring many famous works of art, especially by Decadents) and the epitome of a young, amoral aesthete. The most notable of these works include:

===Fiction===

*&quot;L&#x27;Agonie&quot; (1888) by Jean Lombard, which was the inspiration for Louis Couperus&#x27;s &quot;De berg van licht&quot; (&quot;The Mountain of Light&quot;) in 1905–06.
*&quot;Héliogabale ou l&#x27;Anarchiste couronné&quot; (&quot;Heliogabalus or The Anarchist Crowned&quot;) by Antonin Artaud (1934), depicting the life of Elagabalus and combining essay, biography, and fiction.
*Historical novels &quot;Family Favourites&quot; (1960) by Alfred Duggan and &quot;Child of the Sun&quot; (1966) by Kyle Onstott and Lance Horner, in the former of which an ordinary Roman soldier witnesses the reign.
*Victor Pelevin&#x27;s novel &quot;Sol Invictus&quot; (2020), which depicts Elagabalus as a key unrecognized spiritual figure.

===Plays===
* &quot;&quot; (1920) by H. L. Mencken and George Jean Nathan
* &quot;&quot; (2002) by Sky Gilbert

=== Dance ===

* &quot;Héliogabale&quot;, a modern dance choreographed by Maurice Béjart
* &quot;The Legends&quot;, a dance performed by Sebastian Droste as Heliogabalus, as part of the &quot;Dances of Vice, Horror and Ecstasy&quot; performance staged by Droste and Anita Berber in 1923

===Music===
* &quot;Eliogabalo&quot; (1667), an opera by Venetian Baroque composer Francesco Cavalli
* Is mentioned (as Heliogabalus) in the &quot;Major-General&#x27;s Song&quot; (1879) from Gilbert and Sullivan&#x27;s &quot;The Pirates of Penzance&quot;. &quot;I quote in elegiacs all the crimes of Heliogabalus&quot;.
* &quot;Heliogabale&quot; (1910), an opera by French composer Déodat de Séverac 
*&quot;Artaud&quot; (1973), an album released by Argentine band Pescado Rabioso, particularly the track &quot;Cantata de Puentes Amarillos&quot;, was heavily influenced by Antonin Artaud&#x27;s book, &quot;Héliogabale ou l&#x27;Anarchiste couronn&quot;é, as well as the life of Heliogabalus. 
* &quot;Eliogabalus&quot; (1990), title of both the second album and second song by the experimental rock band Devil Doll (Slovenian band)
* &quot;Heliogabalus imperator&quot; (&quot;Emperor Heliogabalus&quot;) (1972), an orchestral work by the German composer Hans Werner Henze 
* &quot;Six Litanies for Heliogabalus&quot; (2007), an album by American musician John Zorn
* &quot;The Pale Emperor&quot; (2015), an album by American musician Marilyn Manson, was inspired by the life of Heliogabalus and more specifically Antonin Artaud&#x27;s book

=== Paintings ===

* &quot;Heliogabalus, High Priest of the Sun&quot; (1866), by the Pre-Raphaelite Simeon Solomon
* &quot;The Roses of Heliogabalus&quot; (1888), by the Anglo-Dutch academician Sir Lawrence Alma-Tadema, depicts one of the most notorious incidents laid to Elagabalus&#x27;s account, an extravagant dinner party in which guests were smothered under a mass of &quot;violets and other flowers&quot; dropped from above. 
* &quot;Antonin Artaud Heliogabalus&quot; (2010–11), by Anselm Kiefer

===Poetry===
* &quot;Algabal&quot; (1892–1919), a collection of poems by Stefan George
* In &quot;He &#x27;Digesteth Harde Yron American poet Marianne Moore describes a banquet at which Elagabalus served six hundred ostrich brains, a detail she found in George Jennison&#x27;s book &quot;Animals for Show and Pleasure in Ancient Rome&quot;.

===Television===
* In CBBC&#x27;s adaptation of &quot;Horrible Histories&quot;, Elagabalus is portrayed by Mathew Baynton as a laddish teenager with a cruel sense of humour.

==Severan dynasty family tree==
== Notes ==
==References==
==Bibliography==

===Primary sources===
* Published on Livius.org in 2007
* &quot;Historia Augusta&quot;, The Life of Elagabalus Part 1 and 2 , Latin text with English translation.
===Secondary material===
* Arrizabalaga y Prado, Leonardo de. &quot;Pseudo-Eunuchs in the Court of Elagabalus: The Riddle of Gannys, Eutychianus, and Comazon&quot; , &quot;Collected Papers in Honour of the Ninety-Fifth Anniversary of Ueno Gakuen&quot;, Tokyo, 1999, pp. 117–141.
* Arrizabalaga y Prado, Leonardo de. &quot;Varian Studies: a Definition of the Subject&quot;, opening address to the Varian Symposium, Trinity College, Cambridge, 30–31 July 2005.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Additional copy. Introduction by J. B. Bury.
* 
* Kienast, Dietmar. &quot;Heliogabalus, a Monster on the Roman Throne: The Literary Construction of a &#x27;Bad&#x27; Emperor,&quot; in Ineke Sluiter and Ralph M. Rosen (eds), &quot;Kakos: Badness and Anti-value in Classical Antiquity&quot; (Leiden/Boston: Brill, 2008) (Mnemosyne: Supplements. History and Archaeology of Classical Antiquity, 307.
* Kienast, Dietmar. &quot;Leonardo de Arrizabalaga y Prado: &quot;The Emperor Elagabalus&quot;&quot; .
* Kienast, Dietmar. &quot;The &#x27;Vices and Follies&#x27; of Elagabalus in Modern Historical Research&quot;, paper delivered at the Varian Symposium, Trinity College, Cambridge, 30–31 July 2005.
* , 26 August 1997.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Varian Symposium Acta and links for a conference held at Trinity College, Cambridge, 30–31 July 2005.
* 

====Images====
* Wildwinds coin archive: Elagabalus . Large archive of ancient Roman and provincial coins bearing the image of Elagabalus. Retrieved on 2008-05-03.
* Coinarchives coin archive: Elagabalus . Large archive of ancient Roman and provincial coins issued under Elagabalus, including coins of family members. Retrieved on 2008-05-03.
==External links==
* 

 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1762" start="0" end="25" title="Elagabalus" label="Marcus Aurelius Antoninus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762" start="32" end="62" title="Elagabalus" label="Sextus Varius Avitus Bassianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762" start="126" end="136" title="Elagabalus" label="Elagabalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762" start="145" end="157" title="Elagabalus" label="Heliogabalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="167" end="180" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q321219" start="340" end="355" title="Severan dynasty" label="Severan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q878607" start="382" end="393" title="Syrian Arabs" label="Syrian Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q131301" start="411" end="415" title="Homs" label="Homs"/>
<link wikidata="Q207118" start="418" end="423" title="Roman Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q511056" start="467" end="474" title="Solar deity" label="sun god"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195817" start="475" end="483" title="Elagabalus (deity)" label="Elagabal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446" start="545" end="554" title="Caracalla" label="Caracalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q231258" start="663" end="674" title="Julia Maesa" label="Julia Maesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752" start="723" end="731" title="Macrinus" label="Macrinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="872" end="883" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q722678" start="942" end="958" title="Historia Augusta" label="Historia Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q664990" start="1190" end="1196" title="baetyl" label="baetyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q188761" start="1542" end="1555" title="Vestal Virgin" label="Vestal Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q181733" start="1700" end="1716" title="Praetorian Guard" label="Praetorian Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="1722" end="1728" title="Roman Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769" start="1857" end="1874" title="Severus Alexander" label="Severus Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q50013" start="2080" end="2092" title="Eccentricity (behavior)" label="eccentricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q945895" start="2094" end="2103" title="decadence" label="decadence"/>
<link wikidata="Q161841" start="2240" end="2253" title="Edward Gibbon" label="Edward Gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q60586" start="2377" end="2399" title="Barthold Georg Niebuhr" label="Barthold Georg Niebuhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q373061" start="2671" end="2689" title="Adrian Goldsworthy" label="Adrian Goldsworthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q312491" start="2974" end="2986" title="John Malalas" label="John Malalas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582706" start="2999" end="3011" title="Warwick Ball" label="Warwick Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q205653" start="3336" end="3346" title="the Orient" label="the Orient"/>
<link wikidata="Q276309" start="3427" end="3450" title="Sextus Varius Marcellus" label="Sextus Varius Marcellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q232380" start="3455" end="3478" title="Julia Soaemias" label="Julia Soaemias Bassiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q777342" start="3664" end="3672" title="cognomen" label="cognomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139438" start="3680" end="3695" title="Emesene dynasty" label="Emesene dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q122166" start="3714" end="3724" title="Equites" label="equestrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="3746" end="3756" title="Roman Senate" label="senatorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446" start="3810" end="3819" title="Caracalla" label="Caracalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q231258" start="4087" end="4098" title="Julia Maesa" label="Julia Maesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="4121" end="4127" title="Roman consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232755" start="4128" end="4151" title="Gaius Julius Avitus Alexianus" label="Julius Avitus Alexianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q229246" start="4167" end="4178" title="Julia Domna" label="Julia Domna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442" start="4217" end="4234" title="Septimius Severus" label="Septimius Severus"/>
<link wikidata="Q235090" start="4284" end="4302" title="Julia Avita Mamaea" label="Julia Avita Mamaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494981" start="4313" end="4344" title="Marcus Julius Gessius Marcianus" label="Marcus Julius Gessius Marcianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769" start="4359" end="4376" title="Severus Alexander" label="Severus Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195817" start="4460" end="4468" title="Elagabalus (deity)" label="Elagabal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114821" start="4497" end="4508" title="high priest" label="high priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q131301" start="4526" end="4530" title="Homs" label="Homs"/>
<link wikidata="Q207118" start="4535" end="4546" title="Roman Syria" label="Roman Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139438" start="4567" end="4582" title="Emesene dynasty" label="Emesene dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="4667" end="4673" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q590467" start="4874" end="4884" title="Baal" label="Ba&amp;#x27;al"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128" start="5047" end="5054" title="Woerden" label="Woerden"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="5063" end="5074" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q146924" start="5098" end="5103" title="Limes (Roman Empire)" label="limes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199937" start="5188" end="5199" title="Sol (Roman mythology)" label="Sol Indiges"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="5218" end="5232" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214494" start="5240" end="5252" title="Sol Invictus" label="Sol Invictus"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="5309" end="5315" title="Helios" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752" start="5493" end="5501" title="Macrinus" label="Macrinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q207118" start="5726" end="5731" title="Syria (Roman province)" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q332519" start="5828" end="5834" title="Gannys" label="Gannys"/>
<link wikidata="Q634719" start="6159" end="6191" title="Legio III Gallica" label="Third Legion &amp;quot;Gallica&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q247552" start="6195" end="6202" title="Raphana" label="Raphana"/>
<link wikidata="Q113856" start="6424" end="6448" title="Publius Valerius Comazon" label="Publius Valerius Comazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q692343" start="6705" end="6723" title="Praetorian prefect" label="Praetorian prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="7126" end="7138" title="Roman Senate" label="Roman Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q46840" start="7283" end="7294" title="Diadumenian" label="Diadumenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q543055" start="7350" end="7363" title="Legio II Parthica" label="Second Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q617550" start="7428" end="7434" title="Apamea, Syria" label="Apamea"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="7564" end="7571" title="Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255524" start="7761" end="7778" title="Battle of Antioch (218)" label="Battle of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q337381" start="7926" end="7935" title="Chalcedon" label="Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q217265" start="7952" end="7962" title="Cappadocia" label="Cappadocia"/>
<link wikidata="Q196987" start="7998" end="8004" title="Zeugma, Commagene" label="Zeugma"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="8260" end="8264" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q185943" start="8275" end="8282" title="amnesty" label="amnesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235185" start="8607" end="8614" title="Imperial cult (Ancient Rome)" label="deified"/>
<link wikidata="Q211804" start="8695" end="8703" title="Augustus (honorific)" label="Augustae"/>
<link wikidata="Q928994" start="8928" end="8941" title="Pater Patriae" label="Pater Patriae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771261" start="9080" end="9099" title="College of Pontiffs" label="College of Pontiffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q212943" start="9129" end="9145" title="pontifex maximus" label="pontifex maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q256974" start="9346" end="9359" title="Fergus Millar" label="Fergus Millar"/>
<link wikidata="Q259083" start="9421" end="9436" title="Gellius Maximus" label="Gellius Maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q658866" start="9456" end="9469" title="Legio IV Scythica" label="Fourth Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q259126" start="9499" end="9504" title="Verus (senator)" label="Verus"/>
<link wikidata="Q373189" start="9698" end="9706" title="Bithynia" label="Bithynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q209349" start="9710" end="9719" title="Nicomedia" label="Nicomedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q199499" start="9758" end="9764" title="Moesia" label="Moesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q308902" start="9964" end="9972" title="Victoria (mythology)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144514" start="9980" end="9992" title="Curia Julia" label="Senate House"/>
<link wikidata="Q379995" start="10583" end="10591" title="Adventus (ceremony)" label="adventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185351" start="10722" end="10728" title="jurist" label="jurist"/>
<link wikidata="Q310076" start="10729" end="10735" title="Ulpian" label="Ulpian"/>
<link wikidata="Q692343" start="10772" end="10790" title="praetorian prefect" label="praetorian prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="10802" end="10808" title="Roman consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q17184559" start="11150" end="11168" title="Horti Spei Veteris" label="Horti Spei Veteris"/>
<link wikidata="Q276309" start="11233" end="11256" title="Sextus Varius Marcellus" label="Sextus Varius Marcellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q475012" start="11441" end="11464" title="Amphitheatrum Castrense" label="Amphitheatrum Castrense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092998" start="11488" end="11503" title="Circus Varianus" label="Circus Varianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q516608" start="11725" end="11734" title="Hierocles (charioteer)" label="Hierocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q188751" start="11754" end="11772" title="Caesar (title)" label="&amp;quot;caesar&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4024839" start="11879" end="11895" title="Aurelius Zoticus" label="Aurelius Zoticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q167779" start="11958" end="11970" title="cubicularius" label="cubicularius"/>
<link wikidata="Q187776" start="12921" end="12929" title="denarius" label="denarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q599170" start="12972" end="12995" title="antoninianus" label="&amp;quot;antoniniani&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442" start="13095" end="13112" title="Septimius Severus" label="Septimius Severus"/>
<link wikidata="Q511056" start="13114" end="13125" title="sun worship" label="sun worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195817" start="13202" end="13210" title="Elagabalus (deity)" label="Elagabal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209773" start="13237" end="13251" title="Roman pantheon" label="Roman pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207932" start="13281" end="13296" title="winter solstice" label="winter solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="13403" end="13410" title="Jupiter (god)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q130274" start="13551" end="13558" title="Astarte" label="Astarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q126916" start="13560" end="13567" title="Minerva" label="Minerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q104002" start="13569" end="13575" title="Urania" label="Urania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246962" start="13853" end="13869" title="Capitoline Triad" label="Capitoline Triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q125046" start="13897" end="13901" title="Juno (mythology)" label="Juno"/>
<link wikidata="Q188761" start="13967" end="13980" title="Vestal Virgin" label="Vestal Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q242457" start="13981" end="13995" title="Aquilia Severa" label="Aquilia Severa"/>
<link wikidata="Q861534" start="14228" end="14240" title="buried alive" label="buried alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q969344" start="14270" end="14281" title="Elagabalium" label="Elagabalium"/>
<link wikidata="Q200642" start="14316" end="14329" title="Palatine Hill" label="Palatine Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q664990" start="14388" end="14397" title="Baetyl" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q664990" start="14427" end="14433" title="baetyl" label="baetyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q313056" start="14441" end="14449" title="Herodian" label="Herodian"/>
<link wikidata="Q83345" start="14840" end="14851" title="circumcised" label="circumcised"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311393" start="14865" end="14883" title="Religious restrictions on the consumption of pork" label="abstain from swine"/>
<link wikidata="Q123524" start="15015" end="15023" title="solstice" label="solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q203788" start="15220" end="15227" title="chariot" label="chariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q188236" start="15436" end="15448" title="Cybele" label="Great Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q178710" start="15462" end="15467" title="Vesta (mythology)" label="Vesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q489353" start="15473" end="15480" title="Ancile" label="Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q366880" start="15488" end="15493" title="Salii" label="Salii"/>
<link wikidata="Q829650" start="15503" end="15512" title="Palladium (mythology)" label="Palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q17888" start="15840" end="15858" title="sexual orientation" label="sexual orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q48264" start="15863" end="15878" title="gender identity" label="gender identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="15935" end="15946" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q256015" start="16039" end="16059" title="Julia Cornelia Paula" label="Julia Cornelia Paula"/>
<link wikidata="Q188761" start="16161" end="16174" title="Vestal Virgin" label="Vestal Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q242457" start="16175" end="16195" title="Aquilia Severa" label="Julia Aquilia Severa"/>
<link wikidata="Q241466" start="16275" end="16297" title="Annia Faustina" label="Annia Aurelia Faustina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430" start="16315" end="16330" title="Marcus Aurelius" label="Marcus Aurelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q516608" start="16572" end="16581" title="Hierocles (charioteer)" label="Hierocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q155987" start="16605" end="16612" title="quadriga" label="chariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q193214" start="16625" end="16630" title="Caria" label="Caria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4024839" start="16713" end="16720" title="Zoticus (husband of Elagabalus)" label="Zoticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379299" start="16738" end="16744" title="Smyrna" label="Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q167779" start="16787" end="16799" title="cubicularius" label="cubicularius"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="16826" end="16837" title="prostitution" label="prostituted"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="16947" end="16958" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053501" start="16980" end="17004" title="sex reassignment surgery" label="sex reassignment surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q458403" start="17338" end="17348" title="Mary Beard (classicist)" label="Mary Beard"/>
<link wikidata="Q43549083" start="17540" end="17566" title="North Hertfordshire Museum" label="North Hertfordshire Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q19798" start="17570" end="17577" title="Hitchin" label="Hitchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q181733" start="17914" end="17930" title="Praetorian Guard" label="Praetorian Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q235090" start="18260" end="18278" title="Julia Avita Mamaea" label="Julia Avita Mamaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769" start="18330" end="18347" title="Severus Alexander" label="Severus Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q188751" start="18477" end="18495" title="Caesar (title)" label="&amp;quot;caesar&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049836" start="19309" end="19324" title="Castra Praetoria" label="Praetorian camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752350" start="19538" end="19566" title="summary execution" label="summary arrest and execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q181733" start="19660" end="19676" title="Praetorian Guard" label="Praetorian Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q516608" start="19807" end="19816" title="Hierocles (charioteer)" label="Hierocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q131301" start="19909" end="19914" title="Emesa" label="Emesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q223590" start="20001" end="20018" title="damnatio memoriae" label="damnatio memoriae"/>
<link wikidata="Q240679" start="20196" end="20204" title="Hercules" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="20320" end="20331" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q154668" start="20468" end="20477" title="Patrician (ancient Rome)" label="patrician"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434" start="20575" end="20583" title="Commodus" label="Commodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379299" start="20600" end="20606" title="Smyrna" label="Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442" start="20626" end="20643" title="Septimius Severus" label="Septimius Severus"/>
<link wikidata="Q181238" start="20714" end="20720" title="Africa province" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q170062" start="20725" end="20733" title="Pannonia" label="Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36507" start="20788" end="20798" title="millennium" label="millennium"/>
<link wikidata="Q82732" start="20820" end="20826" title="Aeneas" label="Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343039" start="21497" end="21509" title="Sardanapalus" label="Sardanapalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q223590" start="21615" end="21632" title="damnatio memoriae" label="damnatio memoriae"/>
<link wikidata="Q313056" start="22593" end="22601" title="Herodian" label="Herodian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434" start="22822" end="22830" title="Commodus" label="Commodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812" start="22867" end="22878" title="Gordian III" label="Gordian III"/>
<link wikidata="Q631286" start="23698" end="23708" title="numismatics" label="numismatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="23713" end="23727" title="archaeology" label="archaeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q722678" start="23847" end="23863" title="Historia Augusta" label="Historia Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q46696" start="24043" end="24055" title="Theodosius I" label="Theodosius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q313030" start="24818" end="24873" title="The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire" label="The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q161841" start="24883" end="24896" title="Edward Gibbon" label="Edward Gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q332519" start="25168" end="25174" title="Gannys" label="Gannys"/>
<link wikidata="Q179294" start="25181" end="25187" title="eunuch" label="eunuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q151936" start="25236" end="25255" title="James George Frazer" label="James George Frazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q651283" start="25273" end="25289" title="The Golden Bough" label="The Golden Bough"/>
<link wikidata="Q368949" start="25926" end="25935" title="exoticism" label="exoticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q63241849" start="26710" end="26733" title="character assassination" label="character assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582706" start="27583" end="27595" title="Warwick Ball" label="Warwick Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="27976" end="27986" title="syncretism" label="syncretism"/>
<link wikidata="Q214494" start="28469" end="28481" title="Sol Invictus" label="Sol Invictus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="28587" end="28598" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28894" end="28905" title=":wikt:heliogábalo" label="heliogábalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q846094" start="29071" end="29088" title="Decadent movement" label="Decadent movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q256922" start="29215" end="29223" title="aesthete" label="aesthete"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29289" end="29302" title="L&amp;#x27;Agonie" label="L&amp;#x27;Agonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221489" start="29319" end="29331" title="Jean Lombard" label="Jean Lombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q437798" start="29363" end="29377" title="Louis Couperus" label="Louis Couperus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29391" end="29408" title="De berg van licht" label="De berg van licht"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29470" end="29511" title="Héliogabale ou l&amp;#x27;Anarchiste couronné" label="Héliogabale ou l&amp;#x27;Anarchiste couronné"/>
<link wikidata="Q187166" start="29573" end="29587" title="Antonin Artaud" label="Antonin Artaud"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29699" end="29716" title="Family Favourites (novel)" label="Family Favourites"/>
<link wikidata="Q280556" start="29733" end="29746" title="Alfred Duggan" label="Alfred Duggan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29757" end="29773" title="Child of the Sun (novel)" label="Child of the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451338" start="29790" end="29802" title="Kyle Onstott" label="Kyle Onstott"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29807" end="29819" title="Lance Horner" label="Lance Horner"/>
<link wikidata="Q246722" start="29892" end="29906" title="Victor Pelevin" label="Victor Pelevin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29926" end="29938" title="Sol Invictus (novel)" label="Sol Invictus"/>
<link wikidata="Q439204" start="30056" end="30069" title="H. L. Mencken" label="H. L. Mencken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507659" start="30074" end="30092" title="George Jean Nathan" label="George Jean Nathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537329" start="30118" end="30129" title="Sky Gilbert" label="Sky Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q217764" start="30205" end="30219" title="Maurice Béjart" label="Maurice Béjart"/>
<link wikidata="Q110851" start="30268" end="30284" title="Sebastian Droste" label="Sebastian Droste"/>
<link wikidata="Q70764" start="30397" end="30409" title="Anita Berber" label="Anita Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051035" start="30439" end="30449" title="Eliogabalo" label="Eliogabalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q108062" start="30502" end="30519" title="Francesco Cavalli" label="Francesco Cavalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6737996" start="30566" end="30591" title="Major-General&amp;#x27;s Song" label="Major-General&amp;#x27;s Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146602" start="30610" end="30630" title="Gilbert and Sullivan" label="Gilbert and Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215463" start="30644" end="30667" title="The Pirates of Penzance" label="The Pirates of Penzance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30747" end="30758" title="Heliogabale (opera)" label="Heliogabale"/>
<link wikidata="Q726550" start="30801" end="30818" title="Déodat de Séverac" label="Déodat de Séverac"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797360" start="30821" end="30839" title="Artaud (album)" label="&amp;quot;Artaud&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638010" start="30884" end="30899" title="Pescado Rabioso" label="Pescado Rabioso"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30930" end="30958" title="Cantata de Puentes Amarillos" label="Cantata de Puentes Amarillos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3723107" start="31121" end="31132" title="Eliogabalus" label="Eliogabalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377070" start="31224" end="31251" title="Devil Doll (Slovenian band)" label="Devil Doll (Slovenian band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24077697" start="31260" end="31282" title="Heliogabalus imperator" label="Heliogabalus imperator"/>
<link wikidata="Q76915" start="31374" end="31391" title="Hans Werner Henze" label="Hans Werner Henze"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485596" start="31401" end="31430" title="Six Litanies for Heliogabalus" label="Six Litanies for Heliogabalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q298726" start="31475" end="31484" title="John Zorn" label="John Zorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18521730" start="31493" end="31509" title="The Pale Emperor" label="The Pale Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q186327" start="31554" end="31568" title="Marilyn Manson" label="Marilyn Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q184814" start="31746" end="31760" title="Pre-Raphaelite" label="Pre-Raphaelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q732617" start="31761" end="31775" title="Simeon Solomon" label="Simeon Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q276174" start="31784" end="31809" title="The Roses of Heliogabalus" label="The Roses of Heliogabalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q240526" start="31859" end="31879" title="Lawrence Alma-Tadema" label="Lawrence Alma-Tadema"/>
<link wikidata="Q170344" start="32150" end="32163" title="Anselm Kiefer" label="Anselm Kiefer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32186" end="32193" title="Algabal" label="Algabal"/>
<link wikidata="Q57187" start="32238" end="32251" title="Stefan George" label="Stefan George"/>
<link wikidata="Q278495" start="32307" end="32321" title="Marianne Moore" label="Marianne Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q935802" start="32529" end="32533" title="CBBC (TV channel)" label="CBBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5905004" start="32561" end="32579" title="Horrible Histories (2009 TV series)" label="Horrible Histories"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298532" start="32614" end="32628" title="Mathew Baynton" label="Mathew Baynton"/>
<link wikidata="Q722678" start="32823" end="32839" title="Historia Augusta" label="Historia Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q332342" start="33336" end="33362" title="Trinity College, Cambridge" label="Trinity College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q502912" start="33431" end="33441" title="J. B. Bury" label="J. B. Bury"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14229" wikidata="Q81058" url="?curid=14229" title="Homeopathy">
<text>Homeopathy or homoeopathy is a pseudoscientific system of alternative medicine. It was conceived in 1796 by the German physician Samuel Hahnemann. Its practitioners, called homeopaths or homeopathic physicians, believe that a substance that causes symptoms of a disease in healthy people can cure similar symptoms in sick people; this doctrine is called &quot;similia similibus curentur&quot;, or &quot;like cures like&quot;. Homeopathic preparations are termed &quot;remedies&quot; and are made using homeopathic dilution. In this process, the selected substance is repeatedly diluted until the final product is chemically indistinguishable from the diluent. Often not even a single molecule of the original substance can be expected to remain in the product. Between each dilution homeopaths may hit and/or shake the product, claiming this makes the diluent &quot;remember&quot; the original substance after its removal. Practitioners claim that such preparations, upon oral intake, can treat or cure disease.

All relevant scientific knowledge about physics, chemistry, biochemistry and biology contradicts homeopathy. Homeopathic remedies are typically biochemically inert, and have no effect on any known disease. Its theory of disease, centered around principles Hahnemann termed miasms, is inconsistent with subsequent identification of viruses and bacteria as causes of disease. Clinical trials have been conducted and generally demonstrated no objective effect from homeopathic preparations. The fundamental implausibility of homeopathy as well as a lack of demonstrable effectiveness has led to it being characterized within the scientific and medical communities as quackery and fraud.

Homeopathy achieved its greatest popularity in the 19th century. It was introduced to the United States in 1825, and the first American homeopathic school opened in 1835. Throughout the 19th century, dozens of homeopathic institutions appeared in Europe and the United States. During this period, homeopathy was able to appear relatively successful, as other forms of treatment could be harmful and ineffective. By the end of the century the practice began to wane, with the last exclusively homeopathic medical school in the United States closing in 1920. During the 1970s, homeopathy made a significant comeback, with sales of some homeopathic products increasing tenfold. The trend corresponded with the rise of the New Age movement, and may be in part due to chemophobia, an irrational aversion to synthetic chemicals, and the longer consultation times homeopathic practitioners provided.

In the 21st century, a series of meta-analyses have shown that the therapeutic claims of homeopathy lack scientific justification. As a result, national and international bodies have recommended the withdrawal of government funding for homeopathy in healthcare. National bodies from Australia, the United Kingdom, Switzerland and France, as well as the European Academies&#x27; Science Advisory Council and the Russian Academy of Sciences have all concluded that homeopathy is ineffective, and recommended against the practice receiving any further funding. The National Health Service in England no longer provides funding for homeopathic remedies and asked the Department of Health to add homeopathic remedies to the list of forbidden prescription items. France removed funding in 2021, while Spain has also announced moves to ban homeopathy and other pseudotherapies from health centers.

==History==
Homeopathy was created in 1796 by Samuel Hahnemann. Hahnemann rejected the mainstream medicine of the late 18th century as irrational and inadvisable, because it was largely ineffective and often harmful. He advocated the use of single drugs at lower doses and promoted an immaterial, vitalistic view of how living organisms function. The term &quot;homeopathy&quot; was coined by Hahnemann and first appeared in print in 1807. He also coined the expression &quot;allopathic medicine&quot;, which was used to pejoratively refer to traditional Western medicine.

===Concept===

Hahnemann conceived of homeopathy while translating a medical treatise by the Scottish physician and chemist William Cullen into German. Being sceptical of Cullen&#x27;s theory that cinchona cured malaria because it was bitter, Hahnemann ingested some bark specifically to investigate what would happen. He experienced fever, shivering and joint pain: symptoms similar to those of malaria itself. From this, Hahnemann came to believe that all effective drugs produce symptoms in healthy individuals similar to those of the diseases that they treat. This led to the name &quot;homeopathy&quot;, which comes from the &quot;hómoios&quot;, &quot;-like&quot; and &quot;páthos&quot;, &quot;suffering&quot;.

The doctrine that those drugs are effective which produce symptoms similar to the symptoms caused by the diseases they treat, called &quot;the law of similars&quot;, was expressed by Hahnemann with the Latin phrase &quot;similia similibus curentur&quot;, or &quot;like cures like&quot;. Hahnemann&#x27;s law of similars is unproven and does not derive from the scientific method. An account of the effects of eating cinchona bark noted by Oliver Wendell Holmes, published in 1861, failed to reproduce the symptoms Hahnemann reported. Subsequent scientific work showed that cinchona cures malaria because it contains quinine, which kills the &quot;Plasmodium falciparum&quot; parasite that causes the disease; the mechanism of action is unrelated to Hahnemann&#x27;s ideas.

====Provings====
Hahnemann began to test what effects various substances may produce in humans, a procedure later called &quot;homeopathic proving&quot;. These tests required subjects to test the effects of ingesting substances by recording all their symptoms as well as the ancillary conditions under which they appeared. He published a collection of provings in 1805, and a second collection of 65 preparations appeared in his book, &quot;Materia Medica Pura&quot; (1810).

As Hahnemann believed that large doses of drugs that caused similar symptoms would only aggravate illness, he advocated for extreme dilutions. A technique was devised for making dilutions that Hahnemann claimed would preserve the substance&#x27;s therapeutic properties while removing its harmful effects. Hahnemann believed that this process enhanced &quot;the spirit-like medicinal powers of the crude substances&quot;. He gathered and published an overview of his new medical system in his book, &quot;The Organon of the Healing Art&quot; (1810), with a sixth edition published in 1921 that homeopaths still use today.

====Miasms and disease====
In the &quot;Organon&quot;, Hahnemann introduced the concept of &quot;miasms&quot; as the &quot;infectious principles&quot; underlying chronic disease and as &quot;peculiar morbid derangement[s] of vital force&quot;. Hahnemann associated each miasm with specific diseases, and thought that initial exposure to miasms causes local symptoms, such as skin or venereal diseases. His assertion was that if these symptoms were suppressed by medication, the cause went deeper and began to manifest itself as diseases of the internal organs. Homeopathy maintains that treating diseases by directly alleviating their symptoms, as is sometimes done in conventional medicine, is ineffective because all &quot;disease can generally be traced to some latent, deep-seated, underlying chronic, or inherited tendency&quot;. The underlying imputed miasm still remains, and deep-seated ailments can be corrected only by removing the deeper disturbance of the vital force.

Hahnemann&#x27;s hypotheses for miasms originally presented only three local symptoms: psora (the itch), syphilis (venereal disease) or sycosis (fig-wart disease). Of these the most important was &quot;psora&quot;, described as being related to any itching diseases of the skin and was claimed to be the foundation of many further disease conditions. Hahnemann believed it to be the cause of such diseases as epilepsy, cancer, jaundice, deafness, and cataracts. Since Hahnemann&#x27;s time, other miasms have been proposed, some replacing illnesses previously attributed to the psora, including tuberculosis and cancer miasms.

Hahnemann&#x27;s miasm theory remains disputed and controversial within homeopathy even in modern times. The theory of miasms has been criticized as an explanation developed to preserve the system of homeopathy in the face of treatment failures, and for being inadequate to cover the many hundreds of sorts of diseases, as well as for failing to explain disease predispositions, as well as genetics, environmental factors, and the unique disease history of each patient.

===19th century: rise to popularity and early criticism===
Homeopathy achieved its greatest popularity in the 19th century. It was introduced to the United States in 1825 by Hans Birch Gram, a student of Hahnemann. The first homeopathic school in the United States opened in 1835 and the American Institute of Homeopathy was established in 1844. Throughout the 19th century, dozens of homeopathic institutions appeared in Europe and the United States, and by 1900, there were 22 homeopathic colleges and 15,000 practitioners in the United States.

Because medical practice of the time relied on treatments which were often ineffective and harmful, patients of homeopaths often had better outcomes than those being treated by medical practitioners. Though ineffective, homeopathic preparations are rarely detrimental, thus users are less likely to be harmed by the treatment that is supposed to be helping them. The relative success of homeopathy in the 19th century may have led to the abandonment of the ineffective and harmful treatments of bloodletting and purging and begun the move towards more effective, science-based medicine. One reason for the growing popularity of homeopathy was its apparent success in treating people suffering from infectious disease epidemics. During 19th-century epidemics of diseases such as cholera, death rates in homeopathic hospitals were often lower than in conventional hospitals, where the treatments used at the time were often harmful and did little or nothing to combat the diseases.

Even during its rise in popularity, homeopathy was criticized by scientists and physicians. Sir John Forbes, physician to Queen Victoria, said in 1843 that the extremely small doses of homeopathy were regularly derided as useless and considered it &quot;an outrage to human reason&quot;. James Young Simpson said in 1853 of the highly diluted drugs: &quot;No poison, however strong or powerful, the billionth or decillionth of which would in the least degree affect a man or harm a fly.&quot; Nineteenth-century American physician and author Oliver Wendell Holmes was also a vocal critic of homeopathy and published an essay entitled &quot;Homœopathy and Its Kindred Delusions&quot; (1842). The members of the French Homeopathic Society observed in 1867 that some leading homeopaths of Europe not only were abandoning the practice of administering infinitesimal doses but were also no longer defending it. The last school in the United States exclusively teaching homeopathy closed in 1920.

=== Revival in the 20th century ===
According to academics and Edzard Ernst, the Nazi regime in Germany was fond of homeopathy, and spent large sums of money on researching its mechanisms, but without gaining a positive result. Unschuld also states that homeopathy never subsequently took root in the United States, but remained more deeply established in European thinking. In the United States, the &quot;Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act&quot; of 1938 (sponsored by Royal Copeland, a Senator from New York and homeopathic physician) recognized homeopathic preparations as drugs. In the 1950s, there were only 75 solely homeopathic practitioners in the U.S. By the mid to late 1970s, homeopathy made a significant comeback and the sales of some homeopathic companies increased tenfold.

Some homeopaths credit the revival to Greek homeopath George Vithoulkas, who conducted a &quot;great deal of research to update the scenarios and refine the theories and practice of homeopathy&quot; in the 1970s, but Ernst and Simon Singh consider it to be linked to the rise of the New Age movement. Bruce Hood has argued that the increased popularity of homeopathy in recent times may be due to the comparatively long consultations practitioners are willing to give their patients, and to a preference for &quot;natural&quot; products, which people think are the basis of homeopathic preparations.

Towards the end of the century opposition to homeopathy began to increase again; with William T. Jarvis, the President of the National Council Against Health Fraud, saying that &quot;Homeopathy is a fraud perpetrated on the public with the government&#x27;s blessing, thanks to the abuse of political power of Sen. Royal S. Copeland.&quot;

===21st century: renewed criticism===

Since the beginning of the 21st century, a series of meta-analyses have further shown that the therapeutic claims of homeopathy lack scientific justification. This had led to a decrease or suspension of funding by many governments. In a 2010 report, the Science and Technology Committee of the United Kingdom House of Commons recommended that homeopathy should no longer receive National Health Service (NHS) funding due its lack of scientific credibility; NHS funding for homeopathy ceased in 2017. They also asked the Department of Health in the UK to add homeopathic remedies to the list of forbidden prescription items.

In 2015, the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia found that &quot;there are no health conditions for which there is reliable evidence that homeopathy is effective&quot;. The federal government only ended up accepting three of the 45 recommendations made by the 2018 review of Pharmacy Remuneration and Regulation. The same year the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) held a hearing requesting public comment on the regulation of homeopathic drugs. In 2017 the FDA announced it would strengthen regulation of homeopathic products.

The American non-profit Center for Inquiry (CFI) filed a lawsuit in 2018 against the CVS pharmacy for consumer fraud over its sale of homeopathic medicines. It claimed that CVS was selling homeopathic products on an easier-to-obtain basis than standard medication. In 2019, CFI brought a similar lawsuit against Walmart for &quot;committing wide-scale consumer fraud and endangering the health of its customers through its sale and marketing of homeopathic medicines&quot;. They also conducted a survey in which they found consumers felt ripped off when informed of the lack of evidence for the efficacy of homeopathic remedies, such as those sold by Walmart and CVS.

In 2021, the French healthcare minister phased out social security reimbursements for homeopathic drugs. France has long had a stronger belief in the virtues of homeopathic drugs than many other countries and the world&#x27;s biggest manufacturer of alternative medicine drugs, Boiron, is located in that country. Spain has also announced moves to ban homeopathy and other pseudotherapies. In 2016, the University of Barcelona cancelled its master&#x27;s degree in Homeopathy citing &quot;lack of scientific basis&quot;, after advice from the Spanish Ministry of Health. Shortly afterwards the University of Valencia announced the elimination of its Masters in Homeopathy.

==Preparations and treatment==
Homeopathic preparations are referred to as &quot;homeopathic remedies&quot;. Practitioners rely on two types of reference when prescribing: &quot;Materia medica&quot; and repertories. A homeopathic &quot;materia medica&quot; is a collection of &quot;drug pictures&quot;, organized alphabetically. A homeopathic repertory is a quick reference version of the &quot;materia medica&quot; that indexes the symptoms and then the associated remedies for each. In both cases different compilers may dispute particular inclusions in the references. The first symptomatic homeopathic &quot;materia medica&quot; was arranged by Hahnemann. The first homeopathic repertory was Georg Jahr&#x27;s &quot;Symptomenkodex&quot;, published in German in 1835, and translated into English as the &quot;Repertory to the more Characteristic Symptoms of Materia Medica&quot; in 1838. This version was less focused on disease categories and was the forerunner to later works by James Tyler Kent. There are over 118 repertories published in English, with Kent&#x27;s being one of the most used.

=== Consultation ===
Homeopaths generally begin with a consultation, which can be a 10–15 minute appointment or last for over an hour, where the patient describes their medical history. The patient describes the &quot;modalities&quot;, or if their symptoms change depending on the weather and other external factors. The practitioner also solicits information on mood, likes and dislikes, physical, mental and emotional states, life circumstances, and any physical or emotional illnesses. This information (also called the &quot;symptom picture&quot;) is matched to the &quot;drug picture&quot; in the &quot;materia medica&quot; or repertory and used to determine the appropriate homeopathic remedies. In classical homeopathy, the practitioner attempts to match a single preparation to the totality of symptoms (the &quot;simlilum&quot;), while &quot;clinical homeopathy&quot; involves combinations of preparations based on the illness&#x27;s symptoms.

=== Preparation ===
Homeopathy uses animal, plant, mineral, and synthetic substances in its preparations, generally referring to them using Latin names. Examples include &quot;arsenicum album&quot; (arsenic oxide), &quot;natrum muriaticum&quot; (sodium chloride or table salt), &quot;Lachesis muta&quot; (the venom of the bushmaster snake), &quot;opium&quot;, and &quot;thyroidinum&quot; (thyroid hormone). Homeopaths say this is to ensure accuracy. In the USA the common name must be displayed, although the Latin one can also be present. Homeopathic pills are made from an inert substance (often sugars, typically lactose), upon which a drop of liquid homeopathic preparation is placed and allowed to evaporate.

Isopathy is a therapy derived from homeopathy in which the preparations come from diseased or pathological products such as fecal, urinary and respiratory discharges, blood, and tissue. They are called nosodes (from the Greek &quot;nosos&quot;, disease) with preparations made from &quot;healthy&quot; specimens being termed &quot;sarcodes&quot;. Many so-called &quot;homeopathic vaccines&quot; are a form of isopathy. Tautopathy is a form of isopathy where the preparations are composed of drugs or vaccines that a person has consumed in the past, in the belief that this can reverse the supposed lingering damage caused by the initial use. There is no convincing scientific evidence for isopathy as an effective method of treatment.

Some modern homeopaths use preparations they call &quot;imponderables&quot; because they do not originate from a substance but some other phenomenon presumed to have been &quot;captured&quot; by alcohol or lactose. Examples include X-rays and sunlight. Another derivative is electrohomeopathy, where an electric bio-energy of therapeutic value is supposedly extracted from plants. Popular in the late nineteenth century, electrohomeopathy is extremely pseudo-scientific. In 2012, the Allahabad High Court in Uttar Pradesh, India, handed down a decree stating that electrohomeopathy was quackery and no longer recognized it as a system of medicine.

Other minority practices include paper preparations, in which the terms for substances and dilutions are written on pieces of paper and either pinned to the patients&#x27; clothing, put in their pockets, or placed under glasses of water that are then given to the patients. Radionics, the use of electromagnetic radiation such as radio waves, can also be used to manufacture preparations. Such practices have been strongly criticized by classical homeopaths as unfounded, speculative, and verging upon magic and superstition. Flower preparations are produced by placing flowers in water and exposing them to sunlight. The most famous of these are the Bach flower remedies, which were developed by Edward Bach.

=== Dilutions ===
Hahnemann claimed that undiluted doses caused reactions, sometimes dangerous ones, and thus that preparations be given at the lowest possible dose. A solution that is more dilute is described as having a higher &quot;potency&quot;, and thus are claimed to be stronger and deeper-acting. The general method of dilution is serial dilution, where solvent is added to part of the previous mixture, but the &quot;Korsakovian&quot; method may also be used. In the Korsakovian method, the vessel in which the preparations are manufactured is emptied, refilled with solvent, with the volume of fluid adhering to the walls of the vessel deemed sufficient for the new batch. The Korsakovian method is sometimes referred to as K on the label of a homeopathic preparation. Another method is Fluxion, which dilutes the substance by continuously passing water through the vial. Insoluble solids, such as granite, diamond, and platinum, are diluted by grinding them with lactose (&quot;trituration&quot;).

Three main logarithmic dilution scales are in regular use in homeopathy. Hahnemann created the &quot;centesimal&quot; or &quot;C scale&quot;, diluting a substance by a factor of 100 at each stage. There is also a decimal dilution scale (notated as &quot;X&quot; or &quot;D&quot;) in which the preparation is diluted by a factor of 10 at each stage. The centesimal scale was favoured by Hahnemann for most of his life, although in his last ten years Hahnemann developed a quintamillesimal (Q) scale which diluted the drug 1 part in 50,000. A 2C dilution works out to one part of the original substance in 10,000 parts of the solution. In standard chemistry, this produces a substance with a concentration of 0.01% (volume-volume percentage). A 6C dilution ends up with the original substance diluted by a factor of 100−6 (one part in one trillion). The end product is usually so diluted as to be indistinguishable from the diluent (pure water, sugar or alcohol). The greatest dilution reasonably likely to contain at least one molecule of the original substance is approximately 12C.

Hahnemann advocated dilutions of 1 part to 1060 or 30C. Hahnemann regularly used dilutions of up to 30C but opined that &quot;there must be a limit to the matter&quot;. To counter the reduced potency at high dilutions he formed the view that vigorous shaking by striking on an elastic surface – a process termed &quot;succussion&quot; – was necessary. Homeopaths are unable to agree on the number and force of strikes needed, and there is no way that the claimed results of succussion can be tested.

Critics of homeopathy commonly emphasize the dilutions involved in homeopathy, using analogies. One mathematically correct example is that a 12C solution is equivalent to &quot;a pinch of salt in both the North and South Atlantic Oceans&quot;. One-third of a drop of some original substance diluted into all the water on Earth would produce a preparation with a concentration of about 13C. Robert L. Park points out that a 200C dilution of duck liver, marketed under the name Oscillococcinum, would require 10320 universes worth of molecules to contain just one original molecule in the final substance. The high dilutions characteristically used are often considered to be the most controversial and implausible aspect of homeopathy.

===Provings===
Homeopaths claim that they can determine the properties of their preparations by following a method which they call &quot;proving&quot;. As performed by Hahnemann, provings involved administering various preparations to healthy volunteers. The volunteers were then observed, often for months at a time. They were made to keep extensive journals detailing all of their symptoms at specific times throughout the day. They were forbidden from consuming coffee, tea, spices, or wine for the duration of the experiment; playing chess was also prohibited because Hahnemann considered it to be &quot;too exciting&quot;, though they were allowed to drink beer and encouraged to exercise in moderation. At first Hahnemann used undiluted doses for provings, but he later advocated provings with preparations at a 30C dilution, and most modern provings are carried out using ultra-dilute preparations.

Provings are claimed to have been important in the development of the clinical trial, due to their early use of simple control groups, systematic and quantitative procedures, and some of the first application of statistics in medicine. The lengthy records of self-experimentation by homeopaths have occasionally proven useful in the development of modern drugs: For example, evidence that nitroglycerin might be useful as a treatment for angina was discovered by looking through homeopathic provings, though homeopaths themselves never used it for that purpose at that time. The first recorded provings were published by Hahnemann in his 1796 &quot;Essay on a New Principle&quot;. His &quot;Fragmenta de Viribus&quot; (1805) contained the results of 27 provings, and his 1810 &quot;Materia Medica Pura&quot; contained 65. For James Tyler Kent&#x27;s 1905 &quot;Lectures on Homoeopathic Materia Medica&quot;, 217 preparations underwent provings and newer substances are continually added to contemporary versions.

Though the proving process has superficial similarities with clinical trials, it is fundamentally different in that the process is subjective, not blinded, and modern provings are unlikely to use pharmacologically active levels of the substance under proving. As early as 1842, Oliver Holmes had noted that provings were impossibly vague, and the purported effect was not repeatable among different subjects.

== Evidence and efficacy ==

Outside of the alternative medicine community, scientists have long considered homeopathy a sham or a pseudoscience, and the medical community regards it as quackery. There is an overall absence of sound statistical evidence of therapeutic efficacy, which is consistent with the lack of any biologically plausible pharmacological agent or mechanism. Proponents argue that homeopathic medicines must work by some, as yet undefined, biophysical mechanism. No homeopathic preparation has been shown to be different from placebo.

=== Lack of scientific evidence ===
The lack of convincing scientific evidence supporting its efficacy and its use of preparations without active ingredients have led to characterizations of homeopathy as pseudoscience and quackery, or, in the words of a 1998 medical review, &quot;placebo therapy at best and quackery at worst&quot;. The Russian Academy of Sciences considers homeopathy a &quot;dangerous &#x27;pseudoscience&#x27; that does not work&quot;, and &quot;urges people to treat homeopathy &#x27;on a par with magic. The Chief Medical Officer for England, Dame Sally Davies, has stated that homeopathic preparations are &quot;rubbish&quot; and do not serve as anything more than placebos. In 2013, Mark Walport, the UK Government Chief Scientific Adviser and head of the Government Office for Science said &quot;homeopathy is nonsense, it is non-science.&quot; His predecessor, John Beddington, also said that homeopathy &quot;has no underpinning of scientific basis&quot; and is being &quot;fundamentally ignored&quot; by the Government.

Jack Killen, acting deputy director of the National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine, says homeopathy &quot;goes beyond current understanding of chemistry and physics&quot;. He adds: &quot;There is, to my knowledge, no condition for which homeopathy has been proven to be an effective treatment.&quot; Ben Goldacre says that homeopaths who misrepresent scientific evidence to a scientifically illiterate public, have &quot;... walled themselves off from academic medicine, and critique has been all too often met with avoidance rather than argument&quot;. Homeopaths often prefer to ignore meta-analyses in favour of cherry picked positive results, such as by promoting a particular observational study (one which Goldacre describes as &quot;little more than a customer-satisfaction survey&quot;) as if it were more informative than a series of randomized controlled trials.

In an article entitled &quot;Should We Maintain an Open Mind about Homeopathy?&quot; published in the &quot;American Journal of Medicine&quot;, Michael Baum and Edzard Ernstwriting to other physicianswrote that &quot;Homeopathy is among the worst examples of faith-based medicine... These axioms [of homeopathy] are not only out of line with scientific facts but also directly opposed to them. If homeopathy is correct, much of physics, chemistry, and pharmacology must be incorrect...&quot;.

=== Plausibility of dilutions ===

The exceedingly low concentration of homeopathic preparations, which often lack even a single molecule of the diluted substance, has been the basis of questions about the effects of the preparations since the 19th century. The laws of chemistry give this dilution limit, which is related to the Avogadro number, as being roughly equal to 12C homeopathic dilutions (1 part in 1024). James Randi and the 10:23 campaign groups have highlighted the lack of active ingredients by taking large &#x27;overdoses&#x27;. None of the hundreds of demonstrators in the UK, Australia, New Zealand, Canada and the US were injured and &quot;no one was cured of anything, either&quot;.

Modern advocates of homeopathy have proposed a concept of &quot;water memory&quot;, according to which water &quot;remembers&quot; the substances mixed in it, and transmits the effect of those substances when consumed. This concept is inconsistent with the current understanding of matter, and water memory has never been demonstrated to have any detectable effect, biological or otherwise. Existence of a pharmacological effect in the absence of any true active ingredient is inconsistent with the law of mass action and the observed dose-response relationships characteristic of therapeutic drugs. Homeopaths contend that their methods produce a therapeutically active preparation, selectively including only the intended substance, though in reality any water will have been in contact with millions of different substances throughout its history, and homeopaths cannot account for the selected homeopathic substance being isolated as a special case in their process.

Practitioners also hold that higher dilutions produce stronger medicinal effects. This idea is also inconsistent with observed dose-response relationships, where effects are dependent on the concentration of the active ingredient in the body. Some contend that the phenomenon of hormesis may support the idea of dilution increasing potency, but the dose-response relationship outside the zone of hormesis declines with dilution as normal, and nonlinear pharmacological effects do not provide any credible support for homeopathy.

===Efficacy===
No individual homeopathic preparation has been unambiguously shown by research to be different from placebo. The methodological quality of the early primary research was low, with problems such as weaknesses in study design and reporting, small sample size, and selection bias. Since better quality trials have become available, the evidence for efficacy of homeopathy preparations has diminished; the highest-quality trials indicate that the preparations themselves exert no intrinsic effect. A review conducted in 2010 of all the pertinent studies of &quot;best evidence&quot; produced by the Cochrane Collaboration concluded that this evidence &quot;fails to demonstrate that homeopathic medicines have effects beyond placebo.&quot;

In 2009, the United Kingdom&#x27;s House of Commons Science and Technology Committee concluded that there was no compelling evidence of effect other than placebo. The Australian National Health and Medical Research Council completed a comprehensive review of the effectiveness of homeopathic preparations in 2015, in which it concluded that &quot;there were no health conditions for which there was reliable evidence that homeopathy was effective.&quot; The European Academies&#x27; Science Advisory Council (EASAC) published its official analysis in 2017 finding a lack of evidence that homeopathic products are effective, and raising concerns about quality control. In contrast a 2011 book was published, purportedly financed by the Swiss government, that concluded that homeopathy was effective and cost efficient. Although hailed by proponents as proof that homeopathy works, it was found to be scientifically, logically and ethically flawed, with most authors having a conflict of interest. The Swiss Federal Office of Public Health later released a statement saying the book was published without the consent of the Swiss government.

Meta-analyses, essential tools to summarize evidence of therapeutic efficacy, and systematic reviews have found that the methodological quality in the majority of randomized trials in homeopathy have shortcomings and that such trials were generally of lower quality than trials of conventional medicine. A major issue has been publication bias, where positive results are more likely to be published in journals. This has been particularly marked in alternative medicine journals, where few of the published articles (just 5% during the year 2000) tend to report null results. A systematic review of the available systematic reviews confirmed in 2002 that higher-quality trials tended to have less positive results, and found no convincing evidence that any homeopathic preparation exerts clinical effects different from placebo. The same conclusion was also reached in 2005 in a meta-analysis published in &quot;The Lancet&quot;. A 2017 systematic review and meta-analysis found that the most reliable evidence did not support the effectiveness of non-individualized homeopathy.

Health organizations, including the UK&#x27;s National Health Service, the American Medical Association, the FASEB, and the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia, have issued statements saying that there is no good-quality evidence that homeopathy is effective as a treatment for any health condition. In 2009, World Health Organization official Mario Raviglione criticized the use of homeopathy to treat tuberculosis; similarly, another WHO spokesperson argued there was no evidence homeopathy would be an effective treatment for diarrhoea. They warned against the use of homeopathy for serious conditions such as depression, HIV and malaria. The American College of Medical Toxicology and the American Academy of Clinical Toxicology recommend that no one use homeopathic treatment for disease or as a preventive health measure. These organizations report that no evidence exists that homeopathic treatment is effective, but that there is evidence that using these treatments produces harm and can bring indirect health risks by delaying conventional treatment.

===Purported effects in other biological systems===
While some articles have suggested that homeopathic solutions of high dilution can have statistically significant effects on organic processes including the growth of grain and enzyme reactions, such evidence is disputed since attempts to replicate them have failed. In 2001 and 2004, Madeleine Ennis published a number of studies that reported that homeopathic dilutions of histamine exerted an effect on the activity of basophils. In response to the first of these studies, &quot;Horizon&quot; aired a programme in which British scientists attempted to replicate Ennis&#x27; results; they were unable to do so. A 2007 systematic review of high-dilution experiments found that none of the experiments with positive results could be reproduced by all investigators.

In 1988, French immunologist Jacques Benveniste published a paper in the journal &quot;Nature&quot; while working at INSERM. The paper purported to have discovered that basophils released histamine when exposed to a homeopathic dilution of anti-immunoglobulin E antibody. Skeptical of the findings, &quot;Nature&quot; assembled an independent investigative team to determine the accuracy of the research. After investigation the team found that the experiments were &quot;statistically ill-controlled&quot;, &quot;interpretation has been clouded by the exclusion of measurements in conflict with the claim&quot;, and concluded, &quot;We believe that experimental data have been uncritically assessed and their imperfections inadequately reported.&quot;

== Ethics and safety ==
The provision of homeopathic preparations has been described as unethical. Michael Baum, professor emeritus of surgery and visiting professor of medical humanities at University College London (UCL), has described homeopathy as a &quot;cruel deception&quot;. Edzard Ernst, the first professor of complementary medicine in the United Kingdom and a former homeopathic practitioner, has expressed his concerns about pharmacists who violate their ethical code by failing to provide customers with &quot;necessary and relevant information&quot; about the true nature of the homeopathic products they advertise and sell. In 2013 the UK Advertising Standards Authority concluded that the Society of Homeopaths were targeting vulnerable ill people and discouraging the use of essential medical treatment while making misleading claims of efficacy for homeopathic products. In 2015 the Federal Court of Australia imposed penalties on a homeopathic company for making false or misleading statements about the efficacy of the whooping cough vaccine and recommending homeopathic remedies as an alternative.A 2000 review by homeopaths reported that homeopathic preparations are &quot;unlikely to provoke severe adverse reactions&quot;. In 2012, a systematic review evaluating evidence of homeopathy&#x27;s possible adverse effects concluded that &quot;homeopathy has the potential to harm patients and consumers in both direct and indirect ways&quot;. A 2016 systematic review and meta-analysis found that, in homeopathic clinical trials, adverse effects were reported among the patients who received homeopathy about as often as they were reported among patients who received placebo or conventional medicine.

Some homeopathic preparations involve poisons such as Belladonna, arsenic, and poison ivy. In rare cases, the original ingredients are present at detectable levels. This may be due to improper preparation or intentional low dilution. Serious adverse effects such as seizures and death have been reported or associated with some homeopathic preparations. Instances of arsenic poisoning have occurred. In 2009, the FDA advised consumers to stop using three discontinued cold remedy Zicam products because it could cause permanent damage to users&#x27; sense of smell. In 2016 the FDA issued a safety alert to consumers warning against the use of homeopathic teething gels and tablets following reports of adverse events after their use. A previous FDA investigation had found that these products were improperly diluted and contained &quot;unsafe levels of belladonna&quot; and that the reports of serious adverse events in children using this product were &quot;consistent with belladonna toxicity&quot;.

Patients who choose to use homeopathy rather than evidence-based medicine risk missing timely diagnosis and effective treatment, thereby worsening the outcomes of serious conditions such as cancer. The Russian Commission on Pseudoscience has said homeopathy is not safe because &quot;patients spend significant amounts of money, buying medicines that do not work and disregard already known effective treatment.&quot; Critics have cited cases of patients failing to receive proper treatment for diseases that could have been easily managed with conventional medicine and who have died as a result. They have also condemned the &quot;marketing practice&quot; of criticizing and downplaying the effectiveness of medicine. Homeopaths claim that use of conventional medicines will &quot;push the disease deeper&quot; and cause more serious conditions, a process referred to as &quot;suppression&quot;. In 1978, Anthony Campbell, a consultant physician at the Royal London Homeopathic Hospital, criticized statements by George Vithoulkas claiming that syphilis, when treated with antibiotics, would develop into secondary and tertiary syphilis with involvement of the central nervous system. Vithoulkas&#x27; claims echo the idea that treating a disease with external medication used to treat the symptoms would only drive it deeper into the body and conflict with scientific studies, which indicate that penicillin treatment produces a complete cure of syphilis in more than 90% of cases.

The use of homeopathy as a preventive for serious infectious diseases, called homeoprophylaxis, is especially controversial. Some homeopaths (particularly those who are non-physicians) advise their patients against immunization. Others have suggested that vaccines be replaced with homeopathic &quot;nosodes&quot;. While Hahnemann was opposed to such preparations, modern homeopaths often use them although there is no evidence to indicate they have any beneficial effects. Promotion of homeopathic alternatives to vaccines has been characterized as dangerous, inappropriate and irresponsible. In December 2014, the Australian homeopathy supplier Homeopathy Plus! was found to have acted deceptively in promoting homeopathic alternatives to vaccines. In 2019, an investigative journalism piece by the &quot;Telegraph&quot; revealed that homeopathy practitioners were actively discouraging patients from vaccinating their children. Cases of homeopaths advising against the use of anti-malarial drugs have also been identified, putting visitors to the tropics in severe danger.

A 2006 review recommends that pharmacy colleges include a required course where ethical dilemmas inherent in recommending products lacking proven safety and efficacy data be discussed and that students should be taught where unproven systems such as homeopathy depart from evidence-based medicine.

==Regulation and prevalence==

Homeopathy is fairly common in some countries while being uncommon in others; is highly regulated in some countries and mostly unregulated in others. It is practiced worldwide and professional qualifications and licences are needed in most countries. A 2019 WHO report found that 100 out of 133 Member States surveyed in 2012 acknowledged that their population used homeopathy, with 22 saying the practice was regulated and 13 providing health insurance coverage. In some countries, there are no specific legal regulations concerning the use of homeopathy, while in others, licences or degrees in conventional medicine from accredited universities are required. In 2001 homeopathy had been integrated into the national health care systems of many countries, including India, Mexico, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, and the United Kingdom.

=== Regulation ===
Some homeopathic treatment is covered by the public health service of several European countries, including Scotland, and Luxembourg. It used to be covered in France until 2021. In other countries, such as Belgium, homeopathy is not covered. In Austria, the public health service requires scientific proof of effectiveness in order to reimburse medical treatments and homeopathy is listed as not reimbursable, but exceptions can be made; private health insurance policies sometimes include homeopathic treatments. In 2018, Austria&#x27;s Medical University of Vienna stopped teaching homeopathy. The Swiss government withdrew coverage of homeopathy and four other complementary treatments in 2005, stating that they did not meet efficacy and cost-effectiveness criteria, but following a referendum in 2009 the five therapies were reinstated for a further 6-year trial period. In Germany, homeopathic treatments are covered by 70 percent of government medical plans, and available in almost every pharmacy. In January 2024, German health minister Karl Lauterbach announced plans to withdraw all statutory health insurance coverage for homeopathic and anthroposophic treatments, citing a lack of scientific evidence for their efficacy.

The English NHS recommended against prescribing homeopathic preparations in 2017. In 2018, prescriptions worth £55,000 were written in defiance of the guidelines, representing less than 0.001% of the total NHS prescribing budget. In 2016 the UK&#x27;s Committee of Advertising Practice compliance team wrote to homeopaths in the UK to &quot;remind them of the rules that govern what they can and can&#x27;t say in their marketing materials&quot;. The letter told homeopaths to &quot;ensure that they do not make any direct or implied claims that homeopathy can treat medical conditions&quot; and asks them to review their marketing communications &quot;including websites and social media pages&quot; to ensure compliance. Homeopathic services offered at Bristol Homeopathic Hospital in the UK ceased in October 2015.

Member states of the European Union are required to ensure that homeopathic products are registered, although this process does not require any proof of efficacy. In Spain, the Association for the protection of patients from pseudo-scientific therapies is lobbying to get rid of the easy registration procedure for homeopathic remedies. In Bulgaria, Hungary, Latvia, Romania and Slovenia homeopathy, by law, can only be practiced by medical practitioners. However, in Slovenia if doctors practice homeopathy their medical license will be revoked. In Germany, to become a homeopathic physician, one must attend a three-year training program, while France, Austria and Denmark mandate licences to diagnose any illness or dispense of any product whose purpose is to treat any illness. Homeopaths in the UK are under no legal regulations, meaning anyone can call themselves homeopaths and administer homeopathic remedies.

The Indian government recognizes homeopathy as one of its national systems of medicine and they are sold with medical claims. It has established the Department of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH) under the Ministry of Health &amp; Family Welfare. The south Indian state of Kerala also has a cabinet-level AYUSH department. The Central Council of Homoeopathy was established in 1973 to monitor higher education in homeopathy, and the National Institute of Homoeopathy in 1975. Principals and standards for homeopathic products are covered by the &quot;Homoeopathic pharmacopoeia of India&quot;. A minimum of a recognized diploma in homeopathy and registration on a state register or the Central Register of Homoeopathy is required to practice homeopathy in India.

Some medical schools in Pakistan, India, and Bangladesh, offer an undergraduate degree programme in homeopathy. Upon completion the college may award a &quot;&quot; (&quot;B.H.M.S.&quot;).

In the United States each state is responsible for the laws and licensing requirements for homeopathy. In 2015, the FDA held a hearing on homeopathic product regulation. At the hearing, representatives from the Center for Inquiry and the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry summarized the harm that is done to the general public from homeopathics and proposed regulatory actions: In 2016 the United States Federal Trade Commission (FTC) issued an &quot;Enforcement Policy Statement Regarding Marketing Claims for Over-the-Counter Homeopathic Drugs&quot; which specified that the FTC will apply the same standard to homeopathic drugs that it applies to other products claiming similar benefits. A related report concluded that claims of homeopathy effectiveness &quot;are not accepted by most modern medical experts and do not constitute competent and reliable scientific evidence that these products have the claimed treatment effects.&quot; In 2019, the FDA removed an enforcement policy that permitted unapproved homeopathics to be sold. Currently no homeopathic products are approved by the FDA.

Homeopathic remedies are regulated as natural health products in Canada. Ontario became the first province in the country to regulate the practice of homeopathy, a move that was widely criticized by scientists and doctors. Health Canada requires all products to have a licence before being sold and applicants have to submit evidence on &quot;the safety, efficacy and quality of a homeopathic medicine&quot;. In 2015 the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation tested the system by applying for and then receiving a government approved licence for a made-up drug aimed at kids.

In Australia, the sale of homeopathic products is regulated by the Therapeutic Goods Administration. In 2015, the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia concluded that there is &quot;no reliable evidence that homeopathy is effective and should not be used to treat health conditions that are chronic, serious, or could become serious&quot;. They recommended anyone considering using homeopathy should first get advice from a registered health practitioner. A 2017 review into Pharmacy Remuneration and Regulation recommended that products be banned from pharmacies; while noting the concerns the government did not adopt the recommendation. In New Zealand there are no regulations specific to homeopathy and the New Zealand Medical Association does not oppose the use of homeopathy, a stance that has been called unethical by some doctors.

=== Prevalence ===

Homeopathy is one of the most commonly used forms of alternative medicines and it has a large worldwide market. The exact size is uncertain, but information available on homeopathic sales suggests it forms a large share of the medical market.

In 1999, about 1000 UK doctors practiced homeopathy, most being general practitioners who prescribe a limited number of remedies. A further 1500 homeopaths with no medical training are also thought to practice. Over ten thousand German and French doctors use homeopathy. In the United States a National Health Interview Survey estimated 5 million adults and 1 million children used homeopathy in 2011. An analysis of this survey concluded that most cases were self-prescribed for colds and musculoskeletal pain. Major retailers like Walmart, CVS, and Walgreens sell homeopathic products that are packaged to resemble conventional medicines.

The homeopathic drug market in Germany is worth about 650 million euro with a 2014 survey finding that 60 percent of Germans reported trying homeopathy. A 2009 survey found that only 17 percent of respondents knew how homeopathic medicine was made. France spent more than US$408 million on homeopathic products in 2008. In the United States the homeopathic market is worth about $3 billion-a-year; with 2.9 billion spent in 2007. Australia spent US$7.3 million on homeopathic medicines in 2008.

In India, a 2014 national health survey found that homeopathy was used by about 3% of the population. Homeopathy is used in China, although it arrived a lot later than in many other countries, partly due to the restriction on foreigners that persisted until late in the nineteenth century. Throughout Africa there is a high reliance on traditional medicines, which can be attributed to the cost of modern medicines and the relative prevalence of practitioners. Many African countries do not have any official training facilities.

==Veterinary use==

Using homeopathy as a treatment for animals is termed &quot;veterinary homeopathy&quot; and dates back to the inception of homeopathy; Hahnemann himself wrote and spoke of the use of homeopathy in animals other than humans. The use of homeopathy in the organic farming industry is heavily promoted. Given that homeopathy&#x27;s effects in humans are due to the placebo effect and the counseling aspects of the consultation, such treatments are even less effective in animals. Studies have also found that giving animals placebos can play active roles in influencing pet owners to believe in the effectiveness of the treatment when none exists. This means that animals given homeopathic remedies will continue to suffer, resulting in animal welfare concerns.

Little existing research on the subject is of a high enough scientific standard to provide reliable data on efficacy. A 2016 review of peer-reviewed articles from 1981 to 2014 by scientists from the University of Kassel, Germany, concluded that there is not enough evidence to support homeopathy as an effective treatment of infectious diseases in livestock. The UK&#x27;s Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) has adopted a robust position against use of &quot;alternative&quot; pet preparations including homeopathy. The British Veterinary Association&#x27;s position statement on alternative medicines says that it &quot;cannot endorse&quot; homeopathy, and the Australian Veterinary Association includes it on its list of &quot;ineffective therapies&quot;.

==See also==
* Fringe science
* List of topics characterized as pseudoscience
* Scientific skepticism

==References==
==External links==
* Homeopathy (NHS Choices, UK)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q81058" start="0" end="10" title="Homeopathy" label="Homeopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81058" start="14" end="25" title="Homeopathy" label="homoeopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="31" end="47" title="pseudoscientific" label="pseudoscientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="58" end="78" title="alternative medicine" label="alternative medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q157056" start="129" end="145" title="Samuel Hahnemann" label="Samuel Hahnemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q81058" start="173" end="183" title="Homeopathy" label="homeopaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477505" start="360" end="386" title="similia similibus curentur" label="similia similibus curentur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356551" start="502" end="522" title="homeopathic dilution" label="homeopathic dilution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268188" start="651" end="658" title="diluent" label="diluent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094" start="1157" end="1170" title="Biochemistry" label="biochemically"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1286" end="1292" title="#Miasms and disease" label="miasms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425837" start="1368" end="1385" title="germ theory of disease" label="causes of disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q104852387" start="1517" end="1593" title="Evidence and efficacy of homeopathy" label="implausibility of homeopathy as well as a lack of demonstrable effectiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468920" start="1677" end="1685" title="quackery" label="quackery"/>
<link wikidata="Q28813" start="1690" end="1695" title="fraud" label="fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="2417" end="2433" title="New Age movement" label="New Age movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055121" start="2461" end="2472" title="chemophobia" label="chemophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q815382" start="2625" end="2638" title="Meta-analysis" label="meta-analyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480052" start="2945" end="2994" title="European Academies&amp;#x27; Science Advisory Council" label="European Academies&amp;#x27; Science Advisory Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q83172" start="3003" end="3030" title="Russian Academy of Sciences" label="Russian Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q19382273" start="3154" end="3188" title="NHS England" label="National Health Service in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044742" start="3255" end="3275" title="Department of Health and Social Care" label="Department of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q157056" start="3530" end="3546" title="Samuel Hahnemann" label="Samuel Hahnemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q191631" start="3781" end="3791" title="vitalism" label="vitalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141345" start="3960" end="3979" title="allopathic medicine" label="allopathic medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q462762" start="4182" end="4196" title="William Cullen" label="William Cullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q160090" start="4255" end="4263" title="cinchona" label="cinchona"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="4270" end="4277" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q683498" start="4413" end="4423" title="arthralgia" label="joint pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477505" start="4996" end="5022" title="similia similibus curentur" label="similia similibus curentur"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="5136" end="5153" title="scientific method" label="scientific method"/>
<link wikidata="Q319829" start="5214" end="5235" title="Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr." label="Oliver Wendell Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q189522" start="5391" end="5398" title="quinine" label="quinine"/>
<link wikidata="Q311383" start="5422" end="5443" title="Plasmodium falciparum" label="Plasmodium falciparum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427225" start="6530" end="6560" title="The Organon of the Healing Art" label="The Organon of the Healing Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q621558" start="7265" end="7291" title="Symptomatic treatment" label="alleviating their symptoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719" start="7647" end="7657" title="hypotheses" label="hypotheses"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="7735" end="7743" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346445" start="7766" end="7773" title="sycosis" label="sycosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="8039" end="8047" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="8049" end="8055" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q133244" start="8057" end="8065" title="jaundice" label="jaundice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12133" start="8067" end="8075" title="deafness" label="deafness"/>
<link wikidata="Q127724" start="8081" end="8090" title="cataracts" label="cataracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="8225" end="8237" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="8242" end="8248" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="8648" end="8656" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003780" start="9018" end="9050" title="American Institute of Homeopathy" label="American Institute of Homeopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q356405" start="9773" end="9785" title="bloodletting" label="bloodletting"/>
<link wikidata="Q691640" start="9841" end="9863" title="science-based medicine" label="science-based medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="10056" end="10063" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233589" start="10351" end="10366" title="John Forbes (physician)" label="Sir John Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="10381" end="10395" title="Victoria of the United Kingdom" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q470140" start="10547" end="10566" title="James Young Simpson" label="James Young Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q319829" start="10801" end="10822" title="Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr." label="Oliver Wendell Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030584" start="10899" end="10935" title="Homœopathy and Its Kindred Delusions" label="Homœopathy and Its Kindred Delusions"/>
<link wikidata="Q70166" start="11314" end="11326" title="Edzard Ernst" label="Edzard Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="11332" end="11336" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="11552" end="11565" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067874" start="11658" end="11686" title="Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act" label="Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5611891" start="11715" end="11729" title="Royal S. Copeland" label="Royal Copeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="11733" end="11740" title="United States Senate" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="11746" end="11754" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q321408" start="12089" end="12106" title="George Vithoulkas" label="George Vithoulkas"/>
<link wikidata="Q442643" start="12262" end="12273" title="Simon Singh" label="Simon Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="12318" end="12334" title="New Age movement" label="New Age movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424760" start="12336" end="12346" title="Bruce Hood (psychologist)" label="Bruce Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582176" start="12528" end="12571" title="appeal to nature" label="preference for &amp;quot;natural&amp;quot; products"/>
<link wikidata="Q51858378" start="12722" end="12739" title="William T. Jarvis" label="William T. Jarvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753164" start="12762" end="12799" title="National Council Against Health Fraud" label="National Council Against Health Fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q815382" start="13069" end="13082" title="Meta-analysis" label="meta-analyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433639" start="13270" end="13341" title="Science and Technology Select Committee" label="Science and Technology Committee of the United Kingdom House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="13395" end="13418" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044742" start="13536" end="13556" title="Department of Health and Social Care" label="Department of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973022" start="13654" end="13698" title="National Health and Medical Research Council" label="National Health and Medical Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="13998" end="14026" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q648015" start="14221" end="14239" title="Center for Inquiry" label="Center for Inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078880" start="14282" end="14285" title="CVS Pharmacy" label="CVS"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="14509" end="14516" title="Walmart" label="Walmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086918" start="15144" end="15150" title="Boiron" label="Boiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q219615" start="15269" end="15292" title="University of Barcelona" label="University of Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q383568" start="15460" end="15482" title="University of Valencia" label="University of Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291275" start="15718" end="15732" title="Materia medica" label="Materia medica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399079" start="16524" end="16540" title="James Tyler Kent" label="James Tyler Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q188952" start="16810" end="16825" title="medical history" label="medical history"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="17735" end="17740" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353314" start="17771" end="17786" title="arsenicum album" label="arsenicum album"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314" start="17841" end="17856" title="sodium chloride" label="sodium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q53741" start="17879" end="17892" title="Lachesis muta" label="Lachesis muta"/>
<link wikidata="Q766057" start="17917" end="17933" title="Lachesis (genus)" label="bushmaster snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q46452" start="17942" end="17947" title="opium" label="opium"/>
<link wikidata="Q422106" start="17984" end="17999" title="thyroid hormone" label="thyroid hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q134808" start="18810" end="18817" title="vaccine" label="vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q127900" start="19252" end="19259" title="lactose" label="lactose"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="19278" end="19283" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q193788" start="19289" end="19297" title="sunlight" label="sunlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358035" start="19321" end="19338" title="electrohomeopathy" label="electrohomeopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362264" start="19969" end="19978" title="Radionics" label="Radionics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12969754" start="19991" end="20016" title="electromagnetic radiation" label="electromagnetic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262" start="20025" end="20035" title="radio wave" label="radio wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q788110" start="20346" end="20366" title="Bach flower remedies" label="Bach flower remedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q969176" start="20392" end="20403" title="Edward Bach" label="Edward Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q476174" start="20745" end="20760" title="serial dilution" label="serial dilution"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="21314" end="21321" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="21323" end="21330" title="diamond" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q880" start="21336" end="21344" title="platinum" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q961231" start="21395" end="21406" title="trituration" label="trituration"/>
<link wikidata="Q937378" start="21427" end="21438" title="Logarithmic scale" label="logarithmic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22130" end="22154" title="Concentration#Volume-volume percentage" label="volume-volume percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q768908" start="23260" end="23264" title="Drop (volume)" label="drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773629" start="23391" end="23405" title="Robert L. Park" label="Robert L. Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289781" start="23477" end="23492" title="Oscillococcinum" label="Oscillococcinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612" start="24714" end="24728" title="clinical trial" label="clinical trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="24856" end="24866" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777105" start="24903" end="24923" title="self-experimentation" label="self-experimentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q162867" start="25033" end="25046" title="nitroglycerin" label="nitroglycerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q180762" start="25082" end="25088" title="angina pectoris" label="angina"/>
<link wikidata="Q608510" start="25805" end="25812" title="Blind test" label="blinded"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="26112" end="26132" title="alternative medicine" label="alternative medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="26199" end="26212" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468920" start="26254" end="26262" title="quackery" label="quackery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320364" start="26301" end="26321" title="statistical evidence" label="statistical evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915013" start="26388" end="26410" title="Biological plausibility" label="biologically plausible"/>
<link wikidata="Q912807" start="26427" end="26432" title="Active ingredient" label="agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q269829" start="26614" end="26621" title="placebo" label="placebo"/>
<link wikidata="Q83172" start="26963" end="26990" title="Russian Academy of Sciences" label="Russian Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793582" start="27191" end="27208" title="Sally Davies (doctor)" label="Dame Sally Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770212" start="27333" end="27345" title="Mark Walport" label="Mark Walport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588713" start="27354" end="27389" title="Government Chief Scientific Adviser" label="Government Chief Scientific Adviser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589009" start="27406" end="27435" title="Government Office for Science" label="Government Office for Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181027" start="27513" end="27528" title="John Beddington" label="John Beddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278030" start="27718" end="27776" title="National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine" label="National Center for Complementary and Alternative Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q816499" start="27994" end="28006" title="Ben Goldacre" label="Ben Goldacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064596" start="28070" end="28095" title="Scientific literacy" label="scientifically illiterate"/>
<link wikidata="Q815382" start="28282" end="28295" title="Meta-analysis" label="meta-analyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006765" start="28309" end="28322" title="Cherry picking (fallacy)" label="cherry picked"/>
<link wikidata="Q818574" start="28375" end="28394" title="observational study" label="observational study"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842959" start="28676" end="28704" title="American Journal of Medicine" label="American Journal of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828504" start="28712" end="28724" title="Michael Baum (surgeon)" label="Michael Baum"/>
<link wikidata="Q70166" start="28729" end="28741" title="Edzard Ernst" label="Edzard Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="29191" end="29199" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q6203" start="29392" end="29407" title="Avogadro constant" label="Avogadro number"/>
<link wikidata="Q294918" start="29479" end="29490" title="James Randi" label="James Randi"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29499" end="29513" title="10:23 campaign" label="10:23 campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q912807" start="29550" end="29567" title="active ingredient" label="active ingredient"/>
<link wikidata="Q281606" start="29831" end="29843" title="water memory" label="water memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q864491" start="30173" end="30195" title="Biological activity" label="pharmacological effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q899494" start="30266" end="30284" title="law of mass action" label="law of mass action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251001" start="30302" end="30328" title="dose-response relationship" label="dose-response relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058294" start="31018" end="31026" title="hormesis" label="hormesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q185698" start="31397" end="31411" title="Methodology" label="methodological"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007018" start="31495" end="31507" title="study design" label="study design"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564360" start="31529" end="31540" title="sample size" label="sample size"/>
<link wikidata="Q284172" start="31546" end="31560" title="selection bias" label="selection bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105202" start="31879" end="31901" title="Cochrane Collaboration" label="Cochrane Collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="32056" end="32072" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973022" start="32199" end="32243" title="National Health and Medical Research Council" label="National Health and Medical Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q211067" start="32995" end="33015" title="conflict of interest" label="conflict of interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005448" start="33021" end="33058" title="Swiss Federal Office of Public Health" label="Swiss Federal Office of Public Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q815382" start="33162" end="33175" title="Meta-analysis" label="Meta-analyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504425" start="33244" end="33261" title="systematic review" label="systematic review"/>
<link wikidata="Q919364" start="33489" end="33505" title="publication bias" label="publication bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457924" start="33725" end="33736" title="null result" label="null result"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="34289" end="34312" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q465697" start="34318" end="34346" title="American Medical Association" label="American Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440753" start="34352" end="34357" title="FASEB" label="FASEB"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973022" start="34367" end="34411" title="National Health and Medical Research Council" label="National Health and Medical Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="34574" end="34599" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6764912" start="34609" end="34625" title="Mario Raviglione" label="Mario Raviglione"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="34668" end="34680" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="34794" end="34803" title="Diarrhea" label="diarrhoea"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="34878" end="34888" title="Major depressive disorder" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="34890" end="34893" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="34898" end="34905" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743462" start="34911" end="34949" title="American College of Medical Toxicology" label="American College of Medical Toxicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742875" start="34958" end="34997" title="American Academy of Clinical Toxicology" label="American Academy of Clinical Toxicology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995529" start="35546" end="35551" title="grain" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="35556" end="35572" title="enzyme" label="enzyme reactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q281606" start="35664" end="35679" title="Madeleine Ennis" label="Madeleine Ennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q61233" start="35754" end="35763" title="histamine" label="histamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q107988" start="35801" end="35809" title="basophil" label="basophil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112475" start="35861" end="35868" title="Horizon (BBC TV series)" label="Horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677906" start="36175" end="36193" title="Jacques Benveniste" label="Jacques Benveniste"/>
<link wikidata="Q180445" start="36233" end="36239" title="Nature (journal)" label="Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474517" start="36263" end="36269" title="INSERM" label="INSERM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828504" start="36999" end="37011" title="Michael Baum (surgeon)" label="Michael Baum"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="37091" end="37116" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q70166" start="37183" end="37195" title="Edzard Ernst" label="Edzard Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="37220" end="37242" title="alternative medicine" label="complementary medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q105186" start="37337" end="37347" title="pharmacist" label="pharmacist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686747" start="37551" end="37585" title="Advertising Standards Authority (United Kingdom)" label="UK Advertising Standards Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q85801843" start="37605" end="37626" title="Society of Homeopaths" label="Society of Homeopaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400030" start="37801" end="37827" title="Federal Court of Australia" label="Federal Court of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047938" start="38226" end="38240" title="adverse effect" label="adverse effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q156091" start="38677" end="38687" title="Atropa belladonna" label="Belladonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="38689" end="38696" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7218532" start="38702" end="38712" title="Toxicodendron radicans" label="poison ivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q730249" start="38990" end="39007" title="arsenic poisoning" label="arsenic poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071455" start="39103" end="39108" title="Zicam" label="Zicam"/>
<link wikidata="Q691640" start="39678" end="39701" title="evidence-based medicine" label="evidence-based medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4229680" start="39838" end="39865" title="Commission on Pseudoscience" label="Commission on Pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772210" start="40535" end="40551" title="Anthony Campbell (physician)" label="Anthony Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q321408" start="40643" end="40660" title="George Vithoulkas" label="George Vithoulkas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41083" start="40675" end="40683" title="syphilis" label="syphilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q47273" start="40791" end="40813" title="central nervous system" label="central nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q12190" start="41028" end="41038" title="penicillin" label="penicillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q85767157" start="41192" end="41208" title="homeoprophylaxis" label="homeoprophylaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q134808" start="41329" end="41341" title="vaccine" label="immunization"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874385" start="41761" end="41777" title="Homeopathy Plus!" label="Homeopathy Plus!"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="41915" end="41936" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="&amp;quot;Telegraph&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="43491" end="43501" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q700731" start="43907" end="43935" title="Medical University of Vienna" label="Medical University of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q491566" start="44392" end="44414" title="Federal Ministry of Health (Germany)" label="German health minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q105676" start="44415" end="44430" title="Karl Lauterbach" label="Karl Lauterbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152999" start="44856" end="44889" title="Committee of Advertising Practice" label="Committee of Advertising Practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q22000445" start="45359" end="45387" title="Bristol Homeopathic Hospital" label="Bristol Homeopathic Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="45444" end="45458" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45600" end="45675" title="Association for the protection of patients from pseudo-scientific therapies" label="Association for the protection of patients from pseudo-scientific therapies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="46346" end="46363" title="Indian government" label="Indian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260158" start="46491" end="46566" title="Department of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy" label="Department of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525265" start="46585" end="46624" title="Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (India)" label="Ministry of Health &amp;amp; Family Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="46652" end="46658" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060665" start="46706" end="46736" title="Central Council of Homoeopathy" label="Central Council of Homoeopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973661" start="46812" end="46845" title="National Institute of Homoeopathy" label="National Institute of Homoeopathy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46930" end="46965" title="Homoeopathic pharmacopoeia of India" label="Homoeopathic pharmacopoeia of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q494230" start="47148" end="47162" title="medical school" label="medical school"/>
<link wikidata="Q648015" start="47544" end="47562" title="Center for Inquiry" label="Center for Inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115728" start="47571" end="47602" title="Committee for Skeptical Inquiry" label="Committee for Skeptical Inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="47735" end="47759" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="Federal Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="48502" end="48509" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057591" start="48652" end="48665" title="Health Canada" label="Health Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q461761" start="48850" end="48883" title="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Canadian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056087" start="49069" end="49101" title="Therapeutic Goods Administration" label="Therapeutic Goods Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973022" start="49116" end="49160" title="National Health and Medical Research Council" label="National Health and Medical Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015492" start="49733" end="49764" title="New Zealand Medical Association" label="New Zealand Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="50659" end="50666" title="Walmart" label="Walmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078880" start="50668" end="50671" title="CVS Pharmacy" label="CVS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591889" start="50677" end="50686" title="Walgreens" label="Walgreens"/>
<link wikidata="Q165647" start="52068" end="52083" title="organic farming" label="organic farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q459426" start="52548" end="52562" title="animal welfare" label="animal welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q833822" start="52773" end="52793" title="University of Kassel" label="University of Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044721" start="52947" end="52997" title="Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs" label="Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140308" start="53372" end="53386" title="Fringe science" label="Fringe science"/>
<link wikidata="Q4437154" start="53389" end="53434" title="List of topics characterized as pseudoscience" label="List of topics characterized as pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q929771" start="53437" end="53458" title="Scientific skepticism" label="Scientific skepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251481" start="53508" end="53519" title="NHS Choices" label="NHS Choices"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14231" wikidata="Q1566584" url="?curid=14231" title="Hairpin">
<text>A hairpin or hair pin is a long device used to hold a person&#x27;s hair in place. It may be used simply to secure long hair out of the way for convenience or as part of an elaborate hairstyle or coiffure. The earliest evidence for dressing the hair may be seen in carved &quot;Venus figurines&quot; such as the Venus of Brassempouy and the Venus of Willendorf. The creation of different hairstyles, especially among women, seems to be common to all cultures and all periods and many past, and current, societies use hairpins.

Hairpins made of metal, ivory, bronze, carved wood, etc. were used in ancient Egypt. for securing decorated hairstyles. Such hairpins suggest, as graves show, that many were luxury objects among the Egyptians and later the Greeks, Etruscans, and Romans. Major success came in 1901 with the invention of the spiral hairpin by New Zealand inventor Ernest Godward. This was a predecessor of the hair clip.

The hairpin may be decorative and encrusted with jewels and ornaments, or it may be utilitarian, and designed to be almost invisible while holding a hairstyle in place. Some hairpins are a single straight pin, but modern versions are more likely to be constructed from different lengths of wire that are bent in half with a u-shaped end and a few kinks along the two opposite portions. The finished pin may vary from two to six inches in last length. The length of the wires enables placement in several designs of hairstyles to hold the nature in place. The kinks enable retaining the pin during normal movements.

A hairpin patent was issued to Kelly Chamandy in 1925.

==Hairpins in Chinese culture==
Hairpins (generally known as ; ) are an important symbol in Chinese culture. In ancient China, hairpins were worn by men as well as women, and they were essential items for everyday hairstyling, mainly for securing and decorating a hair bun. Furthermore, hairpins worn by women could also represent their social status.

In Han Chinese culture, when young girls reached the age of fifteen, they were allowed to take part in a rite of passage known as (), or &quot;hairpin initiation&quot;. This ceremony marked the coming of age of young women. Particularly, before the age of fifteen, girls did not use hairpins as they wore their hair in braids, and they were considered as children. When they turned fifteen, they could be considered as young women after the ceremony, and they started to style their hair as buns secured and embellished by hairpins. This practice indicated that these young women could now enter into marriage. However, if a young woman had not been consented to marriage before age twenty, or she had not yet participated in a coming of age ceremony, she would attend a ceremony when she turned twenty.

In comparison with , the male equivalent known as () or &quot;hat initiation&quot;, usually took place five years later, at the age of twenty. In the 21st century hanfu movement, an attempt to revive the traditional Han Chinese coming-of-age ceremonies has been made, and the ideal age to attend the ceremony is twenty years old for all genders.

While hairpins can symbolize the transition from childhood to adulthood, they were closely connected to the concept of marriage as well. At the time of an engagement, the fiancée may take a hairpin from her hair and give it to her fiancé as a pledge: this can be seen as a reversal of the Western tradition, in which the future groom presents an engagement ring to his betrothed. After the wedding ceremony, the husband should put the hairpin back into his spouse&#x27;s hair.

Hair has always carried many psychological, philosophical, romantic, and cultural meanings in Chinese culture. In Han culture, people call the union between two people (), literally &quot;tying hair&quot;. During the wedding ceremony, some Chinese couples exchange a lock of hair as a pledge, while others break a hairpin into two parts, and then, each of the betrothed take one part with them for keeping. If this couple were ever to get separated in the future, when they reunite, they can piece the two halves together, and the completed hairpin would serve as a proof of their identities as well as a symbol of their reunion. In addition, a married couple is sometimes referred to as (), an idiom which implies the relationship between the pair is very intimate and happy, just like how their hair has been tied together.

==Gallery==
==See also==

*Bobby pin
*Hair stick
*Hatpin
*Hair clip

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1566584" start="2" end="9" title="Hairpin" label="hairpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566584" start="13" end="21" title="Hairpin" label="hair pin"/>
<link wikidata="Q327496" start="183" end="192" title="hairstyle" label="hairstyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q248726" start="278" end="292" title="Venus figurine" label="Venus figurine"/>
<link wikidata="Q849063" start="312" end="332" title="Venus of Brassempouy" label="Venus of Brassempouy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131397" start="341" end="360" title="Venus of Willendorf" label="Venus of Willendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q82001" start="552" end="557" title="ivory" label="ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="559" end="565" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251519" start="835" end="849" title="spiral hairpin" label="spiral hairpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="853" end="864" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393139" start="874" end="888" title="Ernest Godward" label="Ernest Godward"/>
<link wikidata="Q327496" start="1447" end="1456" title="hairstyle" label="hairstyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5371971" start="2100" end="2118" title="Guan Li" label="hairpin initiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647802" start="2925" end="2939" title="hanfu movement" label="hanfu movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251519" start="4441" end="4450" title="Bobby pin" label="Bobby pin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17135933" start="4452" end="4462" title="Hair stick" label="Hair stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584340" start="4464" end="4470" title="Hatpin" label="Hatpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885586" start="4472" end="4481" title="Hair clip" label="Hair clip"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="14233" wikidata="Q653347" url="?curid=14233" title="Hate speech">
<text>Hate speech is a term with varied meaning and has no single, consistent definition. It is defined by the &quot;Cambridge Dictionary&quot; as &quot;public speech that expresses hate or encourages violence towards a person or group based on something such as race, religion, sex, or sexual orientation&quot;. The &quot;Encyclopedia of the American Constitution&quot; states that hate speech is &quot;usually thought to include communications of animosity or disparagement of an individual or a group on account of a group characteristic such as race, color, national origin, sex, disability, religion, or sexual orientation&quot;. There is no single definition of what constitutes &quot;hate&quot; or &quot;disparagement&quot;. Legal definitions of hate speech vary from country to country.

There has been much debate over freedom of speech, hate speech, and hate speech legislation. The laws of some countries describe hate speech as speech, gestures, conduct, writing, or displays that incite violence or prejudicial actions against a group or individuals on the basis of their membership in the group, or that disparage or intimidate a group or individuals on the basis of their membership in the group. The law may identify protected groups based on certain characteristics. In some countries, including the United States, what is usually labelled &quot;hate speech&quot; is constitutionally protected. In some other countries, a victim of hate speech may seek redress under civil law, criminal law, or both.

Hate speech is generally accepted to be one of the prerequisites for mass atrocities such as genocide. Incitement to genocide is an extreme form of hate speech, and has been prosecuted in international courts such as the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

== History ==

Starting in the 1940s and 50s, various American civil rights groups responded to the atrocities of World War II by advocating for restrictions on hateful speech targeting groups on the basis of race and religion. These organizations used group libel as a legal framework for describing the violence of hate speech and addressing its harm. In his discussion of the history of criminal libel, scholar Jeremy Waldron states that these laws helped &quot;vindicate public order, not just by preempting violence, but by upholding against attack a shared sense of the basic elements of each person&#x27;s status, dignity, and reputation as a citizen or member of society in good standing&quot;. A key legal victory for this view came in 1952 when group libel law was affirmed by the United States Supreme Court in Beauharnais v. Illinois. However, the group libel approach lost ground due to a rise in support for individual rights within civil rights movements during the 60s. Critiques of group defamation laws are not limited to defenders of individual rights. Some legal theorists, such as critical race theorist Richard Delgado, support legal limits on hate speech, but claim that defamation is too narrow a category to fully counter hate speech. Ultimately, Delgado advocates a legal strategy that would establish a specific section of tort law for responding to racist insults, citing the difficulty of receiving redress under the existing legal system.

==Hate speech laws==

After World War II, Germany criminalized &quot;Volksverhetzung&quot; (&quot;incitement of popular hatred&quot;) to prevent resurgence of Nazism. Hate speech on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity also is banned in Germany. Most European countries have likewise implemented various laws and regulations regarding hate speech, and the European Union&#x27;s Framework Decision 2008/913/JHA requires member states to criminalize hate crimes and speech (though individual implementation and interpretation of this framework varies by state).

International human rights laws from the United Nations Human Rights Committee have been protecting freedom of expression, and one of the most fundamental documents is the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) drafted by the U.N. General Assembly in 1948. Article 19 of the UDHR states that &quot;Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference and to seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers.&quot;

While there are fundamental laws in place designed to protect freedom of expression, there are also multiple international laws that expand on the UDHR and pose limitations and restrictions, specifically concerning the safety and protection of individuals.

* The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD) was the first to address hate speech and the need to establish legislation prohibiting inflammatory types of language.
** The CERD addresses hate speech through the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD) and monitors its implementation by State parties.
* Article 19(3) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) permits restrictions on the human right of freedom of expression only when provided by law, and when necessary to protect &quot;rights or reputations of others&quot;, or for &quot;protection of national security or of public order (&quot;ordre public&quot;), or of public health or morals&quot;.
* Article 20(2) of the ICCPR prohibits national, religious, or racial hatred that incites violence, discrimination, or hostility.

Most developed democracies have laws that restrict hate speech, including Australia, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, India, Ireland, South Africa, Sweden, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom. The United States does not have hate speech laws, because the U.S. Supreme Court has repeatedly ruled that they violate the guarantee to freedom of speech contained in the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.

Laws against hate speech can be divided into two types: those intended to preserve public order and those intended to protect human dignity. The laws designed to protect public order require that a higher threshold be violated, so they are not often enforced. For example, a 1992 study found that only one person was prosecuted in Northern Ireland in the preceding 21 years for violating a law against incitement to religious violence. The laws meant to protect human dignity have a much lower threshold for violation, so those in Canada, Denmark, France, Germany and the Netherlands tend to be more frequently enforced.

== State-sanctioned hate speech ==
A few states, including Saudi Arabia, Iran, Rwanda Hutu factions, actors in the Yugoslav Wars and Ethiopia have been described as spreading official hate speech or incitement to genocide.

==Internet==

The rise of the internet and social media has presented a new medium through which hate speech can spread. Hate speech on the internet can be traced all the way back to its initial years, with a 1983 bulletin board system created by neo-Nazi George Dietz considered the first instance of hate speech online. As the internet evolved over time hate speech continued to spread and create its footprint; the first hate speech website Stormfront was published in 1996, and hate speech has become one of the central challenges for social media platforms.

The structure and nature of the internet contribute to both the creation and persistence of hate speech online. The widespread use and access to the internet gives hate mongers an easy way to spread their message to wide audiences with little cost and effort. According to the International Telecommunication Union, approximately 66% of the world population has access to the internet. Additionally, the pseudo-anonymous nature of the internet imboldens many to make statements constituting hate speech that they otherwise wouldn&#x27;t for fear of social or real life repercussions. While some governments and companies attempt to combat this type of behavior by leveraging real name systems, difficulties in verifying identities online, public opposition to such policies, and sites that don&#x27;t enforce these policies leave large spaces for this behavior to persist.

Because the internet crosses national borders, comprehensive government regulations on online hate speech can be difficult to implement and enforce. Governments who want to regulate hate speech contend with issues around lack of jurisdiction and conflicting viewpoints from other countries. In an early example of this, the case of &quot;Yahoo! Inc. v. La Ligue Contre Le Racisme et l&#x27;Antisemitisme&quot; had a French court hold Yahoo! liable for allowing Nazi memorabilia auctions to be visible to the public. Yahoo! refused to comply with the ruling and ultimately won relief in a U.S. court which found that the ruling was unenforceable in the U.S. Disagreements like these make national level regulations difficult, and while there are some international efforts and laws that attempt to regulate hate speech and its online presence, as with most international agreements the implementation and interpretation of these treaties varies by country.

Much of the regulation regarding online hate speech is performed voluntarily by individual companies. Many major tech companies have adopted terms of service which outline allowed content on their platform, often banning hate speech. In a notable step for this, on 31 May 2016, Facebook, Google, Microsoft, and Twitter, jointly agreed to a European Union code of conduct obligating them to review &quot;[the] majority of valid notifications for removal of illegal hate speech&quot; posted on their services within 24 hours. Techniques employed by these companies to regulate hate speech include user reporting, Artificial Intelligence flagging, and manual review of content by employees. Major search engines like Google Search also tweak their algorithms to try and suppress hateful content from appearing in their results. However, despite these efforts hate speech remains a persistent problem online. According to a 2021 study by the Anti-Defamation League 33% of Americans were the target of identity based harassment in the preceding year, a statistic which has not noticeably shifted downwards despite increasing self regulation by companies.

==Commentary==
Several activists and scholars have criticized the practice of limiting hate speech. Kim Holmes, Vice President of the conservative Heritage Foundation and a critic of hate speech theory, has argued that it &quot;assumes bad faith on the part of people regardless of their stated intentions&quot; and that it &quot;obliterates the ethical responsibility of the individual&quot;. Rebecca Ruth Gould, a professor of Islamic and Comparative Literature at the University of Birmingham, argues that laws against hate speech constitute viewpoint discrimination (which is prohibited by the First Amendment in the United States) as the legal system punishes some viewpoints but not others. Other scholars, such as Gideon Elford, argue instead that &quot;insofar as hate speech regulation targets the consequences of speech that are contingently connected with the substance of what is expressed then it is viewpoint discriminatory in only an indirect sense.&quot; John Bennett argues that restricting hate speech relies on questionable conceptual and empirical foundations and is reminiscent of efforts by totalitarian regimes to control the thoughts of their citizens.

Civil libertarians say that hate speech laws have been used, in both developing and developed nations, to persecute minority viewpoints and critics of the government. Former ACLU president Nadine Strossen says that, while efforts to censor hate speech have the goal of protecting the most vulnerable, they are ineffective and may have the opposite effect: disadvantaged and ethnic minorities being charged with violating laws against hate speech. Journalist Glenn Greenwald says that hate speech laws in Europe have been used to censor left-wing views as much as they have been used to combat hate speech.

Miisa Kreandner and Eriz Henze argue that hate speech laws are arbitrary, as they only protect some categories of people but not others. Henze argues the only way to resolve this problem without abolishing hate speech laws would be to extend them to all possible conceivable categories, which Henze argues would amount to totalitarian control over speech.

Michael Conklin argues that there are benefits to hate speech that are often overlooked. He contends that allowing hate speech provides a more accurate view of the human condition, provides opportunities to change people&#x27;s minds, and identifies certain people that may need to be avoided in certain circumstances. According to one psychological research study, a high degree of psychopathy is &quot;a significant predictor&quot; for involvement in online hate activity, while none of the other 7 potential factors examined were found to have a statistically significant predictive power.

Political philosopher Jeffrey W. Howard considers the popular framing of hate speech as &quot;free speech vs. other political values&quot; as a mischaracterization. He refers to this as the &quot;balancing model&quot;, and says it seeks to weigh the benefit of free speech against other values such as dignity and equality for historically marginalized groups. Instead, he believes that the crux of debate should be whether or not freedom of expression is inclusive of hate speech. Research indicates that when people support censoring hate speech, they are motivated more by concerns about the effects the speech has on others than they are about its effects on themselves. Women are somewhat more likely than men to support censoring hate speech due to greater perceived harm of hate speech, which some researchers believe may be due to gender differences in empathy towards targets of hate speech.

== See also ==
* Antilocution
* Genocide justification
* Incitement to terrorism
* Malinformation
* Psychology of genocide
* Risk factors for genocide

== References ==
== External links ==
* TANDIS (Tolerance and Non-Discrimination Information System), developed by the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
* Reconciling Rights and Responsibilities of Colleges and Students: Offensive Speech, Assembly, Drug Testing and Safety
* From Discipline to Development: Rethinking Student Conduct in Higher Education
* Sexual Minorities on Community College Campuses
* The Foundation for Individual Rights in Education
* Activities to tackle Hate speech
* Survivor bashing – bias motivated hate crimes
* &quot;Striking the right balance&quot; by Agnès Callamard, for Article 19
* Hate speech, a factsheet by the European Court of Human Rights, 2015
* Recommendation No. R (97) 20 Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe 1997</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q653347" start="0" end="11" title="Hate speech" label="Hate speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025348" start="111" end="131" title="Cambridge Advanced Learner&amp;#x27;s Dictionary" label="Cambridge Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="822" end="839" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q160232" start="919" end="923" title="hatred" label="hate"/>
<link wikidata="Q570354" start="987" end="993" title="Incitement" label="incite"/>
<link wikidata="Q124490" start="994" end="1002" title="violence" label="violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q179742" start="1006" end="1017" title="Prejudice" label="prejudicial"/>
<link wikidata="Q42377967" start="1297" end="1324" title="Hate speech in the United States" label="including the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122235" start="1478" end="1487" title="Private law" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q146491" start="1489" end="1501" title="criminal law" label="criminal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817637" start="1582" end="1597" title="Atrocity crime" label="mass atrocities"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="1606" end="1614" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q93935382" start="1616" end="1638" title="Incitement to genocide" label="Incitement to genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262438" start="1701" end="1721" title="international courts" label="international courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q478358" start="1734" end="1776" title="International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda" label="International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1893" end="1905" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177364" start="2193" end="2207" title="Jeremy Waldron" label="Jeremy Waldron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877495" start="2601" end="2624" title="Beauharnais v. Illinois" label="Beauharnais v. Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186753" start="2881" end="2903" title="Critical Race Theory" label="critical race theorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q158970" start="3129" end="3137" title="Tort" label="tort law"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="3291" end="3298" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q43442" start="3318" end="3333" title="Volksverhetzung" label="Volksverhetzung"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="3408" end="3414" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q770764" start="3866" end="3903" title="United Nations Human Rights Committee" label="United Nations Human Rights Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="3997" end="4034" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q743306" start="4628" end="4681" title="Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination" label="Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q743306" start="4854" end="4935" title="International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination" label="International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q392119" start="5017" end="5069" title="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights" label="International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="5761" end="5779" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="5836" end="5853" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="5871" end="5911" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="6577" end="6582" title="State (polity)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q242352" start="6651" end="6664" title="Yugoslav Wars" label="Yugoslav Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q93935382" start="6735" end="6757" title="incitement to genocide" label="incitement to genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="6790" end="6798" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="6803" end="6815" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q210499" start="6974" end="6995" title="bulletin board system" label="bulletin board system"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="7007" end="7015" title="Neo-Nazism" label="neo-Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q125933176" start="7016" end="7028" title="George P. Dietz" label="George Dietz"/>
<link wikidata="Q700773" start="7204" end="7214" title="Stormfront (website)" label="Stormfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="7601" end="7638" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="International Telecommunication Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q12015793" start="7999" end="8016" title="Real-name system" label="real name systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046848" start="8536" end="8601" title="Yahoo! Inc. v. La Ligue Contre Le Racisme et l&amp;#x27;Antisemitisme" label="Yahoo! Inc. v. La Ligue Contre Le Racisme et l&amp;#x27;Antisemitisme"/>
<link wikidata="Q37093" start="8632" end="8638" title="Yahoo!" label="Yahoo!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8948" end="8978" title="#Hate speech laws" label="international efforts and laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q7214489" start="9296" end="9312" title="terms of service" label="terms of service"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="9433" end="9441" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="9443" end="9449" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="9451" end="9460" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="9466" end="9473" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="9495" end="9509" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="9766" end="9789" title="Artificial intelligence" label="Artificial Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q9366" start="9869" end="9882" title="Google Search" label="Google Search"/>
<link wikidata="Q158818" start="10093" end="10115" title="Anti-Defamation League" label="Anti-Defamation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6408746" start="10406" end="10416" title="Kim Holmes" label="Kim Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q876787" start="10453" end="10472" title="The Heritage Foundation" label="Heritage Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706138" start="10542" end="10551" title="bad faith" label="bad faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q59823550" start="10700" end="10718" title="Rebecca Ruth Gould" label="Rebecca Ruth Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q223429" start="10777" end="10801" title="University of Birmingham" label="University of Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841819" start="10851" end="10875" title="viewpoint discrimination" label="viewpoint discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="10904" end="10919" title="First Amendment" label="First Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876201" start="11484" end="11502" title="Civil libertarians" label="Civil libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q21637" start="11658" end="11662" title="American Civil Liberties Union" label="ACLU"/>
<link wikidata="Q21791" start="11673" end="11688" title="Nadine Strossen" label="Nadine Strossen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568842" start="11942" end="11957" title="Glenn Greenwald" label="Glenn Greenwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="12020" end="12029" title="left-wing" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q425265" start="12997" end="13022" title="statistical significance" label="statistically significant"/>
<link wikidata="Q577556" start="13961" end="13973" title="Antilocution" label="Antilocution"/>
<link wikidata="Q97628012" start="13976" end="13998" title="Genocide justification" label="Genocide justification"/>
<link wikidata="Q8202753" start="14001" end="14024" title="Incitement to terrorism" label="Incitement to terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q111175123" start="14027" end="14041" title="Malinformation" label="Malinformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q97574271" start="14044" end="14066" title="Psychology of genocide" label="Psychology of genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q24963239" start="14069" end="14094" title="Risk factors for genocide" label="Risk factors for genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q17279118" start="14702" end="14717" title="Agnès Callamard" label="Agnès Callamard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533114" start="14723" end="14733" title="Article 19" label="Article 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="14768" end="14798" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735723" start="14836" end="14883" title="Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe" label="Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe"/>
</links>
</doc>
