<doc id="13692" wikidata="Q193315" url="?curid=13692" title="History of the Internet">
<text>The history of the Internet originated in the efforts of scientists and engineers to build and interconnect computer networks. The Internet Protocol Suite, the set of rules used to communicate between networks and devices on the Internet, arose from research and development in the United States and involved international collaboration, particularly with researchers in the United Kingdom and France.

Computer science was an emerging discipline in the late 1950s that began to consider time-sharing between computer users, and later, the possibility of achieving this over wide area networks. J. C. R. Licklider developed the idea of a universal network at the Information Processing Techniques Office (IPTO) of the United States Department of Defense (DoD) Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA). Independently, Paul Baran at the RAND Corporation proposed a distributed network based on data in message blocks in the early 1960s, and Donald Davies conceived of packet switching in 1965 at the National Physical Laboratory (NPL), proposing a national commercial data network in the United Kingdom.

ARPA awarded contracts in 1969 for the development of the ARPANET project, directed by Robert Taylor and managed by Lawrence Roberts. ARPANET adopted the packet switching technology proposed by Davies and Baran. The network of Interface Message Processors (IMPs) was built by a team at Bolt, Beranek, and Newman, with the design and specification led by Bob Kahn. The host-to-host protocol was specified by a group of graduate students at UCLA, led by Steve Crocker, along with Jon Postel and others. The ARPANET expanded rapidly across the United States with connections to the United Kingdom and Norway.

Several early packet-switched networks emerged in the 1970s which researched and provided data networking. Louis Pouzin and Hubert Zimmermann pioneered a simplified end-to-end approach to internetworking at the IRIA. Peter Kirstein put internetworking into practice at University College London in 1973. Bob Metcalfe developed the theory behind Ethernet and the PARC Universal Packet. ARPA initiatives and the International Network Working Group developed and refined ideas for internetworking, in which multiple separate networks could be joined into a &quot;network of networks&quot;. Vint Cerf, now at Stanford University, and Bob Kahn, now at DARPA, published their research on internetworking in 1974. Through the Internet Experiment Note series and later RFCs this evolved into the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and Internet Protocol (IP), two protocols of the Internet protocol suite. The design included concepts pioneered in the French CYCLADES project directed by Louis Pouzin. The development of packet switching networks was underpinned by mathematical work in the 1970s by Leonard Kleinrock at UCLA.

In the late 1970s, national and international public data networks emerged based on the X.25 protocol, designed by Rémi Després and others. In the United States, the National Science Foundation (NSF) funded national supercomputing centers at several universities in the United States, and provided interconnectivity in 1986 with the NSFNET project, thus creating network access to these supercomputer sites for research and academic organizations in the United States. International connections to NSFNET, the emergence of architecture such as the Domain Name System, and the adoption of TCP/IP on existing networks in the United States and around the world marked the beginnings of the Internet. Commercial Internet service providers (ISPs) emerged in 1989 in the United States and Australia. Limited private connections to parts of the Internet by officially commercial entities emerged in several American cities by late 1989 and 1990. The optical backbone of the NSFNET was decommissioned in 1995, removing the last restrictions on the use of the Internet to carry commercial traffic, as traffic transitioned to optical networks managed by Sprint, MCI and AT&amp;T in the United States.

Research at CERN in Switzerland by the British computer scientist Tim Berners-Lee in 1989–90 resulted in the World Wide Web, linking hypertext documents into an information system, accessible from any node on the network. The dramatic expansion of the capacity of the Internet, enabled by the advent of wave division multiplexing (WDM) and the rollout of fiber optic cables in the mid-1990s, had a revolutionary impact on culture, commerce, and technology. This made possible the rise of near-instant communication by electronic mail, instant messaging, voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) telephone calls, video chat, and the World Wide Web with its discussion forums, blogs, social networking services, and online shopping sites. Increasing amounts of data are transmitted at higher and higher speeds over fiber-optic networks operating at 1 Gbit/s, 10 Gbit/s, and 800 Gbit/s by 2019. The Internet&#x27;s takeover of the global communication landscape was rapid in historical terms: it only communicated 1% of the information flowing through two-way telecommunications networks in the year 1993, 51% by 2000, and more than 97% of the telecommunicated information by 2007. The Internet continues to grow, driven by ever greater amounts of online information, commerce, entertainment, and social networking services. However, the future of the global network may be shaped by regional differences.

==Foundations==
===Precursors===

==== Telegraphy ====
:The practice of transmitting messages between two different places through an electromagnetic medium dates back to the electrical telegraph in the late 19th century, which was the first fully digital communication system. Radiotelegraphy began to be used commercially in the early 20th century. Telex became an operational teleprinter service in the 1930s. Such systems were limited to point-to-point communication between two end devices.

==== Information theory ====
:Fundamental theoretical work in telecommunications technology was developed by Harry Nyquist and Ralph Hartley in the 1920s. Information theory, as enunciated by Claude Shannon in 1948, provided a firm theoretical underpinning to understand the trade-offs between signal-to-noise ratio, bandwidth, and error-free transmission in the presence of noise.

==== Computers and modems ====
:Early fixed-program computers in the 1940s were operated manually by entering small programs via switches in order to load and run a series of programs. As transistor technology evolved in the 1950s, central processing units and user terminals came into use by 1955. The mainframe computer model was devised, and modems, such as the Bell 101, allowed digital data to be transmitted over regular unconditioned telephone lines at low speeds by the late 1950s. These technologies made it possible to exchange data between remote computers. However, a fixed-line link was still necessary; the point-to-point communication model did not allow for direct communication between any two arbitrary systems. In addition, the applications were specific and not general purpose. Examples included SAGE (1958) and SABRE (1960).

==== Time-sharing ====
:Christopher Strachey, who became Oxford University&#x27;s first Professor of Computation, filed a patent application in the United Kingdom for time-sharing in February 1959. In June that year, he gave a paper &quot;Time Sharing in Large Fast Computers&quot; at the UNESCO Information Processing Conference in Paris where he passed the concept on to J. C. R. Licklider. Licklider, a vice president at Bolt Beranek and Newman, Inc. (BBN), promoted the idea of time-sharing as an alternative to batch processing. John McCarthy, at MIT, wrote a memo in 1959 that broadened the concept of time sharing to encompass multiple interactive user sessions, which resulted in the Compatible Time-Sharing System (CTSS) implemented at MIT. Other multi-user mainframe systems developed, such as PLATO at the University of Illinois Chicago. In the early 1960, the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) of the United States Department of Defense funded further research into time-sharing at MIT through Project MAC.

===Inspiration===
J. C. R. Licklider, while working at BBN, proposed a computer network in his March 1960 paper &quot;Man-Computer Symbiosis&quot;:

In August 1962, Licklider and Welden Clark published the paper &quot;On-Line Man-Computer Communication&quot; which was one of the first descriptions of a networked future.

In October 1962, Licklider was hired by Jack Ruina as director of the newly established Information Processing Techniques Office (IPTO) within ARPA, with a mandate to interconnect the United States Department of Defense&#x27;s main computers at Cheyenne Mountain, the Pentagon, and SAC HQ. There he formed an informal group within DARPA to further computer research. He began by writing memos in 1963 describing a distributed network to the IPTO staff, whom he called &quot;Members and Affiliates of the Intergalactic Computer Network&quot;.

Although he left the IPTO in 1964, five years before the ARPANET went live, it was his vision of universal networking that provided the impetus for one of his successors, Robert Taylor, to initiate the ARPANET development. Licklider later returned to lead the IPTO in 1973 for two years.

===Packet switching===

The infrastructure for telephone systems at the time was based on circuit switching, which requires pre-allocation of a dedicated communication line for the duration of the call. Telegram services had developed store and forward telecommunication techniques. Western Union&#x27;s Automatic Telegraph Switching System Plan 55-A was based on message switching. The U.S. military&#x27;s AUTODIN network became operational in 1962. These systems, like SAGE and SBRE, still required rigid routing structures that were prone to single point of failure.

The technology was considered vulnerable for strategic and military use because there were no alternative paths for the communication in case of a broken link. In the early 1960s, Paul Baran of the RAND Corporation produced a study of survivable networks for the U.S. military in the event of nuclear war. Information would be transmitted across a &quot;distributed&quot; network, divided into what he called &quot;message blocks&quot;.

In addition to being prone to a single point of failure, existing telegraphic techniques were inefficient and inflexible. Beginning in 1965 Donald Davies, at the National Physical Laboratory in the United Kingdom, developed a more advanced proposal of the concept, designed for high-speed computer networking, which he called packet switching, the term that would ultimately be adopted.

Packet switching is a technique for transmitting computer data by splitting it into very short, standardized chunks, attaching routing information to each of these chunks, and transmitting them independently through a computer network. It provides better bandwidth utilization than traditional circuit-switching used for telephony, and enables the connection of computers with different transmission and receive rates. It is a distinct concept to message switching.

==Networks that led to the Internet==

===NPL network===

Following discussions with J. C. R. Licklider in 1965, Donald Davies became interested in data communications for computer networks. Later that year, at the National Physical Laboratory (NPL) in the United Kingdom, Davies designed and proposed a national commercial data network based on packet switching. The following year, he described the use of &quot;switching nodes&quot; to act as routers in a digital communication network. The proposal was not taken up nationally but he produced a design for a local network to serve the needs of the NPL and prove the feasibility of packet switching using high-speed data transmission. To deal with packet permutations (due to dynamically updated route preferences) and to datagram losses (unavoidable when fast sources send to a slow destinations), he assumed that &quot;all users of the network will provide themselves with some kind of error control&quot;, thus inventing what came to be known as the end-to-end principle. In 1967, he and his team were the first to use the term &#x27;protocol&#x27; in a modern data-commutation context.

In 1968, Davies began building the Mark I packet-switched network to meet the needs of his multidisciplinary laboratory and prove the technology under operational conditions. The network&#x27;s development was described at a 1968 conference. Elements of the network became operational in early 1969, the first implementation of packet switching, and the NPL network was the first to use high-speed links. Many other packet switching networks built in the 1970s were similar &quot;in nearly all respects&quot; to Davies&#x27; original 1965 design. The Mark II version which operated from 1973 used a layered protocol architecture. In 1976, 12 computers and 75 terminal devices were attached, and more were added. The NPL team carried out simulation work on wide-area packet networks, including datagrams and congestion; and research into internetworking and secure communications. The network was replaced in 1986.

===ARPANET===

Robert Taylor was promoted to the head of the Information Processing Techniques Office (IPTO) at Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) in 1966. He intended to realize Licklider&#x27;s ideas of an interconnected networking system. As part of the IPTO&#x27;s role, three network terminals had been installed: one for System Development Corporation in Santa Monica, one for Project Genie at University of California, Berkeley, and one for the Compatible Time-Sharing System project at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Taylor&#x27;s identified need for networking became obvious from the waste of resources apparent to him.

Bringing in Larry Roberts from MIT in January 1967, he initiated a project to build such a network. Roberts and Thomas Merrill had been researching computer time-sharing over wide area networks (WANs). Wide area networks emerged during the late 1950s and became established during the 1960s. At the first ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles in October 1967, Roberts presented a proposal for the &quot;ARPA net&quot;, based on Wesley Clark&#x27;s idea to use Interface Message Processors (IMP) to create a message switching network. At the conference, Roger Scantlebury presented Donald Davies&#x27; work on a hierarchical digital communications network using packet switching and referenced the work of Paul Baran at RAND. Roberts incorporated the packet switching and routing concepts of Davies and Baran into the ARPANET design and upgraded the proposed communications speed from 2.4 kbit/s to 50 kbit/s. 

ARPA awarded the contract to build the network to Bolt Beranek &amp; Newman. The &quot;IMP guys&quot;, led by Frank Heart and Bob Kahn, developed the routing, flow control, software design and network control. The first ARPANET link was established between the Network Measurement Center at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science directed by Leonard Kleinrock, and the NLS system at Stanford Research Institute (SRI) directed by Douglas Engelbart in Menlo Park, California at 22:30 hours on October 29, 1969.

By December 1969, a four-node network was connected by adding the Culler-Fried Interactive Mathematics Center at the University of California, Santa Barbara followed by the University of Utah Graphics Department. In the same year, Taylor helped fund ALOHAnet, a system designed by professor Norman Abramson and others at the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa that transmitted data by radio between seven computers on four islands on Hawaii.

Steve Crocker formed the &quot;Network Working Group&quot; in 1969 at UCLA. Working with Jon Postel and others, he initiated and managed the Request for Comments (RFC) process, which is still used today for proposing and distributing contributions. RFC 1, entitled &quot;Host Software&quot;, was written by Steve Crocker and published on April 7, 1969. The protocol for establishing links between network sites in the ARPANET, the Network Control Program (NCP), was completed in 1970. These early years were documented in the 1972 film Computer Networks: The Heralds of Resource Sharing.

Roberts presented the idea of packet switching to the communication professionals, and faced anger and hostility. Before ARPANET was operating, they argued that the router buffers would quickly run out. After the ARPANET was operating, they argued packet switching would never be economic without the government subsidy. Baran faced the same rejection and thus failed to convince the military into constructing a packet switching network.

Early international collaborations via the ARPANET were sparse. Connections were made in 1973 to the Norwegian Seismic Array (NORSAR), via a satellite link at the Tanum Earth Station in Sweden, and to Peter Kirstein&#x27;s research group at University College London, which provided a gateway to British academic networks, the first international heterogenous resource sharing network. Throughout the 1970s, Leonard Kleinrock developed the mathematical theory to model and measure the performance of packet-switching technology, building on his earlier work on the application of queueing theory to message switching systems. By 1981, the number of hosts had grown to 213. The ARPANET became the technical core of what would become the Internet, and a primary tool in developing the technologies used.

===Merit Network===

The Merit Network was formed in 1966 as the Michigan Educational Research Information Triad to explore computer networking between three of Michigan&#x27;s public universities as a means to help the state&#x27;s educational and economic development. With initial support from the State of Michigan and the National Science Foundation (NSF), the packet-switched network was first demonstrated in December 1971 when an interactive host to host connection was made between the IBM mainframe computer systems at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor and Wayne State University in Detroit. In October 1972 connections to the CDC mainframe at Michigan State University in East Lansing completed the triad. Over the next several years in addition to host to host interactive connections the network was enhanced to support terminal to host connections, host to host batch connections (remote job submission, remote printing, batch file transfer), interactive file transfer, gateways to the Tymnet and Telenet public data networks, X.25 host attachments, gateways to X.25 data networks, Ethernet attached hosts, and eventually TCP/IP and additional public universities in Michigan join the network. All of this set the stage for Merit&#x27;s role in the NSFNET project starting in the mid-1980s.

===CYCLADES===
The CYCLADES packet switching network was a French research network designed and directed by Louis Pouzin. In 1972, he began planning the network to explore alternatives to the early ARPANET design and to support internetworking research. First demonstrated in 1973, it was the first network to implement the end-to-end principle conceived by Donald Davies and make the hosts responsible for reliable delivery of data, rather than the network itself, using unreliable datagrams. Concepts implemented in this network influenced TCP/IP architecture.

===X.25 and public data networks===

Based on international research initiatives, particularly the contributions of Rémi Després, packet switching network standards were developed by the International Telegraph and Telephone Consultative Committee (ITU-T) in the form of X.25 and related standards. X.25 is built on the concept of virtual circuits emulating traditional telephone connections. In 1974, X.25 formed the basis for the SERCnet network between British academic and research sites, which later became JANET, the United Kingdom&#x27;s high-speed national research and education network (NREN). The initial ITU Standard on X.25 was approved in March 1976. Existing networks, such as Telenet in the United States adopted X.25 as well as new public data networks, such as DATAPAC in Canada and TRANSPAC in France. X.25 was supplemented by the X.75 protocol which enabled internetworking between national PTT networks in Europe and commercial networks in North America.

The British Post Office, Western Union International, and Tymnet collaborated to create the first international packet-switched network, referred to as the International Packet Switched Service (IPSS), in 1978. This network grew from Europe and the US to cover Canada, Hong Kong, and Australia by 1981. By the 1990s it provided a worldwide networking infrastructure.

Unlike ARPANET, X.25 was commonly available for business use. Telenet offered its Telemail electronic mail service, which was also targeted to enterprise use rather than the general email system of the ARPANET.

The first public dial-in networks used asynchronous teleprinter (TTY) terminal protocols to reach a concentrator operated in the public network. Some networks, such as Telenet and CompuServe, used X.25 to multiplex the terminal sessions into their packet-switched backbones, while others, such as Tymnet, used proprietary protocols. In 1979, CompuServe became the first service to offer electronic mail capabilities and technical support to personal computer users. The company broke new ground again in 1980 as the first to offer real-time chat with its CB Simulator. Other major dial-in networks were America Online (AOL) and Prodigy that also provided communications, content, and entertainment features. Many bulletin board system (BBS) networks also provided on-line access, such as FidoNet which was popular amongst hobbyist computer users, many of them hackers and amateur radio operators.

===UUCP and Usenet===
In 1979, two students at Duke University, Tom Truscott and Jim Ellis, originated the idea of using Bourne shell scripts to transfer news and messages on a serial line UUCP connection with nearby University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Following public release of the software in 1980, the mesh of UUCP hosts forwarding on the Usenet news rapidly expanded. UUCPnet, as it would later be named, also created gateways and links between FidoNet and dial-up BBS hosts. UUCP networks spread quickly due to the lower costs involved, ability to use existing leased lines, X.25 links or even ARPANET connections, and the lack of strict use policies compared to later networks like CSNET and BITNET. All connects were local. By 1981 the number of UUCP hosts had grown to 550, nearly doubling to 940 in 1984.

Sublink Network, operating since 1987 and officially founded in Italy in 1989, based its interconnectivity upon UUCP to redistribute mail and news groups messages throughout its Italian nodes (about 100 at the time) owned both by private individuals and small companies. Sublink Network evolved into one of the first examples of Internet technology coming into use through popular diffusion.

==1973–1989: Merging the networks and creating the Internet==
===TCP/IP===

With so many different networking methods seeking interconnection, a method was needed to unify them. Louis Pouzin initiated the CYCLADES project in 1972, building on the work of Donald Davies and the ARPANET. An International Network Working Group formed in 1972; active members included Vint Cerf from Stanford University, Alex McKenzie from BBN, Donald Davies and Roger Scantlebury from NPL, and Louis Pouzin and Hubert Zimmermann from IRIA. Pouzin coined the term &quot;catenet&quot; for concatenated network. Bob Metcalfe at Xerox PARC outlined the idea of Ethernet and PARC Universal Packet (PUP) for internetworking. Bob Kahn, now at DARPA, recruited Vint Cerf to work with him on the problem. By 1973, these groups had worked out a fundamental reformulation, in which the differences between network protocols were hidden by using a common internetworking protocol. Instead of the network being responsible for reliability, as in the ARPANET, the hosts became responsible.

Cerf and Kahn published their ideas in May 1974, which incorporated concepts implemented by Louis Pouzin and Hubert Zimmermann in the CYCLADES network. The specification of the resulting protocol, the Transmission Control Program, was published as by the Network Working Group in December 1974. It contains the first attested use of the term &quot;internet&quot;, as a shorthand for internetwork. This software was monolithic in design using two simplex communication channels for each user session.

With the role of the network reduced to a core of functionality, it became possible to exchange traffic with other networks independently from their detailed characteristics, thereby solving the fundamental problems of internetworking. DARPA agreed to fund the development of prototype software. Testing began in 1975 through concurrent implementations at Stanford, BBN and University College London (UCL). After several years of work, the first demonstration of a gateway between the Packet Radio network (PRNET) in the SF Bay area and the ARPANET was conducted by the Stanford Research Institute. On November 22, 1977, a three network demonstration was conducted including the ARPANET, the SRI&#x27;s Packet Radio Van on the Packet Radio Network and the Atlantic Packet Satellite Network (SATNET) including a node at UCL.

The software was redesigned as a modular protocol stack, using full-duplex channels; between 1976 and 1977, Yogen Dalal and Robert Metcalfe among others, proposed separating TCP&#x27;s routing and transmission control functions into two discrete layers, which led to the splitting of the Transmission Control Program into the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and the Internet Protocol (IP) in version 3 in 1978. Version 4 was described in IETF publication RFC 791 (September 1981), 792 and 793. It was installed on SATNET in 1982 and the ARPANET in January 1983 after the DoD made it standard for all military computer networking. This resulted in a networking model that became known informally as TCP/IP. It was also referred to as the Department of Defense (DoD) model or DARPA model. Cerf credits his graduate students Yogen Dalal, Carl Sunshine, Judy Estrin, Richard Karp, and Gérard Le Lann with important work on the design and testing. DARPA sponsored or encouraged the development of TCP/IP implementations for many operating systems.

===From ARPANET to NSFNET===


After the ARPANET had been up and running for several years, ARPA looked for another agency to hand off the network to; ARPA&#x27;s primary mission was funding cutting-edge research and development, not running a communications utility. In July 1975, the network was turned over to the Defense Communications Agency, also part of the Department of Defense. In 1983, the U.S. military portion of the ARPANET was broken off as a separate network, the MILNET. MILNET subsequently became the unclassified but military-only NIPRNET, in parallel with the SECRET-level SIPRNET and JWICS for TOP SECRET and above. NIPRNET does have controlled security gateways to the public Internet.

The networks based on the ARPANET were government funded and therefore restricted to noncommercial uses such as research; unrelated commercial use was strictly forbidden. This initially restricted connections to military sites and universities. During the 1980s, the connections expanded to more educational institutions, and a growing number of companies such as Digital Equipment Corporation and Hewlett-Packard, which were participating in research projects or providing services to those who were. Data transmission speeds depended upon the type of connection, the slowest being analog telephone lines and the fastest using optical networking technology.

Several other branches of the U.S. government, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), the National Science Foundation (NSF), and the Department of Energy (DOE) became heavily involved in Internet research and started development of a successor to ARPANET. In the mid-1980s, all three of these branches developed the first Wide Area Networks based on TCP/IP. NASA developed the NASA Science Network, NSF developed CSNET and DOE evolved the Energy Sciences Network or ESNet.
NASA developed the TCP/IP based NASA Science Network (NSN) in the mid-1980s, connecting space scientists to data and information stored anywhere in the world. In 1989, the DECnet-based Space Physics Analysis Network (SPAN) and the TCP/IP-based NASA Science Network (NSN) were brought together at NASA Ames Research Center creating the first multiprotocol wide area network called the NASA Science Internet, or NSI. NSI was established to provide a totally integrated communications infrastructure to the NASA scientific community for the advancement of earth, space and life sciences. As a high-speed, multiprotocol, international network, NSI provided connectivity to over 20,000 scientists across all seven continents.

In 1981, NSF supported the development of the Computer Science Network (CSNET). CSNET connected with ARPANET using TCP/IP, and ran TCP/IP over X.25, but it also supported departments without sophisticated network connections, using automated dial-up mail exchange. CSNET played a central role in popularizing the Internet outside the ARPANET.

In 1986, the NSF created NSFNET, a 56 kbit/s backbone to support the NSF-sponsored supercomputing centers. The NSFNET also provided support for the creation of regional research and education networks in the United States, and for the connection of university and college campus networks to the regional networks. The use of NSFNET and the regional networks was not limited to supercomputer users and the 56 kbit/s network quickly became overloaded. NSFNET was upgraded to 1.5 Mbit/s in 1988 under a cooperative agreement with the Merit Network in partnership with IBM, MCI, and the State of Michigan. The existence of NSFNET and the creation of Federal Internet Exchanges (FIXes) allowed the ARPANET to be decommissioned in 1990.

NSFNET was expanded and upgraded to dedicated fiber, optical lasers and optical amplifier systems capable of delivering T3 start up speeds or 45 Mbit/s in 1991. However, the T3 transition by MCI took longer than expected, allowing Sprint to establish a coast-to-coast long-distance commercial Internet service. When NSFNET was decommissioned in 1995, its optical networking backbones were handed off to several commercial Internet service providers, including MCI, PSI Net and Sprint. As a result, when the handoff was complete, Sprint and its Washington DC Network Access Points began to carry Internet traffic, and by 1996, Sprint was the world&#x27;s largest carrier of Internet traffic.

The research and academic community continues to develop and use advanced networks such as Internet2 in the United States and JANET in the United Kingdom.

===Transition towards the Internet===
The term &quot;internet&quot; was reflected in the first RFC published on the TCP protocol (RFC 675: Internet Transmission Control Program, December 1974) as a short form of &quot;internetworking&quot;, when the two terms were used interchangeably. In general, an internet was a collection of networks linked by a common protocol. In the time period when the ARPANET was connected to the newly formed NSFNET project in the late 1980s, the term was used as the name of the network, Internet, being the large and global TCP/IP network.

Opening the Internet and the fiber optic backbone to corporate and consumers increased demand for network capacity. The expense and delay of laying new fiber led providers to test a fiber bandwidth expansion alternative that had been pioneered in the late 1970s by Optelecom using &quot;interactions between light and matter, such as lasers and optical devices used for optical amplification and wave mixing&quot;. This technology became known as wave division multiplexing (WDM). Bell Labs deployed a 4-channel WDM system in 1995. To develop a mass capacity (dense) WDM system, Optelecom and its former head of Light Systems Research, David R. Huber formed a new venture, Ciena Corp., that deployed the world&#x27;s first dense WDM system on the Sprint fiber network in June 1996. This was referred to as the real start of optical networking.

As interest in networking grew by needs of collaboration, exchange of data, and access of remote computing resources, the Internet technologies spread throughout the rest of the world. The hardware-agnostic approach in TCP/IP supported the use of existing network infrastructure, such as the International Packet Switched Service (IPSS) X.25 network, to carry Internet traffic.

Many sites unable to link directly to the Internet created simple gateways for the transfer of electronic mail, the most important application of the time. Sites with only intermittent connections used UUCP or FidoNet and relied on the gateways between these networks and the Internet. Some gateway services went beyond simple mail peering, such as allowing access to File Transfer Protocol (FTP) sites via UUCP or mail.

Finally, routing technologies were developed for the Internet to remove the remaining centralized routing aspects. The Exterior Gateway Protocol (EGP) was replaced by a new protocol, the Border Gateway Protocol (BGP). This provided a meshed topology for the Internet and reduced the centric architecture which ARPANET had emphasized. In 1994, Classless Inter-Domain Routing (CIDR) was introduced to support better conservation of address space which allowed use of route aggregation to decrease the size of routing tables.

===Optical networking===
The MOS transistor underpinned the rapid growth of telecommunication bandwidth over the second half of the 20th century. To address the need for transmission capacity beyond that provided by radio, satellite and analog copper telephone lines, engineers developed optical communications systems based on fiber optic cables powered by lasers and optical amplifier techniques.

The concept of lasing arose from a 1917 paper by Albert Einstein, &quot;On the Quantum Theory of Radiation&quot;. Einstein expanded upon a conversation with Max Planck on how atoms absorb and emit light, part of a thought process that, with input from Erwin Schrödinger, Werner Heisenberg and others, gave rise to quantum mechanics. Specifically, in his quantum theory, Einstein mathematically determined that light could be generated not only by spontaneous emission, such as the light emitted by an incandescent light or the Sun, but also by stimulated emission.

Forty years later, on November 13, 1957, Columbia University physics student Gordon Gould first realized how to make light by stimulated emission through a process of optical amplification. He coined the term LASER for this technology—Light Amplification by Stimulated Emission of Radiation. Using Gould&#x27;s light amplification method (patented as &quot;Optically Pumped Laser Amplifier&quot;), Theodore Maiman made the first working laser on May 16, 1960.

Gould co-founded Optelecom in 1973 to commercialize his inventions in optical fiber telecommunications, just as Corning Glass was producing the first commercial fiber optic cable in small quantities. Optelecom configured its own fiber lasers and optical amplifiers into the first commercial optical communication systems which it delivered to Chevron and the US Army Missile Defense. Three years later, GTE deployed the first optical telephone system in 1977 in Long Beach, California. By the early 1980s, optical networks powered by lasers, LED and optical amplifier equipment supplied by Bell Labs, NTT and Perelli were used by select universities and long-distance telephone providers.

===TCP/IP goes global (1980s)===
====CERN and the European Internet====

In 1982, NORSAR/NDRE and Peter Kirstein&#x27;s research group at University College London (UCL) left the ARPANET and began to use TCP/IP over SATNET. There were 40 British academic research groups using UCL&#x27;s link to the ARPANET in 1975.

Between 1984 and 1988, CERN began installation and operation of TCP/IP to interconnect its major internal computer systems, workstations, PCs, and an accelerator control system. CERN continued to operate a limited self-developed system (CERNET) internally and several incompatible (typically proprietary) network protocols externally. There was considerable resistance in Europe towards more widespread use of TCP/IP, and the CERN TCP/IP intranets remained isolated from the Internet until 1989, when a transatlantic connection to Cornell University was established.

The Computer Science Network (CSNET) began operation in 1981 to provide networking connections to institutions that could not connect directly to ARPANET. Its first international connection was to Israel in 1984. Soon after, connections were established to computer science departments in Canada, France, and Germany.

In 1988, the first international connections to NSFNET was established by France&#x27;s INRIA, and Piet Beertema at the Centrum Wiskunde &amp; Informatica (CWI) in the Netherlands. Daniel Karrenberg, from CWI, visited Ben Segal, CERN&#x27;s TCP/IP coordinator, looking for advice about the transition of EUnet, the European side of the UUCP Usenet network (much of which ran over X.25 links), over to TCP/IP. The previous year, Segal had met with Len Bosack from the then still small company Cisco about purchasing some TCP/IP routers for CERN, and Segal was able to give Karrenberg advice and forward him on to Cisco for the appropriate hardware. This expanded the European portion of the Internet across the existing UUCP networks. The NORDUnet connection to NSFNET was in place soon after, providing open access for university students in Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden. In January 1989, CERN opened its first external TCP/IP connections. This coincided with the creation of Réseaux IP Européens (RIPE), initially a group of IP network administrators who met regularly to carry out coordination work together. Later, in 1992, RIPE was formally registered as a cooperative in Amsterdam.

The United Kingdom&#x27;s national research and education network (NREN), JANET, began operation in 1984 using the UK&#x27;s Coloured Book protocols and connected to NSFNET in 1989. In 1991, JANET adopted Internet Protocol on the existing network. The same year, Dai Davies introduced Internet technology into the pan-European NREN, EuropaNet, which was built on the X.25 protocol. The European Academic and Research Network (EARN) and RARE adopted IP around the same time, and the European Internet backbone EBONE became operational in 1992.

Nonetheless, for a period in the late 1980s and early 1990s, engineers, organizations and nations were polarized over the issue of which standard, the OSI model or the Internet protocol suite would result in the best and most robust computer networks.

====The link to the Pacific====
South Korea set up a two-node domestic TCP/IP network in 1982, the System Development Network (SDN), adding a third node the following year. SDN was connected to the rest of the world in August 1983 using UUCP (Unix-to-Unix-Copy); connected to CSNET in December 1984; and formally connected to the NSFNET in 1990.

Japan, which had built the UUCP-based network JUNET in 1984, connected to CSNET, and later to NSFNET in 1989, marking the spread of the Internet to Asia.

In Australia, ad hoc networking to ARPA and in-between Australian universities formed in the late 1980s, based on various technologies such as X.25, UUCPNet, and via a CSNET. These were limited in their connection to the global networks, due to the cost of making individual international UUCP dial-up or X.25 connections. In 1989, Australian universities joined the push towards using IP protocols to unify their networking infrastructures. AARNet was formed in 1989 by the Australian Vice-Chancellors&#x27; Committee and provided a dedicated IP based network for Australia.

New Zealand adopted the UK&#x27;s Coloured Book protocols as an interim standard and established its first international IP connection to the U.S. in 1989.

====A &quot;digital divide&quot; emerges====



While developed countries with technological infrastructures were joining the Internet, developing countries began to experience a digital divide separating them from the Internet. On an essentially continental basis, they built organizations for Internet resource administration and to share operational experience, which enabled more transmission facilities to be put into place.

====Africa====
At the beginning of the 1990s, African countries relied upon X.25 IPSS and 2400 baud modem UUCP links for international and internetwork computer communications.

In August 1995, InfoMail Uganda, Ltd., a privately held firm in Kampala now known as InfoCom, and NSN Network Services of Avon, Colorado, sold in 1997 and now known as Clear Channel Satellite, established Africa&#x27;s first native TCP/IP high-speed satellite Internet services. The data connection was originally carried by a C-Band RSCC Russian satellite which connected InfoMail&#x27;s Kampala offices directly to NSN&#x27;s MAE-West point of presence using a private network from NSN&#x27;s leased ground station in New Jersey. InfoCom&#x27;s first satellite connection was just 64 kbit/s, serving a Sun host computer and twelve US Robotics dial-up modems.

In 1996, a USAID funded project, the Leland Initiative, started work on developing full Internet connectivity for the continent. Guinea, Mozambique, Madagascar and Rwanda gained satellite earth stations in 1997, followed by Ivory Coast and Benin in 1998.

Africa is building an Internet infrastructure. AFRINIC, headquartered in Mauritius, manages IP address allocation for the continent. As with other Internet regions, there is an operational forum, the Internet Community of Operational Networking Specialists.

There are many programs to provide high-performance transmission plant, and the western and southern coasts have undersea optical cable. High-speed cables join North Africa and the Horn of Africa to intercontinental cable systems. Undersea cable development is slower for East Africa; the original joint effort between New Partnership for Africa&#x27;s Development (NEPAD) and the East Africa Submarine System (Eassy) has broken off and may become two efforts.

====Asia and Oceania====
The Asia Pacific Network Information Centre (APNIC), headquartered in Australia, manages IP address allocation for the continent. APNIC sponsors an operational forum, the Asia-Pacific Regional Internet Conference on Operational Technologies (APRICOT).

In South Korea, VDSL, a last mile technology developed in the 1990s by NextLevel Communications, connected corporate and consumer copper-based telephone lines to the Internet.

The People&#x27;s Republic of China established its first TCP/IP college network, Tsinghua University&#x27;s TUNET in 1991. The PRC went on to make its first global Internet connection in 1994, between the Beijing Electro-Spectrometer Collaboration and Stanford University&#x27;s Linear Accelerator Center. However, China went on to implement its own digital divide by implementing a country-wide content filter.

Japan hosted the annual meeting of the Internet Society, INET&#x27;92, in Kobe. Singapore developed TECHNET in 1990, and Thailand gained a global Internet connection between Chulalongkorn University and UUNET in 1992.

====Latin America====
As with the other regions, the Latin American and Caribbean Internet Addresses Registry (LACNIC) manages the IP address space and other resources for its area. LACNIC, headquartered in Uruguay, operates DNS root, reverse DNS, and other key services.

==1990–2003: Rise of the global Internet, Web 1.0==

===Development===
Initially, as with its predecessor networks, the system that would evolve into the Internet was primarily for government and government body use. Although commercial use was forbidden, the exact definition of commercial use was unclear and subjective. UUCPNet and the X.25 IPSS had no such restrictions, which would eventually see the official barring of UUCPNet use of ARPANET and NSFNET connections.
As a result, during the late 1980s, the first Internet service provider (ISP) companies were formed. Companies like PSINet, UUNET, Netcom, and Portal Software were formed to provide service to the regional research networks and provide alternate network access, UUCP-based email and Usenet News to the public. In 1989, MCI Mail became the first commercial email provider to get an experimental gateway to the Internet. The first commercial dialup ISP in the United States was The World, which opened in 1989.

In 1992, the U.S. Congress passed the Scientific and Advanced-Technology Act, , which allowed NSF to support access by the research and education communities to computer networks which were not used exclusively for research and education purposes, thus permitting NSFNET to interconnect with commercial networks. This caused controversy within the research and education community, who were concerned commercial use of the network might lead to an Internet that was less responsive to their needs, and within the community of commercial network providers, who felt that government subsidies were giving an unfair advantage to some organizations.

By 1990, ARPANET&#x27;s goals had been fulfilled and new networking technologies exceeded the original scope and the project came to a close. New network service providers including PSINet, Alternet, CERFNet, ANS CO+RE, and many others were offering network access to commercial customers. NSFNET was no longer the de facto backbone and exchange point of the Internet. The Commercial Internet eXchange (CIX), Metropolitan Area Exchanges (MAEs), and later Network Access Points (NAPs) were becoming the primary interconnections between many networks. The final restrictions on carrying commercial traffic ended on April 30, 1995, when the National Science Foundation ended its sponsorship of the NSFNET Backbone Service. NSF provided initial support for the NAPs and interim support to help the regional research and education networks transition to commercial ISPs. NSF also sponsored the very high speed Backbone Network Service (vBNS) which continued to provide support for the supercomputing centers and research and education in the United States.

An event held on 11 January 1994, &quot;The Superhighway Summit&quot; at UCLA&#x27;s Royce Hall, was the &quot;first public conference bringing together all of the major industry, government and academic leaders in the field [and] also began the national dialogue about the &quot;Information Superhighway&quot; and its implications&quot;.

===Internet use in wider society===
The invention of the World Wide Web by Tim Berners-Lee at CERN, as an application on the Internet, brought many social and commercial uses to what was, at the time, a network of networks for academic and research institutions. The Web opened to the public in 1991 and began to enter general use in 1993–4, when websites for everyday use started to become available.
During the first decade or so of the public Internet, the immense changes it would eventually enable in the 2000s were still nascent. In terms of providing context for this period, mobile cellular devices (&quot;smartphones&quot; and other cellular devices) which today provide near-universal access, were used for business and not a routine household item owned by parents and children worldwide. Social media in the modern sense had yet to come into existence, laptops were bulky and most households did not have computers. Data rates were slow and most people lacked means to video or digitize video; media storage was transitioning slowly from analog tape to digital optical discs (DVD and to an extent still, floppy disc to CD). Enabling technologies used from the early 2000s such as PHP, modern JavaScript and Java, technologies such as AJAX, HTML 4 (and its emphasis on CSS), and various software frameworks, which enabled and simplified speed of web development, largely awaited invention and their eventual widespread adoption.

The Internet was widely used for mailing lists, emails, creating and distributing maps with tools like MapQuest, e-commerce and early popular online shopping (Amazon and eBay for example), online forums and bulletin boards, and personal websites and blogs, and use was growing rapidly, but by more modern standards, the systems used were static and lacked widespread social engagement. It awaited a number of events in the early 2000s to change from a communications technology to gradually develop into a key part of global society&#x27;s infrastructure.

Typical design elements of these &quot;Web 1.0&quot; era websites included: Static pages instead of dynamic HTML; content served from filesystems instead of relational databases; pages built using Server Side Includes or CGI instead of a web application written in a dynamic programming language; HTML 3.2-era structures such as frames and tables to create page layouts; online guestbooks; overuse of GIF buttons and similar small graphics promoting particular items; and HTML forms sent via email. (Support for server side scripting was rare on shared servers so the usual feedback mechanism was via email, using mailto forms and their email program.

During the period 1997 to 2001, the first speculative investment bubble related to the Internet took place, in which &quot;dot-com&quot; companies (referring to the &quot;.com&quot; top level domain used by businesses) were propelled to exceedingly high valuations as investors rapidly stoked stock values, followed by a market crash; the first dot-com bubble. However this only temporarily slowed enthusiasm and growth, which quickly recovered and continued to grow.

The history of the World Wide Web up to around 2004 was retrospectively named and described by some as &quot;Web 1.0&quot;.

===IPv6===
In the final stage of IPv4 address exhaustion, the last IPv4 address block was assigned in January 2011 at the level of the regional Internet registries. IPv4 uses 32-bit addresses which limits the address space to 232 addresses, i.e. addresses. IPv4 is in the process of replacement by IPv6, its successor, which uses 128-bit addresses, providing 2128 addresses, i.e. , a vastly increased address space. The shift to IPv6 is expected to take a long time to complete.

==2004–present: Web 2.0, global ubiquity, social media==
The rapid technical advances that would propel the Internet into its place as a social system, which has completely transformed the way humans interact with each other, took place during a relatively short period from around 2005 to 2010, coinciding with the point in time in which IoT devices surpassed the number of humans alive at some point in the late 2000s. They included:
* The call to &quot;Web 2.0&quot; in 2004 (first suggested in 1999).
* Accelerating adoption and commoditization among households of, and familiarity with, the necessary hardware (such as computers).
* Accelerating storage technology and data access speeds – hard drives emerged, took over from far smaller, slower floppy discs, and grew from megabytes to gigabytes (and by around 2010, terabytes), RAM from hundreds of kilobytes to gigabytes as typical amounts on a system, and Ethernet, the enabling technology for TCP/IP, moved from common speeds of kilobits to tens of megabits per second, to gigabits per second.
* High speed Internet and wider coverage of data connections, at lower prices, allowing larger traffic rates, more reliable simpler traffic, and traffic from more locations.
* The public&#x27;s accelerating perception of the potential of computers to create new means and approaches to communication, the emergence of social media and websites such as Twitter and Facebook to their later prominence, and global collaborations such as Wikipedia (which existed before but gained prominence as a result).
* The mobile device revolution, particularly with smartphones and tablet computers becoming widespread, which began to provide easy access to the Internet to much of human society of all ages, in their daily lives, and allowed them to share, discuss, and continually update, inquire, and respond.
* Non-volatile RAM rapidly grew in size and reliability, and decreased in price, becoming a commodity capable of enabling high levels of computing activity on these small handheld devices as well as solid-state drives (SSD).
* An emphasis on power efficient processor and device design, rather than purely high processing power; one of the beneficiaries of this was Arm, a British company which had focused since the 1980s on powerful but low cost simple microprocessors. The ARM architecture family rapidly gained dominance in the market for mobile and embedded devices.

=== Web 2.0 ===
The term &quot;Web 2.0&quot; describes websites that emphasize user-generated content (including user-to-user interaction), usability, and interoperability. It first appeared in a January 1999 article called &quot;Fragmented Future&quot; written by Darcy DiNucci, a consultant on electronic information design, where she wrote:

The term resurfaced during 2002–2004, and gained prominence in late 2004 following presentations by Tim O&#x27;Reilly and Dale Dougherty at the first Web 2.0 Conference. In their opening remarks, John Battelle and Tim O&#x27;Reilly outlined their definition of the &quot;Web as Platform&quot;, where software applications are built upon the Web as opposed to upon the desktop. The unique aspect of this migration, they argued, is that &quot;customers are building your business for you&quot;. They argued that the activities of users generating content (in the form of ideas, text, videos, or pictures) could be &quot;harnessed&quot; to create value.

&quot;Web 2.0&quot; does not refer to an update to any technical specification, but rather to cumulative changes in the way Web pages are made and used. &quot;Web 2.0&quot; describes an approach, in which sites focus substantially upon allowing users to interact and collaborate with each other in a social media dialogue as creators of user-generated content in a virtual community, in contrast to Web sites where people are limited to the passive viewing of content. Examples of Web 2.0 include social networking services, blogs, wikis, folksonomies, video sharing sites, hosted services, Web applications, and mashups. Terry Flew, in his 3rd edition of &quot;New Media&quot;, described what he believed to characterize the differences between Web 1.0 and Web 2.0:

This era saw several household names gain prominence through their community-oriented operation – YouTube, Twitter, Facebook, Reddit and Wikipedia being some examples.

=== Telephone networks convert to VoIP ===
Telephone systems have been slowly adopting voice over IP since 2003. Early experiments proved that voice can be converted to digital packets and sent over the Internet. The packets are collected and converted back to analog voice.

===The mobile revolution===
The process of change that generally coincided with Web 2.0 was itself greatly accelerated and transformed only a short time later by the increasing growth in mobile devices. This mobile revolution meant that computers in the form of smartphones became something many people used, took with them everywhere, communicated with, used for photographs and videos they instantly shared or to shop or seek information &quot;on the move&quot; – and used socially, as opposed to items on a desk at home or just used for work.

Location-based services, services using location and other sensor information, and crowdsourcing (frequently but not always location based), became common, with posts tagged by location, or websites and services becoming location aware. Mobile-targeted websites (such as &quot;m.example.com&quot;) became common, designed especially for the new devices used. Netbooks, ultrabooks, widespread 4G and Wi-Fi, and mobile chips capable or running at nearly the power of desktops from not many years before on far lower power usage, became enablers of this stage of Internet development, and the term &quot;App&quot; (short for &quot;Application program&quot; or &quot;Program&quot;) became popularized, as did the &quot;App store&quot;.

This &quot;mobile revolution&quot; has allowed for people to have a nearly unlimited amount of information at all times. With the ability to access the internet from cell phones came a change in the way media was consumed. Media consumption statistics show that over half of media consumption between those aged 18 and 34 were using a smartphone.

===Networking in outer space===

The first Internet link into low Earth orbit was established on January 22, 2010, when astronaut T. J. Creamer posted the first unassisted update to his Twitter account from the International Space Station, marking the extension of the Internet into space. (Astronauts at the ISS had used email and Twitter before, but these messages had been relayed to the ground through a NASA data link before being posted by a human proxy.) This personal Web access, which NASA calls the Crew Support LAN, uses the space station&#x27;s high-speed Ku band microwave link. To surf the Web, astronauts can use a station laptop computer to control a desktop computer on Earth, and they can talk to their families and friends on Earth using Voice over IP equipment.

Communication with spacecraft beyond Earth orbit has traditionally been over point-to-point links through the Deep Space Network. Each such data link must be manually scheduled and configured. In the late 1990s NASA and Google began working on a new network protocol, delay-tolerant networking (DTN), which automates this process, allows networking of spaceborne transmission nodes, and takes the fact into account that spacecraft can temporarily lose contact because they move behind the Moon or planets, or because space weather disrupts the connection. Under such conditions, DTN retransmits data packages instead of dropping them, as the standard TCP/IP Internet Protocol does. NASA conducted the first field test of what it calls the &quot;deep space internet&quot; in November 2008. Testing of DTN-based communications between the International Space Station and Earth (now termed disruption-tolerant networking) has been ongoing since March 2009, and was scheduled to continue until March 2014.

This network technology is supposed to ultimately enable missions that involve multiple spacecraft where reliable inter-vessel communication might take precedence over vessel-to-Earth downlinks. According to a February 2011 statement by Google&#x27;s Vint Cerf, the so-called &quot;bundle protocols&quot; have been uploaded to NASA&#x27;s EPOXI mission spacecraft (which is in orbit around the Sun) and communication with Earth has been tested at a distance of approximately 80 light seconds.

==Internet governance==

As a globally distributed network of voluntarily interconnected autonomous networks, the Internet operates without a central governing body. Each constituent network chooses the technologies and protocols it deploys from the technical standards that are developed by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). However, successful interoperation of many networks requires certain parameters that must be common throughout the network. For managing such parameters, the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) oversees the allocation and assignment of various technical identifiers. In addition, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) provides oversight and coordination for the two principal name spaces in the Internet, the Internet Protocol address space and the Domain Name System.

===NIC, InterNIC, IANA, and ICANN===
The IANA function was originally performed by USC Information Sciences Institute (ISI), and it delegated portions of this responsibility with respect to numeric network and autonomous system identifiers to the Network Information Center (NIC) at Stanford Research Institute (SRI International) in Menlo Park, California. ISI&#x27;s Jonathan Postel managed the IANA, served as RFC Editor and performed other key roles until his death in 1998.

As the early ARPANET grew, hosts were referred to by names, and a HOSTS.TXT file would be distributed from SRI International to each host on the network. As the network grew, this became cumbersome. A technical solution came in the form of the Domain Name System, created by ISI&#x27;s Paul Mockapetris in 1983. The Defense Data Network—Network Information Center (DDN-NIC) at SRI handled all registration services, including the top-level domains (TLDs) of .mil, .gov, .edu, .org, .net, .com and .us, root nameserver administration and Internet number assignments under a United States Department of Defense contract. In 1991, the Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA) awarded the administration and maintenance of DDN-NIC (managed by SRI up until this point) to Government Systems, Inc., who subcontracted it to the small private-sector Network Solutions, Inc.

The increasing cultural diversity of the Internet also posed administrative challenges for centralized management of the IP addresses. In October 1992, the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) published RFC 1366, which described the &quot;growth of the Internet and its increasing globalization&quot; and set out the basis for an evolution of the IP registry process, based on a regionally distributed registry model. This document stressed the need for a single Internet number registry to exist in each geographical region of the world (which would be of &quot;continental dimensions&quot;). Registries would be &quot;unbiased and widely recognized by network providers and subscribers&quot; within their region.
The RIPE Network Coordination Centre (RIPE NCC) was established as the first RIR in May 1992. The second RIR, the Asia Pacific Network Information Centre (APNIC), was established in Tokyo in 1993, as a pilot project of the Asia Pacific Networking Group.

Since at this point in history most of the growth on the Internet was coming from non-military sources, it was decided that the Department of Defense would no longer fund registration services outside of the .mil TLD. In 1993 the U.S. National Science Foundation, after a competitive bidding process in 1992, created the InterNIC to manage the allocations of addresses and management of the address databases, and awarded the contract to three organizations. Registration Services would be provided by Network Solutions; Directory and Database Services would be provided by AT&amp;T; and Information Services would be provided by General Atomics.

Over time, after consultation with the IANA, the IETF, RIPE NCC, APNIC, and the Federal Networking Council (FNC), the decision was made to separate the management of domain names from the management of IP numbers. Following the examples of RIPE NCC and APNIC, it was recommended that management of IP address space then administered by the InterNIC should be under the control of those that use it, specifically the ISPs, end-user organizations, corporate entities, universities, and individuals. As a result, the American Registry for Internet Numbers (ARIN) was established as in December 1997, as an independent, not-for-profit corporation by direction of the National Science Foundation and became the third Regional Internet Registry.

In 1998, both the IANA and remaining DNS-related InterNIC functions were reorganized under the control of ICANN, a California non-profit corporation contracted by the United States Department of Commerce to manage a number of Internet-related tasks. As these tasks involved technical coordination for two principal Internet name spaces (DNS names and IP addresses) created by the IETF, ICANN also signed a memorandum of understanding with the IAB to define the technical work to be carried out by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority. The management of Internet address space remained with the regional Internet registries, which collectively were defined as a supporting organization within the ICANN structure. ICANN provides central coordination for the DNS system, including policy coordination for the split registry / registrar system, with competition among registry service providers to serve each top-level-domain and multiple competing registrars offering DNS services to end-users.

===Internet Engineering Task Force===
The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) is the largest and most visible of several loosely related ad-hoc groups that provide technical direction for the Internet, including the Internet Architecture Board (IAB), the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG), and the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF).

The IETF is a loosely self-organized group of international volunteers who contribute to the engineering and evolution of Internet technologies. It is the principal body engaged in the development of new Internet standard specifications. Much of the work of the IETF is organized into &quot;Working Groups&quot;. Standardization efforts of the Working Groups are often adopted by the Internet community, but the IETF does not control or patrol the Internet.

The IETF grew out of quarterly meetings with U.S. government-funded researchers, starting in January 1986. Non-government representatives were invited by the fourth IETF meeting in October 1986. The concept of Working Groups was introduced at the fifth meeting in February 1987. The seventh meeting in July 1987 was the first meeting with more than one hundred attendees. In 1992, the Internet Society, a professional membership society, was formed and IETF began to operate under it as an independent international standards body. The first IETF meeting outside of the United States was held in Amsterdam, the Netherlands, in July 1993. Today, the IETF meets three times per year and attendance has been as high as ca. 2,000 participants. Typically one in three IETF meetings are held in Europe or Asia. The number of non-US attendees is typically ca. 50%, even at meetings held in the United States.

The IETF is not a legal entity, has no governing board, no members, and no dues. The closest status resembling membership is being on an IETF or Working Group mailing list. IETF volunteers come from all over the world and from many different parts of the Internet community. The IETF works closely with and under the supervision of the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG) and the Internet Architecture Board (IAB). The Internet Research Task Force (IRTF) and the Internet Research Steering Group (IRSG), peer activities to the IETF and IESG under the general supervision of the IAB, focus on longer-term research issues.

====RFCs====
RFCs are the main documentation for the work of the IAB, IESG, IETF, and IRTF. Originally intended as requests for comments, RFC 1, &quot;Host Software&quot;, was written by Steve Crocker at UCLA in April 1969. These technical memos documented aspects of ARPANET development. They were edited by Jon Postel, the first RFC Editor.

RFCs cover a wide range of information from proposed standards, draft standards, full standards, best practices, experimental protocols, history, and other informational topics. RFCs can be written by individuals or informal groups of individuals, but many are the product of a more formal Working Group. Drafts are submitted to the IESG either by individuals or by the Working Group Chair. An RFC Editor, appointed by the IAB, separate from IANA, and working in conjunction with the IESG, receives drafts from the IESG and edits, formats, and publishes them. Once an RFC is published, it is never revised. If the standard it describes changes or its information becomes obsolete, the revised standard or updated information will be re-published as a new RFC that &quot;obsoletes&quot; the original.

===The Internet Society===
The Internet Society (ISOC) is an international, nonprofit organization founded during 1992 &quot;to assure the open development, evolution and use of the Internet for the benefit of all people throughout the world&quot;. With offices near Washington, DC, US, and in Geneva, Switzerland, ISOC has a membership base comprising more than 80 organizational and more than 50,000 individual members. Members also form &quot;chapters&quot; based on either common geographical location or special interests. There are currently more than 90 chapters around the world.

ISOC provides financial and organizational support to and promotes the work of the standards settings bodies for which it is the organizational home: the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), the Internet Architecture Board (IAB), the Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG), and the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF). ISOC also promotes understanding and appreciation of the Internet model of open, transparent processes and consensus-based decision-making.

===Globalization and Internet governance in the 21st century===
Since the 1990s, the Internet&#x27;s governance and organization has been of global importance to governments, commerce, civil society, and individuals. The organizations which held control of certain technical aspects of the Internet were the successors of the old ARPANET oversight and the current decision-makers in the day-to-day technical aspects of the network. While recognized as the administrators of certain aspects of the Internet, their roles and their decision-making authority are limited and subject to increasing international scrutiny and increasing objections. These objections have led to the ICANN removing themselves from relationships with first the University of Southern California in 2000, and in September 2009 gaining autonomy from the US government by the ending of its longstanding agreements, although some contractual obligations with the U.S. Department of Commerce continued. Finally, on October 1, 2016, ICANN ended its contract with the United States Department of Commerce National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA), allowing oversight to pass to the global Internet community.

The IETF, with financial and organizational support from the Internet Society, continues to serve as the Internet&#x27;s ad-hoc standards body and issues Request for Comments.

In November 2005, the World Summit on the Information Society, held in Tunis, called for an Internet Governance Forum (IGF) to be convened by United Nations Secretary General. The IGF opened an ongoing, non-binding conversation among stakeholders representing governments, the private sector, civil society, and the technical and academic communities about the future of Internet governance. The first IGF meeting was held in October/November 2006 with follow up meetings annually thereafter. Since WSIS, the term &quot;Internet governance&quot; has been broadened beyond narrow technical concerns to include a wider range of Internet-related policy issues.

Tim Berners-Lee, inventor of the web, was becoming concerned about threats to the web&#x27;s future and in November 2009 at the IGF in Washington DC launched the World Wide Web Foundation (WWWF) to campaign to make the web a safe and empowering tool for the good of humanity with access to all. In November 2019 at the IGF in Berlin, Berners-Lee and the WWWF went on to launch the &quot;Contract for the Web&quot;, a campaign initiative to persuade governments, companies and citizens to commit to nine principles to stop &quot;misuse&quot; with the warning &quot;If we don&#x27;t act now - and act together - to prevent the web being misused by those who want to exploit, divide and undermine, we are at risk of squandering&quot; (its potential for good).

==Politicization of the Internet==
Due to its prominence and immediacy as an effective means of mass communication, the Internet has also become more politicized as it has grown. This has led in turn, to discourses and activities that would once have taken place in other ways, migrating to being mediated by internet.

Examples include political activities such as public protest and canvassing of support and votes, but also:

* The spreading of ideas and opinions;
* Recruitment of followers, and &quot;coming together&quot; of members of the public, for ideas, products, and causes;
* Providing and widely distributing and sharing information that might be deemed sensitive or relates to whistleblowing (and efforts by specific countries to prevent this by censorship);
* Criminal activity and terrorism (and resulting law enforcement use, together with its facilitation by mass surveillance);
* Politically motivated fake news.

==Net neutrality==

On April 23, 2014, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) was reported to be considering a new rule that would permit Internet service providers to offer content providers a faster track to send content, thus reversing their earlier net neutrality position. A possible solution to net neutrality concerns may be municipal broadband, according to Professor Susan Crawford, a legal and technology expert at Harvard Law School. On May 15, 2014, the FCC decided to consider two options regarding Internet services: first, permit fast and slow broadband lanes, thereby compromising net neutrality; and second, reclassify broadband as a telecommunication service, thereby preserving net neutrality. On November 10, 2014, President Obama recommended the FCC reclassify broadband Internet service as a telecommunications service in order to preserve net neutrality. On January 16, 2015, Republicans presented legislation, in the form of a U.S. Congress HR discussion draft bill, that makes concessions to net neutrality but prohibits the FCC from accomplishing the goal or enacting any further regulation affecting Internet service providers (ISPs). On January 31, 2015, AP News reported that the FCC will present the notion of applying (&quot;with some caveats&quot;) Title II (common carrier) of the Communications Act of 1934 to the internet in a vote expected on February 26, 2015. Adoption of this notion would reclassify internet service from one of information to one of telecommunications and, according to Tom Wheeler, chairman of the FCC, ensure net neutrality. The FCC is expected to enforce net neutrality in its vote, according to &quot;The New York Times&quot;.

On February 26, 2015, the FCC ruled in favor of net neutrality by applying Title II (common carrier) of the Communications Act of 1934 and Section 706 of the Telecommunications act of 1996 to the Internet. The FCC chairman, Tom Wheeler, commented, &quot;This is no more a plan to regulate the Internet than the First Amendment is a plan to regulate free speech. They both stand for the same concept.&quot;

On March 12, 2015, the FCC released the specific details of the net neutrality rules. On April 13, 2015, the FCC published the final rule on its new &quot;Net Neutrality&quot; regulations.

On December 14, 2017, the FCC repealed their March 12, 2015 decision by a 3–2 vote regarding net neutrality rules.

==Use and culture==

===Email and Usenet===
Email has often been called the killer application of the Internet. It predates the Internet, and was a crucial tool in creating it. Email started in 1965 as a way for multiple users of a time-sharing mainframe computer to communicate. Although the history is undocumented, among the first systems to have such a facility were the System Development Corporation (SDC) Q32 and the Compatible Time-Sharing System (CTSS) at MIT.

The ARPANET computer network made a large contribution to the evolution of electronic mail. An experimental inter-system transferred mail on the ARPANET shortly after its creation. In 1971 Ray Tomlinson created what was to become the standard Internet electronic mail addressing format, using the @ sign to separate mailbox names from host names.

A number of protocols were developed to deliver messages among groups of time-sharing computers over alternative transmission systems, such as UUCP and IBM&#x27;s VNET email system. Email could be passed this way between a number of networks, including ARPANET, BITNET and NSFNET, as well as to hosts connected directly to other sites via UUCP. See the history of SMTP protocol.

In addition, UUCP allowed the publication of text files that could be read by many others. The News software developed by Steve Daniel and Tom Truscott in 1979 was used to distribute news and bulletin board-like messages. This quickly grew into discussion groups, known as newsgroups, on a wide range of topics. On ARPANET and NSFNET similar discussion groups would form via mailing lists, discussing both technical issues and more culturally focused topics (such as science fiction, discussed on the sflovers mailing list).

During the early years of the Internet, email and similar mechanisms were also fundamental to allow people to access resources that were not available due to the absence of online connectivity. UUCP was often used to distribute files using the &#x27;alt.binary&#x27; groups. Also, FTP e-mail gateways allowed people that lived outside the US and Europe to download files using ftp commands written inside email messages. The file was encoded, broken in pieces and sent by email; the receiver had to reassemble and decode it later, and it was the only way for people living overseas to download items such as the earlier Linux versions using the slow dial-up connections available at the time. After the popularization of the Web and the HTTP protocol such tools were slowly abandoned.

===File sharing===
Resource or file sharing has been an important activity on computer networks from well before the Internet was established and was supported in a variety of ways including bulletin board systems (1978), Usenet (1980), Kermit (1981), and many others. The File Transfer Protocol (FTP) for use on the Internet was standardized in 1985 and is still in use today. A variety of tools were developed to aid the use of FTP by helping users discover files they might want to transfer, including the Wide Area Information Server (WAIS) in 1991, Gopher in 1991, Archie in 1991, Veronica in 1992, Jughead in 1993, Internet Relay Chat (IRC) in 1988, and eventually the World Wide Web (WWW) in 1991 with Web directories and Web search engines.

In 1999, Napster became the first peer-to-peer file sharing system. Napster used a central server for indexing and peer discovery, but the storage and transfer of files was decentralized. A variety of peer-to-peer file sharing programs and services with different levels of decentralization and anonymity followed, including: Gnutella, eDonkey2000, and Freenet in 2000, FastTrack, Kazaa, Limewire, and BitTorrent in 2001, and Poisoned in 2003.

All of these tools are general purpose and can be used to share a wide variety of content, but sharing of music files, software, and later movies and videos are major uses. And while some of this sharing is legal, large portions are not. Lawsuits and other legal actions caused Napster in 2001, eDonkey2000 in 2005, Kazaa in 2006, and Limewire in 2010 to shut down or refocus their efforts. The Pirate Bay, founded in Sweden in 2003, continues despite a trial and appeal in 2009 and 2010 that resulted in jail terms and large fines for several of its founders. File sharing remains contentious and controversial with charges of theft of intellectual property on the one hand and charges of censorship on the other.

===File hosting services===

File hosting allowed for people to expand their computer&#x27;s hard drives and &quot;host&quot; their files on a server. Most file hosting services offer free storage, as well as larger storage amount for a fee. These services have greatly expanded the internet for business and personal use.

Google Drive, launched on April 24, 2012, has become the most popular file hosting service. Google Drive allows users to store, edit, and share files with themselves and other users. Not only does this application allow for file editing, hosting, and sharing. It also acts as Google&#x27;s own free-to-access office programs, such as Google Docs, Google Slides, and Google Sheets. This application served as a useful tool for University professors and students, as well as those who are in need of Cloud storage.

Dropbox, released in June 2007 is a similar file hosting service that allows users to keep all of their files in a folder on their computer, which is synced with Dropbox&#x27;s servers. This differs from Google Drive as it is not web-browser based. Now, Dropbox works to keep workers and files in sync and efficient.

Mega, having over 200 million users, is an encrypted storage and communication system that offers users free and paid storage, with an emphasis on privacy. Being three of the largest file hosting services, Google Drive, Dropbox, and Mega all represent the core ideas and values of these services.

==Online piracy==
The earliest form of online piracy began with a P2P (peer to peer) music sharing service named Napster, launched in 1999. Sites like LimeWire, The Pirate Bay, and BitTorrent allowed for anyone to engage in online piracy, sending ripples through the media industry. With online piracy came a change in the media industry as a whole.

==Mobile telephone data traffic==
Total global mobile data traffic reached 588 exabytes during 2020, a 150-fold increase from 3.86 exabytes/year in 2010. Most recently, smartphones accounted for 95% of this mobile data traffic with video accounting for 66% by type of data. Mobile traffic travels by radio frequency to the closest cell phone tower and its base station where the radio signal is converted into an optical signal that is transmitted over high-capacity optical networking systems that convey the information to data centers. The optical backbones enable much of this traffic as well as a host of emerging mobile services including the Internet of things, 3-D virtual reality, gaming and autonomous vehicles. The most popular mobile phone application is texting, of which 2.1 trillion messages were logged in 2020. The texting phenomenon began on December 3, 1992, when Neil Papworth sent the first text message of &quot;Merry Christmas&quot; over a commercial cell phone network to the CEO of Vodafone.

The first mobile phone with Internet connectivity was the Nokia 9000 Communicator, launched in Finland in 1996. The viability of Internet services access on mobile phones was limited until prices came down from that model, and network providers started to develop systems and services conveniently accessible on phones. NTT DoCoMo in Japan launched the first mobile Internet service, i-mode, in 1999 and this is considered the birth of the mobile phone Internet services. In 2001, the mobile phone email system by Research in Motion (now BlackBerry Limited) for their BlackBerry product was launched in America. To make efficient use of the small screen and tiny keypad and one-handed operation typical of mobile phones, a specific document and networking model was created for mobile devices, the Wireless Application Protocol (WAP). Most mobile device Internet services operate using WAP. The growth of mobile phone services was initially a primarily Asian phenomenon with Japan, South Korea and Taiwan all soon finding the majority of their Internet users accessing resources by phone rather than by PC. Developing countries followed, with India, South Africa, Kenya, the Philippines, and Pakistan all reporting that the majority of their domestic users accessed the Internet from a mobile phone rather than a PC. The European and North American use of the Internet was influenced by a large installed base of personal computers, and the growth of mobile phone Internet access was more gradual, but had reached national penetration levels of 20–30% in most Western countries. The cross-over occurred in 2008, when more Internet access devices were mobile phones than personal computers. In many parts of the developing world, the ratio is as much as 10 mobile phone users to one PC user.

==Growth in demand==
Global Internet traffic continues to grow at a rapid rate, rising 23% from 2020 to 2021 when the number of active Internet users reached 4.66 billion people, representing half of the global population. Further demand for data, and the capacity to satisfy this demand, are forecast to increase to 717 terabits per second in 2021. This capacity stems from the optical amplification and WDM systems that are the common basis of virtually every metro, regional, national, international and submarine telecommunications networks. These optical networking systems have been installed throughout the 5 billion kilometers of fiber optic lines deployed around the world. Continued growth in traffic is expected for the foreseeable future from a combination of new users, increased mobile phone adoption, machine-to-machine connections, connected homes, 5G devices and the burgeoning requirement for cloud and Internet services such as Amazon, Facebook, Apple Music and YouTube.

==Historiography==

There are nearly insurmountable problems in supplying a historiography of the Internet&#x27;s development. The process of digitization represents a twofold challenge both for historiography in general and, in particular, for historical communication research. A sense of the difficulty in documenting early developments that led to the internet can be gathered from the quote:

Notable works on the subject were published by Katie Hafner and Matthew Lyon, &quot;Where Wizards Stay Up Late: The Origins Of The Internet&quot; (1996), Roy Rosenzweig, &quot;Wizards, Bureaucrats, Warriors, and Hackers: Writing the History of the Internet&quot; (1998), and Janet Abbate, &quot;Inventing the Internet&quot; (2000).

Most scholarship and literature on the Internet lists ARPANET as the prior network that was iterated on and studied to create it, although other early computer networks and experiments existed alongside or before ARPANET.

These histories of the Internet have since been characterized as teleologies or Whig history; that is, they take the present to be the end point toward which history has been unfolding based on a single cause:

In addition to these characteristics, historians have cited methodological problems arising in their work:
==See also==
* History of email
* History of hypertext
* History of telecommunication
* Index of Internet-related articles
* Internet activism
* List of Internet pioneers
* MH &amp; xmh: Email for Users &amp; Programmers
* Nerds 2.0.1 A Brief History of the Internet
* On the Internet, nobody knows you&#x27;re a dog
* Outline of the Internet
==References==
===Sources===
*
*
* 
*

=== Further reading ===

==External links==

*Internet History Timeline – Computer History Museum
*Histories of the Internet – Internet Society
*&quot;History of the Internet&quot;, a short animated film (2009)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="19" end="27" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="108" end="124" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="131" end="154" title="Internet protocol suite" label="Internet Protocol Suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="282" end="295" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="375" end="389" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="394" end="400" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="403" end="419" title="Computer science" label="Computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q913876" start="488" end="500" title="time-sharing" label="time-sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11384" start="575" end="592" title="wide area network" label="wide area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q92778" start="595" end="613" title="J. C. R. Licklider" label="J. C. R. Licklider"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030770" start="663" end="703" title="Information Processing Techniques Office" label="Information Processing Techniques Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="732" end="753" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="760" end="793" title="DARPA" label="Advanced Research Projects Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q92617" start="817" end="827" title="Paul Baran" label="Paul Baran"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="835" end="851" title="RAND Corporation" label="RAND Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240482" start="939" end="952" title="Donald Davies" label="Donald Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q193446" start="966" end="982" title="packet switching" label="packet switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967606" start="998" end="1026" title="National Physical Laboratory (United Kingdom)" label="National Physical Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q177524" start="1161" end="1168" title="ARPANET" label="ARPANET"/>
<link wikidata="Q93038" start="1190" end="1203" title="Robert Taylor (computer scientist)" label="Robert Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q92935" start="1219" end="1235" title="Lawrence Roberts (scientist)" label="Lawrence Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451440" start="1330" end="1358" title="Interface Message Processor" label="Interface Message Processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q891612" start="1389" end="1414" title="Bolt, Beranek, and Newman" label="Bolt, Beranek, and Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q62843" start="1457" end="1465" title="Bob Kahn" label="Bob Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="1542" end="1546" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178997" start="1555" end="1568" title="Steve Crocker" label="Steve Crocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q92623" start="1581" end="1591" title="Jon Postel" label="Jon Postel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1718" end="1748" title="Packet switching#Packet-switched networks" label="early packet-switched networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="1800" end="1815" title="computer network" label="data networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083180" start="1817" end="1829" title="Louis Pouzin" label="Louis Pouzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5927706" start="1834" end="1851" title="Hubert Zimmermann" label="Hubert Zimmermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067099" start="1898" end="1913" title="internetworking" label="internetworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146208" start="1921" end="1925" title="INRIA" label="IRIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177227" start="1927" end="1941" title="Peter T. Kirstein" label="Peter Kirstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="1979" end="2004" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q92766" start="2014" end="2026" title="Robert Metcalfe" label="Bob Metcalfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="2055" end="2063" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118200" start="2072" end="2093" title="PARC Universal Packet" label="PARC Universal Packet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16643941" start="2120" end="2155" title="International Network Working Group" label="International Network Working Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q92743" start="2297" end="2306" title="Vint Cerf" label="Vint Cerf"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="2315" end="2334" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153513" start="2429" end="2453" title="Internet Experiment Note" label="Internet Experiment Note"/>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="2471" end="2475" title="Request for Comments" label="RFCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8803" start="2498" end="2527" title="Transmission Control Protocol" label="Transmission Control Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8795" start="2538" end="2555" title="Internet Protocol" label="Internet Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="2583" end="2606" title="Internet protocol suite" label="Internet protocol suite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024621" start="2661" end="2669" title="CYCLADES" label="CYCLADES"/>
<link wikidata="Q32338" start="2802" end="2819" title="Leonard Kleinrock" label="Leonard Kleinrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498158" start="2876" end="2895" title="public data network" label="public data network"/>
<link wikidata="Q622993" start="2918" end="2922" title="X.25" label="X.25"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456013" start="2945" end="2957" title="Rémi Després" label="Rémi Després"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="2996" end="3023" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q121117" start="3046" end="3060" title="Supercomputer" label="supercomputing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093567" start="3163" end="3169" title="NSFNET" label="NSFNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q8767" start="3378" end="3396" title="Domain Name System" label="Domain Name System"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3406" end="3424" title="Internet protocol suite#Adoption" label="adoption of TCP/IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="3517" end="3525" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="3538" end="3563" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q42944" start="4034" end="4038" title="CERN" label="CERN"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="4042" end="4053" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q80" start="4088" end="4103" title="Tim Berners-Lee" label="Tim Berners-Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="4131" end="4145" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q93241" start="4155" end="4164" title="hypertext" label="hypertext"/>
<link wikidata="Q173106" start="4223" end="4227" title="Node (networking)" label="node"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620670" start="4325" end="4351" title="Wavelength-division multiplexing" label="wave division multiplexing"/>
<link wikidata="Q197961" start="4377" end="4395" title="Fiber-optic cable" label="fiber optic cables"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="4540" end="4555" title="email" label="electronic mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q58199" start="4557" end="4574" title="instant messaging" label="instant messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="4576" end="4604" title="voice over Internet Protocol" label="voice over Internet Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="4629" end="4639" title="video chat" label="video chat"/>
<link wikidata="Q168210" start="4673" end="4690" title="discussion forums" label="discussion forums"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="4692" end="4697" title="blogs" label="blogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220391" start="4699" end="4724" title="social networking service" label="social networking service"/>
<link wikidata="Q212930" start="4731" end="4746" title="online shopping" label="online shopping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529430" start="4830" end="4850" title="Fiber-optic communication" label="fiber-optic networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="4866" end="4872" title="Gbits/sec" label="Gbit/s"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="5074" end="5092" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220391" start="5311" end="5336" title="social networking service" label="social networking service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501061" start="5596" end="5616" title="electrical telegraph" label="electrical telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q729856" start="5699" end="5714" title="Radiotelegraphy" label="Radiotelegraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q66175" start="5772" end="5777" title="Telex" label="Telex"/>
<link wikidata="Q66196" start="5800" end="5811" title="teleprinter" label="teleprinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q681349" start="5863" end="5891" title="Point-to-point (telecommunications)" label="point-to-point communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375892" start="5904" end="5915" title="End system" label="end devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="5980" end="5998" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q316022" start="6027" end="6040" title="Harry Nyquist" label="Harry Nyquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q529886" start="6045" end="6058" title="Ralph Hartley" label="Ralph Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q131222" start="6073" end="6091" title="Information theory" label="Information theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q92760" start="6110" end="6124" title="Claude Shannon" label="Claude Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883752" start="6162" end="6174" title="underpinning" label="underpinning"/>
<link wikidata="Q738628" start="6212" end="6233" title="signal-to-noise ratio" label="signal-to-noise ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576430" start="6235" end="6244" title="Bandwidth (computing)" label="bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q118093" start="6261" end="6273" title="Transmission (telecommunications)" label="transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q179448" start="6293" end="6298" title="noise" label="noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="6353" end="6361" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5320" start="6430" end="6438" title="Switch" label="switches"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="6489" end="6499" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="6533" end="6556" title="central processing unit" label="central processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q216640" start="6567" end="6576" title="Computer terminal" label="terminals"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="6604" end="6622" title="mainframe computer" label="mainframe computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="6646" end="6651" title="modem" label="modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883100" start="6666" end="6674" title="Bell 101 modem" label="Bell 101"/>
<link wikidata="Q173285" start="6684" end="6696" title="digital data" label="digital data"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373572" start="6742" end="6757" title="Telephone line" label="telephone lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200186" start="6852" end="6868" title="Remote desktop software" label="remote computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935523" start="7118" end="7122" title="Semi-Automatic Ground Environment" label="SAGE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727367" start="7134" end="7139" title="Sabre (travel reservation system)" label="SABRE"/>
<link wikidata="Q93122" start="7173" end="7193" title="Christopher Strachey" label="Christopher Strachey"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="7206" end="7230" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford University&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q12525525" start="7250" end="7261" title="Computation" label="Computation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022019" start="7271" end="7289" title="patent application" label="patent application"/>
<link wikidata="Q913876" start="7316" end="7328" title="time-sharing" label="time-sharing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7438" end="7478" title="International Federation for Information Processing#History" label="UNESCO Information Processing Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q92778" start="7522" end="7540" title="J. C. R. Licklider" label="J. C. R. Licklider"/>
<link wikidata="Q891612" start="7573" end="7602" title="BBN Technologies" label="Bolt Beranek and Newman, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q661613" start="7665" end="7681" title="batch processing" label="batch processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q92739" start="7683" end="7696" title="John McCarthy (computer scientist)" label="John McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="7701" end="7704" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121396" start="7841" end="7871" title="Compatible Time-Sharing System" label="Compatible Time-Sharing System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755406" start="7953" end="7958" title="PLATO (computer system)" label="PLATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q955764" start="7966" end="7996" title="University of Illinois Chicago" label="University of Illinois Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="8021" end="8054" title="Advanced Research Projects Agency" label="Advanced Research Projects Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="8069" end="8104" title="United States Department of Defense" label="United States Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354917" start="8162" end="8173" title="Project MAC" label="Project MAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q20650478" start="8294" end="8316" title="Man-Computer Symbiosis" label="Man-Computer Symbiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114938" start="8539" end="8549" title="Jack Ruina" label="Jack Ruina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030770" start="8587" end="8627" title="Information Processing Techniques Office" label="Information Processing Techniques Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071445" start="8744" end="8761" title="Cheyenne Mountain" label="Cheyenne Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6046509" start="9003" end="9033" title="Intergalactic Computer Network" label="Intergalactic Computer Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q93038" start="9213" end="9226" title="Robert Taylor (computer scientist)" label="Robert Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="9378" end="9387" title="telephone" label="telephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q506273" start="9421" end="9438" title="circuit switching" label="circuit switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="9534" end="9542" title="Telegram" label="Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q603357" start="9566" end="9583" title="store and forward" label="store and forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q861042" start="9614" end="9627" title="Western Union" label="Western Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200868" start="9672" end="9681" title="Plan 55-A" label="Plan 55-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393411" start="9695" end="9712" title="message switching" label="message switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826517" start="9739" end="9746" title="AUTODIN" label="AUTODIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363179" start="9877" end="9900" title="single point of failure" label="single point of failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q92617" start="10083" end="10093" title="Paul Baran" label="Paul Baran"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="10101" end="10117" title="RAND Corporation" label="RAND Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240482" start="10481" end="10494" title="Donald Davies" label="Donald Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967606" start="10503" end="10531" title="National Physical Laboratory, UK" label="National Physical Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="10630" end="10646" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q193446" start="10667" end="10683" title="packet switching" label="packet switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1301371" start="10947" end="10963" title="computer network" label="computer network"/>
<link wikidata="Q92778" start="11281" end="11299" title="J. C. R. Licklider" label="J. C. R. Licklider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240482" start="11309" end="11322" title="Donald Davies" label="Donald Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q389772" start="11344" end="11363" title="data communications" label="data communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967606" start="11411" end="11439" title="National Physical Laboratory (United Kingdom)" label="National Physical Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318" start="11642" end="11649" title="router (computing)" label="routers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527392" start="12202" end="12222" title="end-to-end principle" label="end-to-end principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q45045" start="13077" end="13087" title="simulation" label="simulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q726868" start="13133" end="13142" title="datagram" label="datagrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q180368" start="13147" end="13157" title="Network congestion" label="congestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067099" start="13177" end="13192" title="internetworking" label="internetworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154228" start="13197" end="13218" title="secure communications" label="secure communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030770" start="13316" end="13356" title="Information Processing Techniques Office" label="Information Processing Techniques Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="13367" end="13408" title="Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency" label="Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q92778" start="13449" end="13458" title="J. C. R. Licklider" label="Licklider"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663644" start="13597" end="13627" title="System Development Corporation" label="System Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47164" start="13631" end="13643" title="Santa Monica, California" label="Santa Monica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249110" start="13653" end="13666" title="Project Genie" label="Project Genie"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="13670" end="13704" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121396" start="13722" end="13752" title="Compatible Time-Sharing System" label="Compatible Time-Sharing System"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="13764" end="13801" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q92935" start="13927" end="13940" title="Lawrence Roberts (scientist)" label="Larry Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q913876" start="14072" end="14084" title="time-sharing" label="time-sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11384" start="14090" end="14107" title="wide area network" label="wide area network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661886" start="14224" end="14265" title="Symposium on Operating Systems Principles" label="Symposium on Operating Systems Principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q252554" start="14351" end="14370" title="Wesley A. Clark" label="Wesley Clark&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451440" start="14383" end="14410" title="Interface Message Processor" label="Interface Message Processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393411" start="14430" end="14447" title="message switching" label="message switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q74225596" start="14476" end="14493" title="Roger Scantlebury" label="Roger Scantlebury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240482" start="14504" end="14523" title="Donald Davies" label="Donald Davies&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q193446" start="14584" end="14600" title="packet switching" label="packet switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q92617" start="14628" end="14638" title="Paul Baran" label="Paul Baran"/>
<link wikidata="Q861141" start="14642" end="14646" title="RAND Corporation" label="RAND"/>
<link wikidata="Q891612" start="14884" end="14909" title="Bolt Beranek &amp;amp; Newman" label="Bolt Beranek &amp;amp; Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q24950965" start="14944" end="14955" title="Frank Heart" label="Frank Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q62843" start="14960" end="14968" title="Bob Kahn" label="Bob Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="15129" end="15166" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="University of California, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q10883073" start="15174" end="15229" title="Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science" label="Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q32338" start="15242" end="15259" title="Leonard Kleinrock" label="Leonard Kleinrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q604924" start="15283" end="15310" title="Stanford Research Institute" label="Stanford Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q92614" start="15329" end="15346" title="Douglas Engelbart" label="Douglas Engelbart"/>
<link wikidata="Q74195" start="15350" end="15360" title="Menlo Park, California" label="Menlo Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q263064" start="15527" end="15566" title="University of California, Santa Barbara" label="University of California, Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q168515" start="15583" end="15601" title="University of Utah" label="University of Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q294502" start="15660" end="15668" title="ALOHAnet" label="ALOHAnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q92977" start="15701" end="15716" title="Norman Abramson" label="Norman Abramson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000129" start="15735" end="15765" title="University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa" label="University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="15840" end="15846" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178997" start="15849" end="15862" title="Steve Crocker" label="Steve Crocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q92623" start="15938" end="15948" title="Jon Postel" label="Jon Postel"/>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="15990" end="16010" title="Request for Comments" label="Request for Comments"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582530" start="16280" end="16303" title="Network Control Protocol (ARPANET)" label="Network Control Program"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16385" end="16435" title="Computer Networks: The Heralds of Resource Sharing" label="Computer Networks: The Heralds of Resource Sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037544" start="17004" end="17010" title="NORSAR" label="NORSAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q511228" start="17041" end="17046" title="Tanum Municipality" label="Tanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177227" start="17079" end="17093" title="Peter T. Kirstein" label="Peter Kirstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="17119" end="17144" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17174" end="17199" title="Internet in the United Kingdom#History" label="British academic networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172305" start="17238" end="17254" title="resource sharing" label="resource sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q847526" start="17458" end="17473" title="queueing theory" label="queueing theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819528" start="17706" end="17719" title="Merit Network" label="Merit Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="17982" end="17999" title="State of Michigan" label="State of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="18008" end="18035" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="18176" end="18179" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="18180" end="18198" title="mainframe computer" label="mainframe computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="18214" end="18236" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q485172" start="18240" end="18249" title="Ann Arbor" label="Ann Arbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q349055" start="18254" end="18276" title="Wayne State University" label="Wayne State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="18280" end="18287" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129191" start="18324" end="18327" title="Control Data Corporation" label="CDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q270222" start="18341" end="18366" title="Michigan State University" label="Michigan State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q871265" start="18370" end="18382" title="East Lansing" label="East Lansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860391" start="18687" end="18693" title="Tymnet" label="Tymnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696386" start="18698" end="18705" title="Telenet" label="Telenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498158" start="18706" end="18725" title="public data network" label="public data network"/>
<link wikidata="Q622993" start="18728" end="18732" title="X.25" label="X.25"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="18783" end="18791" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="18823" end="18829" title="TCP/IP" label="TCP/IP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18845" end="18876" title="List of colleges and universities in Michigan#Public colleges and universities" label="public universities in Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093567" start="18950" end="18956" title="NSFNET" label="NSFNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024621" start="19012" end="19020" title="CYCLADES" label="CYCLADES"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083180" start="19101" end="19113" title="Louis Pouzin" label="Louis Pouzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067099" start="19221" end="19236" title="internetworking" label="internetworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527392" start="19317" end="19337" title="end-to-end principle" label="end-to-end principle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19465" end="19485" title="Datagrams#Packets vs. datagrams" label="unreliable datagrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="19535" end="19541" title="TCP/IP" label="TCP/IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456013" start="19673" end="19685" title="Rémi Després" label="Rémi Després"/>
<link wikidata="Q4007363" start="19744" end="19804" title="International Telegraph and Telephone Consultative Committee" label="International Telegraph and Telephone Consultative Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q622993" start="19828" end="19832" title="X.25" label="X.25"/>
<link wikidata="Q777849" start="19888" end="19903" title="virtual circuit" label="virtual circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107679" start="20069" end="20074" title="JANET" label="JANET"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746884" start="20113" end="20152" title="national research and education network" label="national research and education network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696386" start="20249" end="20256" title="Telenet" label="Telenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498158" start="20306" end="20325" title="public data network" label="public data network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204330" start="20336" end="20343" title="DATAPAC" label="DATAPAC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20358" end="20366" title="Packet switching#TRANSPAC" label="TRANSPAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q622993" start="20378" end="20382" title="X.25" label="X.25"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597375" start="20407" end="20411" title="X.75" label="X.75"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="20538" end="20557" title="Post Office Telecommunications" label="British Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q861042" start="20559" end="20586" title="Western Union" label="Western Union International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860391" start="20592" end="20598" title="Tymnet" label="Tymnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052298" start="20690" end="20727" title="International Packet Switched Service" label="International Packet Switched Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696386" start="20964" end="20971" title="Telenet" label="Telenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q66196" start="21166" end="21177" title="teleprinter" label="teleprinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696386" start="21282" end="21289" title="Telenet" label="Telenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122074" start="21294" end="21304" title="CompuServe" label="CompuServe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860391" start="21411" end="21417" title="Tymnet" label="Tymnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="21501" end="21516" title="e-mail" label="electronic mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q287198" start="21645" end="21659" title="online chat" label="real-time chat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009386" start="21669" end="21681" title="CB Simulator" label="CB Simulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q27585" start="21717" end="21731" title="America Online" label="America Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922491" start="21742" end="21749" title="Prodigy (ISP)" label="Prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q210499" start="21827" end="21848" title="bulletin board system" label="bulletin board system"/>
<link wikidata="Q729805" start="21902" end="21909" title="FidoNet" label="FidoNet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1487" start="21974" end="21980" title="hacker" label="hacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939892" start="21986" end="22008" title="amateur radio operator" label="amateur radio operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q168751" start="22059" end="22074" title="Duke University" label="Duke University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817879" start="22076" end="22088" title="Tom Truscott" label="Tom Truscott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194839" start="22093" end="22102" title="Jim Ellis (computing)" label="Jim Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q844595" start="22133" end="22145" title="Bourne shell" label="Bourne shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047966" start="22201" end="22205" title="UUCP" label="UUCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q192334" start="22229" end="22272" title="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill" label="University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q729805" start="22472" end="22479" title="FidoNet" label="FidoNet"/>
<link wikidata="Q622993" start="22603" end="22607" title="X.25" label="X.25"/>
<link wikidata="Q177524" start="22622" end="22629" title="ARPANET" label="ARPANET"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357779" start="22711" end="22716" title="CSNET" label="CSNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q796027" start="22721" end="22727" title="BITNET" label="BITNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631537" start="22838" end="22853" title="Sublink Network" label="Sublink Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083180" start="23409" end="23421" title="Louis Pouzin" label="Louis Pouzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024621" start="23436" end="23444" title="CYCLADES" label="CYCLADES"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240482" start="23486" end="23499" title="Donald Davies" label="Donald Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16643941" start="23520" end="23555" title="International Network Working Group" label="International Network Working Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q92743" start="23596" end="23605" title="Vint Cerf" label="Vint Cerf"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="23611" end="23630" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q891612" start="23651" end="23654" title="Bolt Beranek &amp;amp; Newman" label="BBN"/>
<link wikidata="Q74225596" start="23674" end="23691" title="Roger Scantlebury" label="Roger Scantlebury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967606" start="23697" end="23700" title="National Physical Laboratory (United Kingdom)" label="NPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5927706" start="23723" end="23740" title="Hubert Zimmermann" label="Hubert Zimmermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146208" start="23746" end="23750" title="French Institute for Research in Computer Science and Automation" label="IRIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067099" start="23781" end="23788" title="catenet" label="catenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q92766" start="23821" end="23833" title="Robert Metcalfe" label="Bob Metcalfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q750428" start="23837" end="23847" title="PARC (company)" label="Xerox PARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="23869" end="23877" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118200" start="23882" end="23903" title="PARC Universal Packet" label="PARC Universal Packet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067099" start="23914" end="23929" title="internetworking" label="internetworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q62843" start="23931" end="23939" title="Robert E. Kahn" label="Bob Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="23948" end="23953" title="DARPA" label="DARPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067099" start="24155" end="24170" title="internetworking" label="internetworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q8795" start="24490" end="24518" title="Transmission Control Program" label="Transmission Control Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q625306" start="24735" end="24756" title="simplex communication" label="simplex communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q193196" start="25164" end="25189" title="University College London" label="University College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q63887933" start="25275" end="25295" title="PRNET" label="Packet Radio network"/>
<link wikidata="Q604924" start="25360" end="25387" title="SRI International" label="Stanford Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975268" start="25493" end="25509" title="Packet Radio Van" label="Packet Radio Van"/>
<link wikidata="Q63865474" start="25546" end="25579" title="Atlantic Packet Satellite Network" label="Atlantic Packet Satellite Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574347" start="25723" end="25734" title="Yogen Dalal" label="Yogen Dalal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22725" start="25800" end="25807" title="routing" label="routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8803" start="25941" end="25970" title="Transmission Control Protocol" label="Transmission Control Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8795" start="25985" end="26002" title="Internet Protocol" label="Internet Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11103" start="26030" end="26039" title="IPv4" label="Version 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="26057" end="26061" title="IETF" label="IETF"/>
<link wikidata="Q63865474" start="26133" end="26139" title="SATNET" label="SATNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q7532" start="26469" end="26480" title="Judy Estrin" label="Judy Estrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q92612" start="26482" end="26494" title="Richard Karp" label="Richard Karp"/>
<link wikidata="Q19956414" start="26500" end="26514" title="Gérard Le Lann" label="Gérard Le Lann"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26596" end="26633" title="Internet protocol suite#Adoption" label="development of TCP/IP implementations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251388" start="26980" end="27009" title="Defense Communications Agency" label="Defense Communications Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="27028" end="27049" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="27064" end="27077" title="U.S. military" label="U.S. military"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446027" start="27143" end="27149" title="MILNET" label="MILNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074813" start="27213" end="27220" title="NIPRNET" label="NIPRNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201480" start="27256" end="27263" title="SIPRNET" label="SIPRNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702559" start="27268" end="27273" title="JWICS" label="JWICS"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="27736" end="27765" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="Digital Equipment Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="27770" end="27785" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="Hewlett-Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="28062" end="28077" title="Federal government of the United States" label="U.S. government"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="28083" end="28128" title="National Aeronautics and Space Administration" label="National Aeronautics and Space Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="28141" end="28168" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="28184" end="28204" title="United States Department of Energy" label="Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28428" end="28448" title="NASA Science Network" label="NASA Science Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357779" start="28464" end="28469" title="CSNET" label="CSNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376985" start="28490" end="28513" title="Energy Sciences Network" label="Energy Sciences Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152931" start="28696" end="28702" title="DECnet" label="DECnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357779" start="29292" end="29316" title="CSNET" label="Computer Science Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q622993" start="29389" end="29393" title="X.25" label="X.25"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093567" start="29615" end="29621" title="NSFNET" label="NSFNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360517" start="29635" end="29643" title="Internet backbone" label="backbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q121117" start="29673" end="29687" title="supercomputer" label="supercomputing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819528" start="30121" end="30134" title="Merit Network" label="Merit Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="30155" end="30158" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089784" start="30160" end="30163" title="MCI Communications" label="MCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="30173" end="30190" title="State of Michigan" label="State of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440263" start="30236" end="30261" title="Federal Internet Exchange" label="Federal Internet Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120660" start="30787" end="30794" title="PSINet" label="PSI Net"/>
<link wikidata="Q873660" start="31105" end="31114" title="Internet2" label="Internet2"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107679" start="31140" end="31145" title="JANET" label="JANET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093567" start="31609" end="31615" title="NSFNET" label="NSFNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q85791082" start="32008" end="32017" title="Optelecom" label="Optelecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359305" start="32113" end="32134" title="Optical amplifier" label="optical amplification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620670" start="32190" end="32222" title="Wavelength-division multiplexing" label="wave division multiplexing (WDM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85791082" start="32322" end="32331" title="Optelecom" label="Optelecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q74752542" start="32379" end="32393" title="David R. Huber" label="David R. Huber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091783" start="32416" end="32427" title="Ciena Corp." label="Ciena Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q6052298" start="32880" end="32917" title="International Packet Switched Service" label="International Packet Switched Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047966" start="33169" end="33173" title="UUCP" label="UUCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q729805" start="33177" end="33184" title="FidoNet" label="FidoNet"/>
<link wikidata="Q42283" start="33335" end="33357" title="File Transfer Protocol" label="File Transfer Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385050" start="33508" end="33533" title="Exterior Gateway Protocol" label="Exterior Gateway Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11155" start="33576" end="33599" title="Border Gateway Protocol" label="Border Gateway Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q646589" start="33732" end="33762" title="Classless Inter-Domain Routing" label="Classless Inter-Domain Routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711430" start="33854" end="33871" title="supernet" label="route aggregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q290066" start="33896" end="33909" title="routing table" label="routing table"/>
<link wikidata="Q210793" start="33942" end="33956" title="MOS transistor" label="MOS transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="34129" end="34134" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="34136" end="34145" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469765" start="34201" end="34222" title="optical communication" label="optical communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q197961" start="34241" end="34259" title="Fiber-optic cable" label="fiber optic cables"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="34271" end="34276" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359305" start="34282" end="34299" title="optical amplifier" label="optical amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="34362" end="34377" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q9021" start="34470" end="34480" title="Max Planck" label="Max Planck"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="34488" end="34492" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="34510" end="34515" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q9130" start="34565" end="34582" title="Erwin Schrödinger" label="Erwin Schrödinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q40904" start="34584" end="34601" title="Werner Heisenberg" label="Werner Heisenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="34627" end="34644" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q923545" start="34760" end="34780" title="spontaneous emission" label="spontaneous emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q47616" start="34814" end="34832" title="Incandescent light bulb" label="incandescent light"/>
<link wikidata="Q853656" start="34857" end="34876" title="stimulated emission" label="stimulated emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="34920" end="34939" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q546175" start="34956" end="34968" title="Gordon Gould" label="Gordon Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359305" start="35046" end="35067" title="optical amplification" label="optical amplification"/>
<link wikidata="Q315399" start="35277" end="35292" title="Theodore Maiman" label="Theodore Maiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q85791082" start="35357" end="35366" title="Optelecom" label="Optelecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5842736" start="35452" end="35465" title="Corning Glass" label="Corning Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q319642" start="35683" end="35690" title="Chevron Corporation" label="Chevron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3759492" start="35743" end="35746" title="GTE" label="GTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="35882" end="35885" title="LED" label="LED"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="35930" end="35939" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q853958" start="35941" end="35944" title="NTT Docomo" label="NTT"/>
<link wikidata="Q207770" start="35949" end="35956" title="Pirelli" label="Perelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037544" start="36112" end="36118" title="NORSAR" label="NORSAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770047" start="36119" end="36123" title="Norwegian Defence Research Establishment" label="NDRE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177227" start="36128" end="36149" title="Peter T. Kirstein" label="Peter Kirstein&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36268" end="36300" title="Internet in the United Kingdom#Early years" label="British academic research groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q42944" start="36371" end="36375" title="CERN" label="CERN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357779" start="36920" end="36944" title="CSNET" label="Computer Science Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093567" start="37283" end="37289" title="National Science Foundation Network" label="NSFNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146208" start="37323" end="37328" title="French Institute for Research in Computer Science and Automation" label="INRIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263937" start="37334" end="37347" title="Piet Beertema" label="Piet Beertema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054410" start="37355" end="37389" title="Centrum Wiskunde &amp;amp; Informatica" label="Centrum Wiskunde &amp;amp; Informatica"/>
<link wikidata="Q18280732" start="37453" end="37462" title="Ben Segal (computer scientist)" label="Ben Segal"/>
<link wikidata="Q319450" start="37539" end="37544" title="EUnet" label="EUnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229666" start="37682" end="37692" title="Len Bosack" label="Len Bosack"/>
<link wikidata="Q173395" start="37727" end="37732" title="Cisco Systems" label="Cisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480188" start="37973" end="37981" title="NORDUnet" label="NORDUnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q961012" start="38250" end="38254" title="RIPE" label="RIPE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4539" start="38413" end="38424" title="cooperative" label="cooperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746884" start="38466" end="38505" title="national research and education network" label="national research and education network"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107679" start="38514" end="38519" title="JANET" label="JANET"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149224" start="38565" end="38588" title="Coloured Book protocols" label="Coloured Book protocols"/>
<link wikidata="Q3011108" start="38773" end="38782" title="DANTE" label="EuropaNet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368604" start="38826" end="38864" title="European Academic and Research Network" label="European Academic and Research Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034868" start="38876" end="38880" title="TERENA" label="RARE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046856" start="38949" end="38954" title="EBONE" label="EBONE"/>
<link wikidata="Q85851705" start="39087" end="39129" title="Protocol Wars" label="polarized over the issue of which standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q93312" start="39135" end="39144" title="OSI model" label="OSI model"/>
<link wikidata="Q469614" start="39630" end="39635" title="JUNET" label="JUNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047966" start="39888" end="39892" title="UUCP" label="UUCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649925" start="40181" end="40187" title="AARNet" label="AARNet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894448" start="40214" end="40257" title="Australian Vice-Chancellors&amp;#x27; Committee" label="Australian Vice-Chancellors&amp;#x27; Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149224" start="40350" end="40373" title="Coloured Book protocols" label="Coloured Book protocols"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="40609" end="40629" title="Developing country" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40652" end="40666" title="digital divide#Global digital divide" label="digital divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052298" start="40985" end="40989" title="International Packet Switched Service" label="IPSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="41755" end="41760" title="USAID" label="USAID"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520758" start="41781" end="41798" title="Leland Initiative" label="Leland Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006" start="41873" end="41879" title="Guinea" label="Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="41893" end="41903" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="41908" end="41914" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349167" start="41922" end="41945" title="satellite earth station" label="satellite earth station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="41968" end="41979" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="41984" end="41989" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q384211" start="42047" end="42054" title="AFRINIC" label="AFRINIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="42073" end="42082" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979764" start="42578" end="42631" title="NEPAD" label="New Partnership for Africa&amp;#x27;s Development (NEPAD)"/>
<link wikidata="Q726801" start="42750" end="42797" title="APNIC" label="Asia Pacific Network Information Centre (APNIC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955" start="43258" end="43277" title="Tsinghua University" label="Tsinghua University"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="43429" end="43448" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q836854" start="43573" end="43587" title="Internet censorship in the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="content filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q749257" start="43629" end="43645" title="Internet Society" label="Internet Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q48320" start="43664" end="43668" title="Kobe" label="Kobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692130" start="43690" end="43697" title="TechNet (computer network)" label="TECHNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311100" start="43858" end="43927" title="LACNIC" label="the Latin American and Caribbean Internet Addresses Registry (LACNIC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047966" start="44405" end="44409" title="UUCP" label="UUCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052298" start="44426" end="44430" title="International Packet Switched Service" label="IPSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q177524" start="44523" end="44530" title="ARPANET" label="ARPANET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093567" start="44535" end="44541" title="NSFNET" label="NSFNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="44601" end="44626" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120660" start="44671" end="44677" title="PSINet" label="PSINet"/>
<link wikidata="Q933565" start="44679" end="44684" title="UUNET" label="UUNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q6998829" start="44686" end="44692" title="Netcom (USA)" label="Netcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231483" start="44698" end="44713" title="Portal Software" label="Portal Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q193162" start="44838" end="44849" title="Usenet" label="Usenet News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881255" start="44874" end="44882" title="MCI Mail" label="MCI Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7775916" start="45031" end="45040" title="The World (internet service provider)" label="The World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120660" start="45894" end="45900" title="PSINet" label="PSINet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45902" end="45910" title="UUNET#Early existence" label="Alternet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093567" start="46002" end="46008" title="NSFNET" label="NSFNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115373" start="46085" end="46113" title="Commercial Internet eXchange" label="Commercial Internet eXchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714131" start="46121" end="46148" title="MAE-East" label="Metropolitan Area Exchanges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433061" start="46167" end="46187" title="Network Access Point" label="Network Access Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q18156802" start="46601" end="46641" title="VBNS" label="very high speed Backbone Network Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643438" start="46805" end="46828" title="The Superhighway Summit" label="The Superhighway Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="46838" end="46842" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928925" start="47045" end="47069" title="Information Superhighway" label="Information Superhighway"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="47162" end="47176" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q80" start="47180" end="47195" title="Tim Berners-Lee" label="Tim Berners-Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q42944" start="47199" end="47203" title="CERN" label="CERN"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645174" start="47452" end="47477" title="List of websites founded before 1995" label="websites for everyday use"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="47688" end="47711" title="cellphone" label="mobile cellular devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="47905" end="47917" title="Social media" label="Social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q193663" start="48155" end="48166" title="analog tape" label="analog tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q173285" start="48170" end="48177" title="digital data" label="digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q234870" start="48178" end="48190" title="optical disc" label="optical disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="48193" end="48196" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="48221" end="48232" title="floppy disc" label="floppy disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="48236" end="48238" title="CD" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q59" start="48297" end="48300" title="PHP" label="PHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005" start="48309" end="48319" title="JavaScript" label="JavaScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="48324" end="48328" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q134471" start="48351" end="48355" title="AJAX" label="AJAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="48357" end="48363" title="HTML 4" label="HTML 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q46441" start="48385" end="48388" title="CSS" label="CSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q271680" start="48403" end="48421" title="software framework" label="software framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q714827" start="48579" end="48591" title="mailing list" label="mailing list"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="48594" end="48599" title="email" label="email"/>
<link wikidata="Q114352755" start="48602" end="48632" title="Internet GIS" label="creating and distributing maps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580938" start="48649" end="48657" title="MapQuest" label="MapQuest"/>
<link wikidata="Q484847" start="48659" end="48669" title="e-commerce" label="e-commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q212930" start="48688" end="48703" title="online shopping" label="online shopping"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="48705" end="48711" title="Amazon.com" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q58024" start="48716" end="48720" title="eBay" label="eBay"/>
<link wikidata="Q168210" start="48735" end="48747" title="online forum" label="online forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q183398" start="48753" end="48767" title="bulletin board" label="bulletin board"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="48796" end="48800" title="blog" label="blog"/>
<link wikidata="Q380153" start="49203" end="49215" title="dynamic HTML" label="dynamic HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q174989" start="49237" end="49247" title="filesystem" label="filesystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q192588" start="49260" end="49279" title="relational database" label="relational database"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411939" start="49300" end="49320" title="Server Side Includes" label="Server Side Includes"/>
<link wikidata="Q264364" start="49324" end="49327" title="Common Gateway Interface" label="CGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q189210" start="49341" end="49356" title="web application" label="web application"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268980" start="49370" end="49398" title="dynamic programming language" label="dynamic programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8811" start="49400" end="49408" title="HTML 3.2" label="HTML 3.2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440657" start="49432" end="49438" title="Framing (World Wide Web)" label="frames"/>
<link wikidata="Q918038" start="49481" end="49490" title="guestbook" label="guestbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192" start="49504" end="49507" title="GIF" label="GIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="49595" end="49600" title="email" label="email"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209289" start="49615" end="49636" title="server side scripting" label="server side scripting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662525" start="49649" end="49662" title="shared server" label="shared server"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714343" start="49717" end="49729" title="mailto" label="mailto forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q570871" start="49740" end="49753" title="email client" label="email program"/>
<link wikidata="Q107885" start="49798" end="49820" title="speculative investment" label="speculative investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q207781" start="49821" end="49827" title="investment bubble" label="bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194970" start="49873" end="49902" title="dot-com company" label="&amp;quot;dot-com&amp;quot; companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q159371" start="49927" end="49931" title=".com" label=".com"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="49938" end="49954" title="top level domain" label="top level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q975735" start="50049" end="50060" title="stock value" label="stock value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020018" start="50077" end="50089" title="market crash" label="market crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q79721" start="50101" end="50115" title="dot-com bubble" label="dot-com bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393866" start="50229" end="50258" title="history of the World Wide Web" label="history of the World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089478" start="50383" end="50406" title="IPv4 address exhaustion" label="IPv4 address exhaustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="50528" end="50531" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q367204" start="50559" end="50572" title="address space" label="address space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551624" start="50648" end="50652" title="IPv6" label="IPv6"/>
<link wikidata="Q251212" start="51169" end="51172" title="Internet of things" label="IoT"/>
<link wikidata="Q131164" start="51286" end="51293" title="Web 2.0" label="Web 2.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="51525" end="51535" title="hard drive" label="hard drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="51581" end="51592" title="floppy disc" label="floppy disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q79735" start="51609" end="51617" title="megabyte" label="megabyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q79738" start="51622" end="51630" title="gigabyte" label="gigabyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799" start="51653" end="51661" title="terabyte" label="terabyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="51665" end="51668" title="Random-access memory" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q79726" start="51686" end="51694" title="kilobyte" label="kilobyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q79984" start="51745" end="51753" title="Ethernet" label="Ethernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="52236" end="52243" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="52248" end="52256" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q52" start="52318" end="52327" title="Wikipedia" label="Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q499024" start="52685" end="52701" title="Non-volatile RAM" label="Non-volatile RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q487343" start="52882" end="52899" title="solid-state drive" label="solid-state drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q296782" start="53049" end="53052" title="Arm (company)" label="Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="53159" end="53182" title="ARM architecture family" label="ARM architecture family"/>
<link wikidata="Q35127" start="53311" end="53318" title="website" label="website"/>
<link wikidata="Q579716" start="53335" end="53357" title="user-generated content" label="user-generated content"/>
<link wikidata="Q216378" start="53396" end="53405" title="usability" label="usability"/>
<link wikidata="Q557770" start="53411" end="53427" title="Web API" label="interoperability"/>
<link wikidata="Q65084179" start="53521" end="53534" title="Darcy DiNucci" label="Darcy DiNucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q845921" start="53552" end="53581" title="information architecture" label="electronic information design"/>
<link wikidata="Q347691" start="53701" end="53718" title="Tim O&amp;#x27;Reilly" label="Tim O&amp;#x27;Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086192" start="53751" end="53769" title="Web 2.0 Summit" label="Web 2.0 Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q614414" start="53797" end="53810" title="John Battelle" label="John Battelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="54553" end="54565" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q579716" start="54590" end="54612" title="user-generated content" label="user-generated content"/>
<link wikidata="Q210980" start="54618" end="54635" title="virtual community" label="virtual community"/>
<link wikidata="Q15824073" start="54713" end="54720" title="Content (media and publishing)" label="content"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220391" start="54750" end="54775" title="social networking service" label="social networking service"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="54778" end="54782" title="blog" label="blog"/>
<link wikidata="Q171" start="54785" end="54789" title="wiki" label="wiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q494291" start="54792" end="54804" title="Folksonomy" label="folksonomies"/>
<link wikidata="Q559856" start="54806" end="54819" title="video sharing" label="video sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q193424" start="54827" end="54842" title="Web service" label="hosted services"/>
<link wikidata="Q189210" start="54844" end="54859" title="Web application" label="Web application"/>
<link wikidata="Q821080" start="54866" end="54873" title="Mashup (web application hybrid)" label="mashups"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704386" start="54875" end="54885" title="Terry Flew" label="Terry Flew"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="55119" end="55126" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136" start="55147" end="55153" title="Reddit" label="Reddit"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="55277" end="55290" title="voice over IP" label="voice over IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q275969" start="56096" end="56109" title="crowdsourcing" label="crowdsourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q178470" start="56372" end="56379" title="Netbook" label="Netbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477770" start="56382" end="56391" title="ultrabook" label="ultrabook"/>
<link wikidata="Q79697" start="56405" end="56407" title="4G" label="4G"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="56412" end="56417" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q166142" start="56614" end="56617" title="App (computing)" label="App"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814081" start="56728" end="56737" title="App store" label="App store"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="57156" end="57171" title="low Earth orbit" label="low Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q461777" start="57224" end="57237" title="Timothy Creamer" label="T. J. Creamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="57305" end="57332" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q306639" start="57662" end="57669" title="Ku band" label="Ku band"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="57851" end="57864" title="Voice over IP" label="Voice over IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q835696" start="57987" end="58005" title="Deep Space Network" label="Deep Space Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q55320" start="58145" end="58170" title="delay-tolerant networking" label="delay-tolerant networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q584093" start="58394" end="58407" title="space weather" label="space weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q92743" start="59131" end="59140" title="Vint Cerf" label="Vint Cerf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518709" start="59219" end="59224" title="EPOXI" label="EPOXI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570871" start="59404" end="59432" title="global network" label="globally distributed network"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="59670" end="59701" title="Internet Engineering Task Force" label="Internet Engineering Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q242540" start="59868" end="59903" title="Internet Assigned Numbers Authority" label="Internet Assigned Numbers Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q485750" start="60001" end="60052" title="Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers" label="Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q873636" start="60119" end="60129" title="name space" label="name space"/>
<link wikidata="Q11135" start="60152" end="60183" title="IP address" label="Internet Protocol address space"/>
<link wikidata="Q8767" start="60192" end="60210" title="Domain Name System" label="Domain Name System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211090" start="60460" end="60486" title="Network Information Center" label="Network Information Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q604924" start="60496" end="60523" title="Stanford Research Institute" label="Stanford Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q74195" start="60547" end="60569" title="Menlo Park, California" label="Menlo Park, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q92623" start="60582" end="60597" title="Jonathan Postel" label="Jonathan Postel"/>
<link wikidata="Q604924" start="60800" end="60817" title="SRI International" label="SRI International"/>
<link wikidata="Q8767" start="60937" end="60955" title="Domain Name System" label="Domain Name System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140555" start="60979" end="60995" title="Paul Mockapetris" label="Paul Mockapetris"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="61123" end="61139" title="top-level domain" label="top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q31635" start="61151" end="61155" title=".mil" label=".mil"/>
<link wikidata="Q31643" start="61157" end="61161" title=".gov" label=".gov"/>
<link wikidata="Q216625" start="61163" end="61167" title=".edu" label=".edu"/>
<link wikidata="Q32131" start="61169" end="61173" title=".org" label=".org"/>
<link wikidata="Q31835" start="61175" end="61179" title=".net" label=".net"/>
<link wikidata="Q159371" start="61181" end="61185" title=".com" label=".com"/>
<link wikidata="Q37861" start="61190" end="61193" title=".us" label=".us"/>
<link wikidata="Q32867" start="61195" end="61210" title="root nameserver" label="root nameserver"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="61266" end="61301" title="United States Department of Defense" label="United States Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467284" start="61536" end="61559" title="Network Solutions" label="Network Solutions, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="62661" end="62682" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="62768" end="62795" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211090" start="62854" end="62862" title="InterNIC" label="InterNIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467284" start="63035" end="63052" title="Network Solutions" label="Network Solutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843047" start="63107" end="63115" title="AT&amp;amp;T Corporation" label="AT&amp;amp;T"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501547" start="63163" end="63178" title="General Atomics" label="General Atomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="63230" end="63234" title="IETF" label="IETF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504968" start="63236" end="63244" title="RIPE NCC" label="RIPE NCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q726801" start="63246" end="63251" title="APNIC" label="APNIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440307" start="63261" end="63287" title="Federal Networking Council" label="Federal Networking Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q282503" start="63695" end="63733" title="American Registry for Internet Numbers" label="American Registry for Internet Numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="63844" end="63871" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q485750" start="64028" end="64033" title="ICANN" label="ICANN"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084016" start="64048" end="64070" title="non-profit corporation" label="non-profit corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q503577" start="64089" end="64125" title="United States Department of Commerce" label="United States Department of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667943" start="64365" end="64368" title="Internet Architecture Board" label="IAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="64961" end="64992" title="Internet Engineering Task Force" label="Internet Engineering Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667943" start="65138" end="65165" title="Internet Architecture Board" label="Internet Architecture Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="65177" end="65212" title="Internet Engineering Steering Group" label="Internet Engineering Steering Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667993" start="65229" end="65257" title="Internet Research Task Force" label="Internet Research Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q749257" start="66111" end="66127" title="Internet Society" label="Internet Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="66965" end="67000" title="Internet Engineering Steering Group" label="Internet Engineering Steering Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667943" start="67016" end="67043" title="Internet Architecture Board" label="Internet Architecture Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667993" start="67055" end="67083" title="Internet Research Task Force" label="Internet Research Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667993" start="67099" end="67131" title="Internet Research Steering Group" label="Internet Research Steering Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="67271" end="67275" title="Request for Comments" label="RFCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="67462" end="67466" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q92623" start="67567" end="67577" title="Jon Postel" label="Jon Postel"/>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="67589" end="67599" title="RFC Editor" label="RFC Editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q749257" start="68434" end="68450" title="Internet Society" label="Internet Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="69146" end="69177" title="Internet Engineering Task Force" label="Internet Engineering Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667943" start="69190" end="69217" title="Internet Architecture Board" label="Internet Architecture Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="69229" end="69264" title="Internet Engineering Steering Group" label="Internet Engineering Steering Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667993" start="69281" end="69309" title="Internet Research Task Force" label="Internet Research Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q81414" start="69375" end="69389" title="Internet model" label="Internet model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633452" start="69544" end="69570" title="Internet governance" label="Internet&amp;#x27;s governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="70195" end="70228" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q212971" start="70815" end="70835" title="Request for Comments" label="Request for Comments"/>
<link wikidata="Q689182" start="70860" end="70899" title="World Summit on the Information Society" label="World Summit on the Information Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="70909" end="70914" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354096" start="70930" end="70955" title="Internet Governance Forum" label="Internet Governance Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q81066" start="70980" end="71012" title="United Nations Secretary General" label="United Nations Secretary General"/>
<link wikidata="Q80" start="71497" end="71512" title="Tim Berners-Lee" label="Tim Berners-Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3742989" start="71659" end="71684" title="World Wide Web Foundation" label="World Wide Web Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q76448687" start="71884" end="71904" title="Contract for the Web" label="Contract for the Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395241" start="72405" end="72416" title="politicized" label="politicized"/>
<link wikidata="Q175331" start="72621" end="72635" title="mass protest" label="public protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033959" start="72640" end="72650" title="canvassing" label="canvassing"/>
<link wikidata="Q189760" start="72666" end="72670" title="vote" label="vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q112983147" start="72947" end="72961" title="whistleblowing" label="whistleblowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q22696" start="73016" end="73026" title="internet censorship" label="censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="73031" end="73048" title="crime" label="Criminal activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="73053" end="73062" title="terrorism" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q44554" start="73078" end="73093" title="law enforcement" label="law enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425056" start="73133" end="73150" title="mass surveillance" label="mass surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q28549308" start="73177" end="73186" title="fake news" label="fake news"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="73232" end="73265" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="73332" end="73357" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q853467" start="73447" end="73461" title="net neutrality" label="net neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677200" start="73526" end="73545" title="municipal broadband" label="municipal broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648261" start="73560" end="73584" title="Susan P. Crawford" label="Professor Susan Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q49122" start="73619" end="73637" title="Harvard Law School" label="Harvard Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="73929" end="73944" title="Barack Obama" label="President Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q853467" start="74056" end="74070" title="net neutrality" label="net neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="74093" end="74104" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="74145" end="74158" title="U.S. Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="74159" end="74161" title="United States House of Representatives" label="HR"/>
<link wikidata="Q18740956" start="74162" end="74183" title="List of bills in the 114th United States Congress" label="discussion draft bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="74321" end="74346" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="74377" end="74384" title="AP News" label="AP News"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74475" end="74500" title="Common carrier#Telecommunications" label="Title II (common carrier)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989681" start="74508" end="74534" title="Communications Act of 1934" label="Communications Act of 1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266169" start="74684" end="74702" title="Telecommunications service provider" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q16255546" start="74721" end="74732" title="Tom Wheeler" label="Tom Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q853467" start="74762" end="74776" title="net neutrality" label="net neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="74856" end="74874" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q853467" start="74931" end="74945" title="net neutrality" label="net neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74958" end="74983" title="Common carrier#Telecommunications" label="Title II (common carrier)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989681" start="74991" end="75017" title="Communications Act of 1934" label="Communications Act of 1934"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75022" end="75033" title="Telecommunications policy of the United States#Broadband deployment policy objectives" label="Section 706"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="75041" end="75071" title="Communications Act of 1934#Telecommunications Act of 1996" label="Telecommunications act of 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q16255546" start="75107" end="75118" title="Tom Wheeler" label="Tom Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="75194" end="75209" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="First Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6998488" start="75445" end="75459" title="Net neutrality in the United States" label="Net Neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q9158" start="75640" end="75645" title="Email" label="Email"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047507" start="75672" end="75690" title="killer application" label="killer application"/>
<link wikidata="Q913876" start="75828" end="75840" title="time-sharing" label="time-sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="75841" end="75859" title="mainframe computer" label="mainframe computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663644" start="75971" end="76001" title="System Development Corporation" label="System Development Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819287" start="76008" end="76011" title="AN/FSQ-32" label="Q32"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121396" start="76020" end="76050" title="Compatible Time-Sharing System" label="Compatible Time-Sharing System"/>
<link wikidata="Q92631" start="76256" end="76269" title="Ray Tomlinson" label="Ray Tomlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q10714" start="76364" end="76370" title="@" label="@ sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047966" start="76558" end="76562" title="UUCP" label="UUCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="76567" end="76570" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969114" start="76578" end="76582" title="VNET" label="VNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q177524" start="76668" end="76675" title="ARPANET" label="ARPANET"/>
<link wikidata="Q796027" start="76677" end="76683" title="BITNET" label="BITNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093567" start="76688" end="76694" title="NSFNET" label="NSFNET"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76768" end="76783" title="SMTP#History" label="history of SMTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817879" start="76934" end="76946" title="Tom Truscott" label="Tom Truscott"/>
<link wikidata="Q657881" start="77068" end="77077" title="newsgroup" label="newsgroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q714827" start="77170" end="77183" title="Electronic mailing list" label="mailing lists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427217" start="77602" end="77621" title="FTPmail" label="FTP e-mail gateways"/>
<link wikidata="Q210499" start="78298" end="78320" title="bulletin board systems" label="bulletin board systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q193162" start="78329" end="78335" title="Usenet" label="Usenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111567" start="78344" end="78350" title="Kermit (software)" label="Kermit"/>
<link wikidata="Q42283" start="78380" end="78402" title="File Transfer Protocol" label="File Transfer Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q950152" start="78616" end="78644" title="Wide Area Information Server" label="Wide Area Information Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q322654" start="78661" end="78667" title="Gopher (protocol)" label="Gopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q633739" start="78677" end="78683" title="Archie search engine" label="Archie"/>
<link wikidata="Q672424" start="78693" end="78701" title="Veronica (search engine)" label="Veronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q11133401" start="78711" end="78718" title="Jughead (search engine)" label="Jughead"/>
<link wikidata="Q73" start="78728" end="78747" title="Internet Relay Chat" label="Internet Relay Chat"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="78782" end="78796" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q327349" start="78816" end="78831" title="Web directories" label="Web directories"/>
<link wikidata="Q4182287" start="78836" end="78854" title="Web search engines" label="Web search engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q275141" start="78866" end="78873" title="Napster" label="Napster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373485" start="78891" end="78916" title="peer-to-peer file sharing" label="peer-to-peer file sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q308859" start="79152" end="79161" title="Anonymity application" label="anonymity"/>
<link wikidata="Q49667" start="79183" end="79191" title="Gnutella" label="Gnutella"/>
<link wikidata="Q283780" start="79193" end="79204" title="eDonkey2000" label="eDonkey2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q540" start="79210" end="79217" title="Freenet" label="Freenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397643" start="79227" end="79236" title="FastTrack" label="FastTrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163401" start="79238" end="79243" title="Kazaa" label="Kazaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q725906" start="79245" end="79253" title="Limewire" label="Limewire"/>
<link wikidata="Q878713" start="79259" end="79269" title="BitTorrent (software)" label="BitTorrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163401" start="79618" end="79623" title="Kazaa" label="Kazaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q22663" start="79693" end="79707" title="The Pirate Bay" label="The Pirate Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353598" start="79756" end="79789" title="The Pirate Bay trial" label="trial and appeal in 2009 and 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="79939" end="79960" title="intellectual property" label="intellectual property"/>
<link wikidata="Q543" start="79992" end="80002" title="censorship" label="censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q9340" start="80342" end="80354" title="Google Drive" label="Google Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q9344" start="80676" end="80687" title="Google Docs" label="Google Docs"/>
<link wikidata="Q46272775" start="80689" end="80702" title="Google Slides" label="Google Slides"/>
<link wikidata="Q46261310" start="80708" end="80721" title="Google Sheets" label="Google Sheets"/>
<link wikidata="Q914359" start="80840" end="80853" title="Cloud storage" label="Cloud storage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="80856" end="80863" title="Dropbox (service)#History" label="Dropbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580273" start="81174" end="81178" title="Mega (service)" label="Mega"/>
<link wikidata="Q275141" start="81585" end="81592" title="Napster" label="Napster"/>
<link wikidata="Q725906" start="81623" end="81631" title="LimeWire" label="LimeWire"/>
<link wikidata="Q22663" start="81633" end="81647" title="The Pirate Bay" label="The Pirate Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q133862" start="81653" end="81663" title="BitTorrent" label="BitTorrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505209" start="82899" end="82922" title="Nokia 9000 Communicator" label="Nokia 9000 Communicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q853958" start="83161" end="83171" title="NTT DoCoMo" label="NTT DoCoMo"/>
<link wikidata="Q284305" start="83225" end="83231" title="i-mode" label="i-mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q502121" start="83379" end="83397" title="BlackBerry Limited" label="BlackBerry Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q171819" start="83409" end="83419" title="BlackBerry" label="BlackBerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q444321" start="83499" end="83510" title="Telephone keypad" label="tiny keypad"/>
<link wikidata="Q186224" start="83639" end="83668" title="Wireless Application Protocol" label="Wireless Application Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359305" start="85012" end="85033" title="Optical amplifier" label="optical amplification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620670" start="85038" end="85041" title="Wavelength-division multiplexing" label="WDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098878" start="85185" end="85203" title="optical networking" label="optical networking"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="85271" end="85282" title="fiber optic" label="fiber optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="85580" end="85586" title="Amazon (company)" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="85588" end="85596" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q20056642" start="85598" end="85609" title="Apple Music" label="Apple Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="85614" end="85621" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q50675" start="85700" end="85714" title="historiography" label="historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686800" start="86069" end="86081" title="Katie Hafner" label="Katie Hafner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298389" start="86176" end="86190" title="Roy Rosenzweig" label="Roy Rosenzweig"/>
<link wikidata="Q20859597" start="86297" end="86309" title="Janet Abbate" label="Janet Abbate"/>
<link wikidata="Q192121" start="86643" end="86654" title="Teleology" label="teleologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660437" start="86658" end="86670" title="Whig history" label="Whig history"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324830" start="86911" end="86927" title="History of email" label="History of email"/>
<link wikidata="Q5867993" start="86930" end="86950" title="History of hypertext" label="History of hypertext"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750030" start="86953" end="86981" title="History of telecommunication" label="History of telecommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732978" start="86984" end="87018" title="Index of Internet-related articles" label="Index of Internet-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147114" start="87021" end="87038" title="Internet activism" label="Internet activism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574347" start="87041" end="87066" title="List of Internet pioneers" label="List of Internet pioneers"/>
<link wikidata="" start="87069" end="87116" title="MH &amp;amp; xmh: Email for Users &amp;amp; Programmers" label="MH &amp;amp; xmh: Email for Users &amp;amp; Programmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6996003" start="87119" end="87130" title="Nerds 2.0.1" label="Nerds 2.0.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275790" start="87165" end="87212" title="On the Internet, nobody knows you&amp;#x27;re a dog" label="On the Internet, nobody knows you&amp;#x27;re a dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112764" start="87215" end="87238" title="Outline of the Internet" label="Outline of the Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q964035" start="87352" end="87375" title="Computer History Museum" label="Computer History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q749257" start="87405" end="87421" title="Internet Society" label="Internet Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13693" wikidata="Q6197" url="?curid=13693" title="Horace">
<text>Quintus Horatius Flaccus (; 8 December 65 BC – 27 November 8 BC), commonly known in the English-speaking world as Horace (), was the leading Roman lyric poet during the time of Augustus (also known as Octavian). The rhetorician Quintilian regarded his &quot;Odes&quot; as the only Latin lyrics worth reading: &quot;He can be lofty sometimes, yet he is also full of charm and grace, versatile in his figures, and felicitously daring in his choice of words.&quot;

Horace also crafted elegant hexameter verses (&quot;Satires&quot; and &quot;Epistles&quot;) and caustic iambic poetry (&quot;Epodes&quot;). The hexameters are amusing yet serious works, friendly in tone, leading the ancient satirist Persius to comment: &quot;as his friend laughs, Horace slyly puts his finger on his every fault; once let in, he plays about the heartstrings&quot;.

His career coincided with Rome&#x27;s momentous change from a republic to an empire. An officer in the republican army defeated at the Battle of Philippi in 42 BC, he was befriended by Octavian&#x27;s right-hand man in civil affairs, Maecenas, and became a spokesman for the new regime. For some commentators, his association with the regime was a delicate balance in which he maintained a strong measure of independence (he was &quot;a master of the graceful sidestep&quot;) but for others he was, in John Dryden&#x27;s phrase, &quot;a well-mannered court slave&quot;.

==Life==

Horace can be regarded as the world&#x27;s first autobiographer. In his writings, he tells far more about himself, his character, his development, and his way of life, than any other great poet of antiquity. Some of the biographical material contained in his work can be supplemented from the short but valuable &quot;Life of Horace&quot; by Suetonius (in his &quot;Lives of the Poets&quot;).

===Childhood===
He was born on 8 December 65 BC in Apulia, in southern Italy. His home town, Venusia, lay on a trade route in the region of Apulia at the border with Lucania (Basilicata). Various Italic dialects were spoken in the area and this perhaps enriched his feeling for language. He could have been familiar with Greek words even as a young boy and later he poked fun at the jargon of mixed Greek and Oscan spoken in neighbouring Canusium. One of the works he probably studied in school was the &quot;Odyssia&quot; of Livius Andronicus, taught by teachers like the &#x27;Orbilius&#x27; mentioned in one of his poems. Army veterans could have been settled there at the expense of local families uprooted by Rome as punishment for their part in the Social War (91–88 BC). Such state-sponsored migration must have added still more linguistic variety to the area. According to a local tradition reported by Horace, a colony of Romans or Latins had been installed in Venusia after the Samnites had been driven out early in the third century. In that case, young Horace could have felt himself to be a Roman though there are also indications that he regarded himself as a Samnite or Sabellus by birth. Italians in modern and ancient times have always been devoted to their home towns, even after success in the wider world, and Horace was no different. Images of his childhood setting and references to it are found throughout his poems.

Horace&#x27;s father was probably a Venutian taken captive by Romans in the Social War, or possibly he was descended from a Sabine captured in the Samnite Wars. Either way, he was a slave for at least part of his life. He was evidently a man of strong abilities however and managed to gain his freedom and improve his social position. Thus Horace claimed to be the free-born son of a prosperous &#x27;coactor&#x27;. The term &#x27;coactor&#x27; could denote various roles, such as tax collector, but its use by Horace was explained by scholia as a reference to &#x27;coactor argentarius&#x27; i.e. an auctioneer with some of the functions of a banker, paying the seller out of his own funds and later recovering the sum with interest from the buyer.

The father spent a small fortune on his son&#x27;s education, eventually accompanying him to Rome to oversee his schooling and moral development. The poet later paid tribute to him in a poem that one modern scholar considers the best memorial by any son to his father. The poem includes this passage:
If my character is flawed by a few minor faults, but is otherwise decent and moral, if you can point out only a few scattered blemishes on an otherwise immaculate surface, if no one can accuse me of greed, or of prurience, or of profligacy, if I live a virtuous life, free of defilement (pardon, for a moment, my self-praise), and if I am to my friends a good friend, my father deserves all the credit... As it is now, he deserves from me unstinting gratitude and praise. I could never be ashamed of such a father, nor do I feel any need, as many people do, to apologize for being a freedman&#x27;s son. &quot;Satires 1.6.65–92&quot;
He never mentioned his mother in his verses and he might not have known much about her. Perhaps she also had been a slave.

===Adulthood===

Horace left Rome, possibly after his father&#x27;s death, and continued his formal education in Athens, a great centre of learning in the ancient world, where he arrived at nineteen years of age, enrolling in The Academy. Founded by Plato, The Academy was now dominated by Epicureans and Stoics, whose theories and practices made a deep impression on the young man from Venusia. Meanwhile, he mixed and lounged about with the elite of Roman youth, such as Marcus, the idle son of Cicero, and the Pompeius to whom he later addressed a poem. It was in Athens too that he probably acquired deep familiarity with the ancient tradition of Greek lyric poetry, at that time largely the preserve of grammarians and academic specialists (access to such material was easier in Athens than in Rome, where the public libraries had yet to be built by Asinius Pollio and Augustus).

Rome&#x27;s troubles following the assassination of Julius Caesar were soon to catch up with him. Marcus Junius Brutus came to Athens seeking support for the republican cause. Brutus was fêted around town in grand receptions and he made a point of attending academic lectures, all the while recruiting supporters among the young men studying there, including Horace. An educated young Roman could begin military service high in the ranks and Horace was made tribunus militum (one of six senior officers of a typical legion), a post usually reserved for men of senatorial or equestrian rank and which seems to have inspired jealousy among his well-born confederates. He learned the basics of military life while on the march, particularly in the wilds of northern Greece, whose rugged scenery became a backdrop to some of his later poems. It was there in 42 BC that Octavian (later Augustus) and his associate Mark Antony crushed the republican forces at the Battle of Philippi. Horace later recorded it as a day of embarrassment for himself, when he fled without his shield, but allowance should be made for his self-deprecating humour. Moreover, the incident allowed him to identify himself with some famous poets who had long ago abandoned their shields in battle, notably his heroes Alcaeus and Archilochus. The comparison with the latter poet is uncanny: Archilochus lost his shield in a part of Thrace near Philippi, and he was deeply involved in the Greek colonization of Thasos, where Horace&#x27;s die-hard comrades finally surrendered.

Octavian offered an early amnesty to his opponents and Horace quickly accepted it. On returning to Italy, he was confronted with yet another loss: his father&#x27;s estate in Venusia was one of many throughout Italy to be confiscated for the settlement of veterans (Virgil lost his estate in the north about the same time). Horace later claimed that he was reduced to poverty and this led him to try his hand at poetry. In reality, there was no money to be had from versifying. At best, it offered future prospects through contacts with other poets and their patrons among the rich. Meanwhile, he obtained the sinecure of &quot;scriba quaestorius&quot;, a civil service position at the &quot;aerarium&quot; or Treasury, profitable enough to be purchased even by members of the &quot;ordo equester&quot; and not very demanding in its work-load, since tasks could be delegated to &quot;scribae&quot; or permanent clerks. It was about this time that he began writing his &quot;Satires&quot; and &quot;Epodes&quot;.

He describes in glowing terms the country villa which his patron, Maecenas, had given him in a letter to his friend Quinctius:

The remains of Horace&#x27;s Villa are situated on a wooded hillside above the river at Licenza, which joins the Aniene as it flows on to Tivoli.

====Poet====

The &quot;Epodes&quot; belong to iambic poetry. Iambic poetry features insulting and obscene language; sometimes, it is referred to as &quot;blame poetry&quot;. &quot;Blame poetry&quot;, or &quot;shame poetry&quot;, is poetry written to blame and shame fellow citizens into a sense of their social obligations. Each poem normally has a archetype person Horace decides to shame, or teach a lesson to. Horace modelled these poems on the poetry of Archilochus. Social bonds in Rome had been decaying since the destruction of Carthage a little more than a hundred years earlier, due to the vast wealth that could be gained by plunder and corruption. These social ills were magnified by rivalry between Julius Caesar, Mark Antony and confederates like Sextus Pompey, all jockeying for a bigger share of the spoils. One modern scholar has counted a dozen civil wars in the hundred years leading up to 31 BC, including the Third Servile War under Spartacus, eight years before Horace&#x27;s birth. As the heirs to Hellenistic culture, Horace and his fellow Romans were not well prepared to deal with these problems:

Horace&#x27;s Hellenistic background is clear in his Satires, even though the genre was unique to Latin literature. He brought to it a style and outlook suited to the social and ethical issues confronting Rome but he changed its role from public, social engagement to private meditation. Meanwhile, he was beginning to interest Octavian&#x27;s supporters, a gradual process described by him in one of his satires. The way was opened for him by his friend, the poet Virgil, who had gained admission into the privileged circle around Maecenas, Octavian&#x27;s lieutenant, following the success of his &quot;Eclogues&quot;. An introduction soon followed and, after a discreet interval, Horace too was accepted. He depicted the process as an honourable one, based on merit and mutual respect, eventually leading to true friendship, and there is reason to believe that his relationship was genuinely friendly, not just with Maecenas but afterwards with Augustus as well. On the other hand, the poet has been unsympathetically described by one scholar as &quot;a sharp and rising young man, with an eye to the main chance.&quot; There were advantages on both sides: Horace gained encouragement and material support, the politicians gained a hold on a potential dissident. His republican sympathies, and his role at Philippi, may have caused him some pangs of remorse over his new status. However, most Romans considered the civil wars to be the result of &quot;contentio dignitatis&quot;, or rivalry between the foremost families of the city, and he too seems to have accepted the principate as Rome&#x27;s last hope for much needed peace.

In 37 BC, Horace accompanied Maecenas on a journey to Brundisium, described in one of his poems as a series of amusing incidents and charming encounters with other friends along the way, such as Virgil. In fact the journey was political in its motivation, with Maecenas en route to negotiate the Treaty of Tarentum with Antony, a fact Horace artfully keeps from the reader (political issues are largely avoided in the first book of satires). Horace was probably also with Maecenas on one of Octavian&#x27;s naval expeditions against the piratical Sextus Pompeius, which ended in a disastrous storm off Palinurus in 36 BC, briefly alluded to by Horace in terms of near-drowning. There are also some indications in his verses that he was with Maecenas at the Battle of Actium in 31 BC, where Octavian defeated his great rival, Antony. By then Horace had already received from Maecenas the famous gift of his Sabine farm, probably not long after the publication of the first book of &quot;Satires&quot;. The gift, which included income from five tenants, may have ended his career at the Treasury, or at least allowed him to give it less time and energy. It signalled his identification with the Octavian regime yet, in the second book of &quot;Satires&quot; that soon followed, he continued the apolitical stance of the first book. By this time, he had attained the status of &quot;eques Romanus&quot; (Roman &#x27;cavalryman&#x27;, &#x27;knight&#x27;), perhaps as a result of his work at the Treasury.

====Knight====

&quot;Odes&quot; 1–3 were the next focus for his artistic creativity. He adapted their forms and themes from Greek lyric poetry of the seventh and sixth centuries BC. The fragmented nature of the Greek world had enabled his literary heroes to express themselves freely and his semi-retirement from the Treasury in Rome to his own estate in the Sabine hills perhaps empowered him to some extent also yet even when his lyrics touched on public affairs they reinforced the importance of private life. Nevertheless, his work in the period 30–27 BC began to show his closeness to the regime and his sensitivity to its developing ideology. In &quot;Odes&quot; 1.2, for example, he eulogized Octavian in hyperboles that echo Hellenistic court poetry. The name &quot;Augustus&quot;, which Octavian assumed in January of 27 BC, is first attested in &quot;Odes&quot; 3.3 and 3.5. In the period 27–24 BC, political allusions in the &quot;Odes&quot; concentrated on foreign wars in Britain (1.35), Arabia (1.29) Hispania (3.8) and Parthia (2.2). He greeted Augustus on his return to Rome in 24 BC as a beloved ruler upon whose good health he depended for his own happiness (3.14).

The public reception of &quot;Odes&quot; 1–3 disappointed him, however. He attributed the lack of success to jealousy among imperial courtiers and to his isolation from literary cliques. Perhaps it was disappointment that led him to put aside the genre in favour of verse letters. He addressed his first book of &quot;Epistles&quot; to a variety of friends and acquaintances in an urbane style reflecting his new social status as a knight. In the opening poem, he professed a deeper interest in moral philosophy than poetry but, though the collection demonstrates a leaning towards stoic theory, it reveals no sustained thinking about ethics. Maecenas was still the dominant confidante but Horace had now begun to assert his own independence, suavely declining constant invitations to attend his patron. In the final poem of the first book of &quot;Epistles&quot;, he revealed himself to be forty-four years old in the consulship of Lollius and Lepidus i.e. 21 BC, and &quot;of small stature, fond of the sun, prematurely grey, quick-tempered but easily placated&quot;.

According to Suetonius, the second book of &quot;Epistles&quot; was prompted by Augustus, who desired a verse epistle to be addressed to himself. Augustus was in fact a prolific letter-writer and he once asked Horace to be his personal secretary. Horace refused the secretarial role but complied with the emperor&#x27;s request for a verse letter. The letter to Augustus may have been slow in coming, being published possibly as late as 11 BC. It celebrated, among other things, the 15 BC military victories of his stepsons, Drusus and Tiberius, yet it and the following letter were largely devoted to literary theory and criticism. The literary theme was explored still further in &quot;Ars Poetica&quot;, published separately but written in the form of an epistle and sometimes referred to as &quot;Epistles&quot; 2.3 (possibly the last poem he ever wrote). He was also commissioned to write odes commemorating the victories of Drusus and Tiberius and one to be sung in a temple of Apollo for the Secular Games, a long-abandoned festival that Augustus revived in accordance with his policy of recreating ancient customs (&quot;Carmen Saeculare&quot;).

Suetonius recorded some gossip about Horace&#x27;s sexual activities late in life, claiming that the walls of his bedchamber were covered with obscene pictures and mirrors, so that he saw erotica wherever he looked. The poet died at 56 years of age, not long after his friend Maecenas, near whose tomb he was laid to rest. Both men bequeathed their property to Augustus, an honour that the emperor expected of his friends.

==Works==
The dating of Horace&#x27;s works isn&#x27;t known precisely and scholars often debate the exact order in which they were first &#x27;published&#x27;. There are persuasive arguments for the following chronology:
* &quot;Satires 1&quot; (c. 35–34 BC)
* &quot;Satires 2&quot; (c. 30 BC)
* &quot;Epodes&quot; (30 BC)
* &quot;Odes 1–3&quot; (c. 23 BC)
* &quot;Epistles 1&quot; (c. 21 BC)
* &quot;Carmen Saeculare&quot; (17 BC)
* &quot;Epistles 2&quot; (c. 11 BC)
* &quot;Odes 4&quot; (c. 11 BC)
* &quot;Ars Poetica&quot; (c. 10–8 BC)

===Historical context===
Horace composed in traditional metres borrowed from Archaic Greece, employing hexameters in his &quot;Satires&quot; and &quot;Epistles&quot;, and iambs in his &quot;Epodes&quot;, all of which were relatively easy to adapt into Latin forms. His &quot;Odes&quot; featured more complex measures, including alcaics and sapphics, which were sometimes a difficult fit for Latin structure and syntax. Despite these traditional metres, he presented himself as a partisan in the development of a new and sophisticated style. He was influenced in particular by Hellenistic aesthetics of brevity, elegance and polish, as modelled in the work of Callimachus.
In modern literary theory, a distinction is often made between immediate personal experience (&quot;Urerlebnis&quot;) and experience mediated by cultural vectors such as literature, philosophy and the visual arts (&quot;Bildungserlebnis&quot;). The distinction has little relevance for Horace however since his personal and literary experiences are implicated in each other. &quot;Satires&quot; 1.5, for example, recounts in detail a real trip Horace made with Virgil and some of his other literary friends, and which parallels a Satire by Lucilius, his predecessor. Unlike much Hellenistic-inspired literature, however, his poetry was not composed for a small coterie of admirers and fellow poets, nor does it rely on abstruse allusions for many of its effects. Though elitist in its literary standards, it was written for a wide audience, as a public form of art. Ambivalence also characterizes his literary persona, since his presentation of himself as part of a small community of philosophically aware people, seeking true peace of mind while shunning vices like greed, was well adapted to Augustus&#x27;s plans to reform public morality, corrupted by greed—his personal plea for moderation was part of the emperor&#x27;s grand message to the nation.

Horace generally followed the examples of poets established as classics in different genres, such as Archilochus in the &quot;Epodes&quot;, Lucilius in the &quot;Satires&quot; and Alcaeus in the &quot;Odes&quot;, later broadening his scope for the sake of variation and because his models weren&#x27;t actually suited to the realities confronting him. Archilochus and Alcaeus were aristocratic Greeks whose poetry had a social and religious function that was immediately intelligible to their audiences but which became a mere artifice or literary motif when transposed to Rome. However, the artifice of the &quot;Odes&quot; is also integral to their success, since they could now accommodate a wide range of emotional effects, and the blend of Greek and Roman elements adds a sense of detachment and universality. Horace proudly claimed to introduce into Latin the spirit and iambic poetry of Archilochus but (unlike Archilochus) without persecuting anyone (&quot;Epistles&quot; 1.19.23–25). It was no idle boast. His &quot;Epodes&quot; were modelled on the verses of the Greek poet, as &#x27;blame poetry&#x27;, yet he avoided targeting real scapegoats. Whereas Archilochus presented himself as a serious and vigorous opponent of wrong-doers, Horace aimed for comic effects and adopted the persona of a weak and ineffectual critic of his times (as symbolized for example in his surrender to the witch Canidia in the final epode). He also claimed to be the first to introduce into Latin the lyrical methods of Alcaeus (&quot;Epistles&quot; 1.19.32–33) and he actually was the first Latin poet to make consistent use of Alcaic meters and themes: love, politics and the symposium. He imitated other Greek lyric poets as well, employing a &#x27;motto&#x27; technique, beginning each ode with some reference to a Greek original and then diverging from it.

The satirical poet Lucilius was a senator&#x27;s son who could castigate his peers with impunity. Horace was a mere freedman&#x27;s son who had to tread carefully. Lucilius was a rugged patriot and a significant voice in Roman self-awareness, endearing himself to his countrymen by his blunt frankness and explicit politics. His work expressed genuine freedom or libertas. His style included &#x27;metrical vandalism&#x27; and looseness of structure. Horace instead adopted an oblique and ironic style of satire, ridiculing stock characters and anonymous targets. His libertas was the private freedom of a philosophical outlook, not a political or social privilege. His &quot;Satires&quot; are relatively easy-going in their use of meter (relative to the tight lyric meters of the &quot;Odes&quot;) but formal and highly controlled relative to the poems of Lucilius, whom Horace mocked for his sloppy standards (&quot;Satires&quot; 1.10.56–61)

The &quot;Epistles&quot; may be considered among Horace&#x27;s most innovative works. There was nothing like it in Greek or Roman literature. Occasionally poems had had some resemblance to letters, including an elegiac poem from Solon to Mimnermus and some lyrical poems from Pindar to Hieron of Syracuse. Lucilius had composed a satire in the form of a letter, and some epistolary poems were composed by Catullus and Propertius. But nobody before Horace had ever composed an entire collection of verse letters, let alone letters with a focus on philosophical problems. The sophisticated and flexible style that he had developed in his &quot;Satires&quot; was adapted to the more serious needs of this new genre. Such refinement of style was not unusual for Horace. His craftsmanship as a wordsmith is apparent even in his earliest attempts at this or that kind of poetry, but his handling of each genre tended to improve over time as he adapted it to his own needs. Thus for example it is generally agreed that his second book of &quot;Satires&quot;, where human folly is revealed through dialogue between characters, is superior to the first, where he propounds his ethics in monologues. Nevertheless, the first book includes some of his most popular poems.

===Themes===
Horace developed a number of inter-related themes throughout his poetic career, including politics, love, philosophy and ethics, his own social role, as well as poetry itself. His &quot;Epodes&quot; and &quot;Satires&quot; are forms of &#x27;blame poetry&#x27; and both have a natural affinity with the moralising and diatribes of Cynicism. This often takes the form of allusions to the work and philosophy of Bion of Borysthenes but it is as much a literary game as a philosophical alignment.

By the time he composed his &quot;Epistles&quot;, he was a critic of Cynicism along with all impractical and &quot;high-falutin&quot; philosophy in general.

The &quot;Satires&quot; also include a strong element of Epicureanism, with frequent allusions to the Epicurean poet Lucretius. So for example the Epicurean sentiment &quot;carpe diem&quot; is the inspiration behind Horace&#x27;s repeated punning on his own name (&quot;Horatius ~ hora&quot;) in &quot;Satires&quot; 2.6. The &quot;Satires&quot; also feature some Stoic, Peripatetic and Platonic (&quot;Dialogues&quot;) elements. In short, the &quot;Satires&quot; present a medley of philosophical programmes, dished up in no particular order—a style of argument typical of the genre.

The &quot;Odes&quot; display a wide range of topics. Over time, he becomes more confident about his political voice. Although he is often thought of as an overly intellectual lover, he is ingenious in representing passion. The &quot;Odes&quot; weave various philosophical strands together, with allusions and statements of doctrine present in about a third of the &quot;Odes&quot; Books 1–3, ranging from the flippant (1.22, 3.28) to the solemn (2.10, 3.2, 3.3). Epicureanism is the dominant influence, characterising about twice as many of these odes as Stoicism.

A group of odes combines these two influences in tense relationships, such as &quot;Odes&quot; 1.7, praising Stoic virility and devotion to public duty while also advocating private pleasures among friends. While generally favouring the Epicurean lifestyle, the lyric poet is as eclectic as the satiric poet, and in &quot;Odes&quot; 2.10 even proposes Aristotle&#x27;s golden mean as a remedy for Rome&#x27;s political troubles.

Many of Horace&#x27;s poems also contain much reflection on genre, the lyric tradition, and the function of poetry. &quot;Odes&quot; 4, thought to be composed at the emperor&#x27;s request, takes the themes of the first three books of &quot;Odes&quot; to a new level. This book shows greater poetic confidence after the public performance of his &quot;Carmen saeculare&quot; or &quot;Century hymn&quot; at a public festival orchestrated by Augustus. In it, Horace addresses the emperor Augustus directly with more confidence and proclaims his power to grant poetic immortality to those he praises. It is the least philosophical collection of his verses, excepting the twelfth ode, addressed to the dead Virgil as if he were living. In that ode, the epic poet and the lyric poet are aligned with Stoicism and Epicureanism respectively, in a mood of bitter-sweet pathos.

The first poem of the &quot;Epistles&quot; sets the philosophical tone for the rest of the collection: &quot;So now I put aside both verses and all those other games: What is true and what befits is my care, this my question, this my whole concern.&quot; His poetic renunciation of poetry in favour of philosophy is intended to be ambiguous. Ambiguity is the hallmark of the &quot;Epistles&quot;. It is uncertain if those being addressed by the self-mocking poet-philosopher are being honoured or criticised. Though he emerges as an Epicurean, it is on the understanding that philosophical preferences, like political and social choices, are a matter of personal taste. Thus he depicts the ups and downs of the philosophical life more realistically than do most philosophers.

==Reception==
The reception of Horace&#x27;s work has varied from one epoch to another and varied markedly even in his own lifetime. &quot;Odes&quot; 1–3 were not well received when first &#x27;published&#x27; in Rome, yet Augustus later commissioned a ceremonial ode for the Centennial Games in 17 BC and also encouraged the publication of &quot;Odes&quot; 4, after which Horace&#x27;s reputation as Rome&#x27;s premier lyricist was assured. His Odes were to become the best received of all his poems in ancient times, acquiring a classic status that discouraged imitation: no other poet produced a comparable body of lyrics in the four centuries that followed (though that might also be attributed to social causes, particularly the parasitism that Italy was sinking into). In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, ode-writing became highly fashionable in England and a large number of aspiring poets imitated Horace both in English and in Latin.

In a verse epistle to Augustus (Epistle 2.1), in 12 BC, Horace argued for classic status to be awarded to contemporary poets, including Virgil and apparently himself. In the final poem of his third book of Odes he claimed to have created for himself a monument more durable than bronze (&quot;Exegi monumentum aere perennius&quot;, &quot;Carmina&quot; 3.30.1). For one modern scholar, however, Horace&#x27;s personal qualities are more notable than the monumental quality of his achievement:
Yet for men like Wilfred Owen, scarred by experiences of World War I, his poetry stood for discredited values:

The same motto, &quot;Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori&quot;, had been adapted to the ethos of martyrdom in the lyrics of early Christian poets like Prudentius.

These preliminary comments touch on a small sample of developments in the reception of Horace&#x27;s work. More developments are covered epoch by epoch in the following sections.

===Antiquity===
Horace&#x27;s influence can be observed in the work of his near contemporaries, Ovid and Propertius. Ovid followed his example in creating a completely natural style of expression in hexameter verse, and Propertius cheekily mimicked him in his third book of elegies. His &quot;Epistles&quot; provided them both with a model for their own verse letters and it also shaped Ovid&#x27;s exile poetry.

His influence had a perverse aspect. As mentioned before, the brilliance of his &quot;Odes&quot; may have discouraged imitation. Conversely, they may have created a vogue for the lyrics of the archaic Greek poet Pindar, due to the fact that Horace had neglected that style of lyric (see Influence and Legacy of Pindar). The iambic genre seems almost to have disappeared after publication of Horace&#x27;s &quot;Epodes&quot;. Ovid&#x27;s &quot;Ibis&quot; was a rare attempt at the form but it was inspired mainly by Callimachus, and there are some iambic elements in Martial but the main influence there was Catullus. A revival of popular interest in the satires of Lucilius may have been inspired by Horace&#x27;s criticism of his unpolished style. Both Horace and Lucilius were considered good role-models by Persius, who critiqued his own satires as lacking both the acerbity of Lucillius and the gentler touch of Horace. Juvenal&#x27;s caustic satire was influenced mainly by Lucilius but Horace by then was a school classic and Juvenal could refer to him respectfully and in a round-about way as &quot;the Venusine lamp&quot;.

Statius paid homage to Horace by composing one poem in Sapphic and one in Alcaic meter (the verse forms most often associated with &quot;Odes&quot;), which he included in his collection of occasional poems, &quot;Silvae&quot;. Ancient scholars wrote commentaries on the lyric meters of the &quot;Odes&quot;, including the scholarly poet Caesius Bassus. By a process called &quot;derivatio&quot;, he varied established meters through the addition or omission of syllables, a technique borrowed by Seneca the Younger when adapting Horatian meters to the stage.

Horace&#x27;s poems continued to be school texts into late antiquity. Works attributed to Helenius Acro and Pomponius Porphyrio are the remnants of a much larger body of Horatian scholarship. Porphyrio arranged the poems in non-chronological order, beginning with the &quot;Odes&quot;, because of their general popularity and their appeal to scholars (the &quot;Odes&quot; were to retain this privileged position in the medieval manuscript tradition and thus in modern editions also). Horace was often evoked by poets of the fourth century, such as Ausonius and Claudian. Prudentius presented himself as a Christian Horace, adapting Horatian meters to his own poetry and giving Horatian motifs a Christian tone. On the other hand, St Jerome, modelled an uncompromising response to the pagan Horace, observing: &quot;What harmony can there be between Christ and the Devil? What has Horace to do with the Psalter?&quot; By the early sixth century, Horace and Prudentius were both part of a classical heritage that was struggling to survive the disorder of the times. Boethius, the last major author of classical Latin literature, could still take inspiration from Horace, sometimes mediated by Senecan tragedy. It can be argued that Horace&#x27;s influence extended beyond poetry to dignify core themes and values of the early Christian era, such as self-sufficiency, inner contentment and courage.

===Middle Ages and Renaissance===
Classical texts almost ceased being copied in the period between the mid sixth century and the Carolingian revival. Horace&#x27;s work probably survived in just two or three books imported into northern Europe from Italy. These became the ancestors of six extant manuscripts dated to the ninth century. Two of those six manuscripts are French in origin, one was produced in Alsace, and the other three show Irish influence but were probably written in continental monasteries (Lombardy for example). By the last half of the ninth century, it was not uncommon for literate people to have direct experience of Horace&#x27;s poetry. His influence on the Carolingian Renaissance can be found in the poems of Heiric of Auxerre and in some manuscripts marked with neumes, notations that may have been an aid to the memorization and discussion of his lyric meters. &quot;Ode&quot; 4.11 is neumed with the melody of a hymn to John the Baptist, &quot;Ut queant laxis&quot;, composed in Sapphic stanzas. This hymn later became the basis of the solfege system (&quot;Do, re, mi...&quot;)an association with western music quite appropriate for a lyric poet like Horace, though the language of the hymn is mainly Prudentian. Lyons argues that the melody in question was linked with Horace&#x27;s Ode well before Guido d&#x27;Arezzo fitted &quot;Ut queant laxis&quot; to it. Ovid does testify to Horace&#x27;s use of the lyre while performing his Odes.

The German scholar Ludwig Traube once dubbed the tenth and eleventh centuries &quot;The age of Horace&quot; (&quot;aetas Horatiana&quot;), and placed it between the &quot;aetas Vergiliana&quot; of the eighth and ninth centuries, and the &quot;aetas Ovidiana&quot; of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. Horace was a substantial influence in the ninth century as well, and Traube concentrated too much on Horace&#x27;s &quot;Satires&quot;. Almost all of Horace&#x27;s work found favour in the Medieval period, with scholars associating Horace&#x27;s different genres with the different ages of man. A twelfth-century scholar encapsulated the theory: 

&quot;...Horace wrote four different kinds of poems on account of the four ages, the &quot;Odes&quot; for boys, the &quot;Ars Poetica&quot; for young men, the &quot;Satires&quot; for mature men, the &quot;Epistles&quot; for old and complete men.&quot; 

It was then thought that Horace had composed his works in the order in which they had been placed by ancient scholars. This schematism involved an appreciation of Horace&#x27;s works as a collection, the &quot;Ars Poetica&quot;, &quot;Satires&quot; and &quot;Epistles&quot; appearing to find favour as well as the &quot;Odes&quot;. The later Middle Ages, however, gave special significance to &quot;Satires&quot; and &quot;Epistles&quot;, considered Horace&#x27;s mature works. Dante referred to Horace as &quot;Orazio satiro&quot;, and he awarded him a privileged position in the first circle of Hell, with Homer, Ovid and Lucan.

Horace&#x27;s popularity is revealed in the large number of quotes from all his works found in almost every genre of medieval literature, and also in the number of poets imitating him in quantitative Latin meter. The most prolific imitator of his &quot;Odes&quot; was the Bavarian monk, Metellus of Tegernsee, who dedicated his work to the patron saint of Tegernsee Abbey, St Quirinus, around the year 1170. He imitated all Horace&#x27;s lyrical meters then followed these up with imitations of other meters used by Prudentius and Boethius, indicating that variety, as first modelled by Horace, was considered a fundamental aspect of the lyric genre. The content of his poems however was restricted to simple piety. Among the most successful imitators of &quot;Satires&quot; and &quot;Epistles&quot; was another Germanic author, calling himself Sextus Amarcius, around 1100, who composed four books, the first two exemplifying vices, the second pair mainly virtues.

Petrarch is a key figure in the imitation of Horace in accentual meters. His verse letters in Latin were modelled on the &quot;Epistles&quot; and he wrote a letter to Horace in the form of an ode. However he also borrowed from Horace when composing his Italian sonnets. One modern scholar has speculated that authors who imitated Horace in accentual rhythms (including stressed Latin and vernacular languages) may have considered their work a natural sequel to Horace&#x27;s metrical variety. In France, Horace and Pindar were the poetic models for a group of vernacular authors called the Pléiade, including for example Pierre de Ronsard and Joachim du Bellay. Montaigne made constant and inventive use of Horatian quotes. The vernacular languages were dominant in Castilia and Portugal in the sixteenth century, where Horace&#x27;s influence is notable in the works of such authors as Garcilaso de la Vega, Juan Boscán, Sá de Miranda, Antonio Ferreira and Fray Luis de León, the last writing odes on the Horatian theme &quot;beatus ille&quot; (&quot;happy the man&quot;). The sixteenth century in western Europe was also an age of translations (except in Germany, where Horace wasn&#x27;t translated into the vernacular until well into the seventeenth century). The first English translator was Thomas Drant, who placed translations of Jeremiah and Horace side by side in &quot;Medicinable Morall&quot;, 1566. That was also the year that the Scot George Buchanan paraphrased the Psalms in a Horatian setting. Ben Jonson put Horace on the stage in 1601 in &quot;Poetaster&quot;, along with other classical Latin authors, giving them all their own verses to speak in translation. Horace&#x27;s part evinces the independent spirit, moral earnestness and critical insight that many readers look for in his poems.

===Age of Enlightenment===
During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, or the Age of Enlightenment, neoclassical culture was pervasive. English literature in the middle of that period has been dubbed Augustan. It is not always easy to distinguish Horace&#x27;s influence during those centuries (the mixing of influences is shown for example in one poet&#x27;s pseudonym, &quot;Horace Juvenal&quot;). However a measure of his influence can be found in the diversity of the people interested in his works, both among readers and authors.

New editions of his works were published almost yearly. There were three new editions in 1612 (two in Leiden, one in Frankfurt) and again in 1699 (Utrecht, Barcelona, Cambridge). Cheap editions were plentiful and fine editions were also produced, including one whose entire text was engraved by John Pine in copperplate. The poet James Thomson owned five editions of Horace&#x27;s work and the physician James Douglas had five hundred books with Horace-related titles. Horace was often commended in periodicals such as The Spectator, as a hallmark of good judgement, moderation and manliness, a focus for moralising. His verses offered a fund of mottoes, such as &quot;simplex munditiis&quot; (elegance in simplicity), &quot;splendide mendax&quot; (nobly untruthful), &quot;sapere aude&quot; (dare to know), &quot;nunc est bibendum&quot; (now is the time to drink), &quot;carpe diem&quot; (seize the day, perhaps the only one still in common use today). These were quoted even in works as prosaic as Edmund Quincy&#x27;s &quot;A treatise of hemp-husbandry&quot; (1765). The fictional hero Tom Jones recited his verses with feeling. His works were also used to justify commonplace themes, such as patriotic obedience, as in James Parry&#x27;s English lines from an Oxford University collection in 1736:

Horatian-style lyrics were increasingly typical of Oxford and Cambridge verse collections for this period, most of them in Latin but some like the previous ode in English. John Milton&#x27;s Lycidas first appeared in such a collection. It has few Horatian echoes yet Milton&#x27;s associations with Horace were lifelong. He composed a controversial version of &quot;Odes&quot; 1.5, and Paradise Lost includes references to Horace&#x27;s &#x27;Roman&#x27; &quot;Odes&quot; 3.1–6 (Book 7 for example begins with echoes of &quot;Odes&quot; 3.4). Yet Horace&#x27;s lyrics could offer inspiration to libertines as well as moralists, and neo-Latin sometimes served as a kind of discrete veil for the risqué. Thus for example Benjamin Loveling authored a catalogue of Drury Lane and Covent Garden prostitutes, in Sapphic stanzas, and an encomium for a dying lady &quot;of salacious memory&quot;. Some Latin imitations of Horace were politically subversive, such as a marriage ode by Anthony Alsop that included a rallying cry for the Jacobite cause. On the other hand, Andrew Marvell took inspiration from Horace&#x27;s &quot;Odes&quot; 1.37 to compose his English masterpiece Horatian Ode upon Cromwell&#x27;s Return from Ireland, in which subtly nuanced reflections on the execution of Charles I echo Horace&#x27;s ambiguous response to the death of Cleopatra (Marvell&#x27;s ode was suppressed in spite of its subtlety and only began to be widely published in 1776). Samuel Johnson took particular pleasure in reading &quot;The Odes&quot;. Alexander Pope wrote direct &quot;Imitations&quot; of Horace (published with the original Latin alongside) and also echoed him in &quot;Essays&quot; and The Rape of the Lock. He even emerged as &quot;a quite Horatian Homer&quot; in his translation of the &quot;Iliad&quot;. Horace appealed also to female poets, such as Anna Seward (&quot;Original sonnets on various subjects, and odes paraphrased from Horace&quot;, 1799) and Elizabeth Tollet, who composed a Latin ode in Sapphic meter to celebrate her brother&#x27;s return from overseas, with tea and coffee substituted for the wine of Horace&#x27;s sympotic settings:
Horace&#x27;s &quot;Ars Poetica&quot; is second only to Aristotle&#x27;s &quot;Poetics&quot; in its influence on literary theory and criticism. Milton recommended both works in his treatise &quot;of Education&quot;. Horace&#x27;s &quot;Satires&quot; and &quot;Epistles&quot; however also had a huge impact, influencing theorists and critics such as John Dryden. There was considerable debate over the value of different lyrical forms for contemporary poets, as represented on one hand by the kind of four-line stanzas made familiar by Horace&#x27;s Sapphic and Alcaic &quot;Odes&quot; and, on the other, the loosely structured Pindarics associated with the odes of Pindar. Translations occasionally involved scholars in the dilemmas of censorship. Thus Christopher Smart entirely omitted &quot;Odes&quot; 4.10 and re-numbered the remaining odes. He also removed the ending of &quot;Odes&quot; 4.1. Thomas Creech printed &quot;Epodes&quot; 8 and 12 in the original Latin but left out their English translations. Philip Francis left out both the English and Latin for those same two epodes, a gap in the numbering the only indication that something was amiss. French editions of Horace were influential in England and these too were regularly bowdlerized.

Most European nations had their own &#x27;Horaces&#x27;: thus for example Friedrich von Hagedorn was called &quot;The German Horace&quot; and Maciej Kazimierz Sarbiewski &quot;The Polish Horace&quot; (the latter was much imitated by English poets such as Henry Vaughan and Abraham Cowley). Pope Urban VIII wrote voluminously in Horatian meters, including an ode on gout.

===19th century on===

Horace maintained a central role in the education of English-speaking elites right up until the 1960s. A pedantic emphasis on the formal aspects of language-learning at the expense of literary appreciation may have made him unpopular in some quarters yet it also confirmed his influencea tension in his reception that underlies Byron&#x27;s famous lines from &quot;Childe Harold&quot; (Canto iv, 77):

William Wordsworth&#x27;s mature poetry, including the preface to &quot;Lyrical Ballads&quot;, reveals Horace&#x27;s influence in its rejection of false ornament and he once expressed &quot;a wish / to meet the shade of Horace...&quot;. John Keats echoed the opening of Horace&#x27;s &quot;Epodes&quot; 14 in the opening lines of &quot;Ode to a Nightingale&quot;.

The Roman poet was presented in the nineteenth century as an honorary English gentleman. William Thackeray produced a version of &quot;Odes&quot; 1.38 in which Horace&#x27;s &#x27;boy&#x27; became &#x27;Lucy&#x27;, and Gerard Manley Hopkins translated the boy innocently as &#x27;child&#x27;. Horace was translated by Sir Theodore Martin (biographer of Prince Albert) but minus some ungentlemanly verses, such as the erotic &quot;Odes&quot; 1.25 and &quot;Epodes&quot; 8 and 12. Edward Bulwer-Lytton produced a popular translation and William Gladstone also wrote translations during his last days as Prime Minister.

Edward FitzGerald&#x27;s &quot;Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam&quot;, though formally derived from the Persian &quot;ruba&#x27;i&quot;, nevertheless shows a strong Horatian influence, since, as one modern scholar has observed, &quot;...the quatrains inevitably recall the stanzas of the &#x27;Odes&#x27;, as does the narrating first person of the world-weary, ageing Epicurean Omar himself, mixing sympotic exhortation and &#x27;carpe diem&#x27; with splendid moralising and &#x27;memento mori&#x27; nihilism.&quot;&quot; Matthew Arnold advised a friend in verse not to worry about politics, an echo of &quot;Odes&quot; 2.11, yet later became a critic of Horace&#x27;s inadequacies relative to Greek poets, as role models of Victorian virtues, observing: &quot;If human life were complete without faith, without enthusiasm, without energy, Horace...would be the perfect interpreter of human life.&quot; Christina Rossetti composed a sonnet depicting a woman willing her own death steadily, drawing on Horace&#x27;s depiction of &#x27;Glycera&#x27; in &quot;Odes&quot; 1.19.5–6 and Cleopatra in &quot;Odes&quot; 1.37. A. E. Housman considered &quot;Odes&quot; 4.7, in Archilochian couplets, the most beautiful poem of antiquity and yet he generally shared Horace&#x27;s penchant for quatrains, being readily adapted to his own elegiac and melancholy strain. The most famous poem of Ernest Dowson took its title and its heroine&#x27;s name from a line of &quot;Odes&quot; 4.1, &quot;Non sum qualis eram bonae sub regno Cynarae&quot;, as well as its motif of nostalgia for a former flame. Kipling wrote a famous parody of the &quot;Odes&quot;, satirising their stylistic idiosyncrasies and especially the extraordinary syntax, but he also used Horace&#x27;s Roman patriotism as a focus for British imperialism, as in the story &quot;Regulus&quot; in the school collection &quot;Stalky &amp; Co.&quot;, which he based on &quot;Odes&quot; 3.5. Wilfred Owen&#x27;s famous poem, quoted above, incorporated Horatian text to question patriotism while ignoring the rules of Latin scansion. However, there were few other echoes of Horace in the war period, possibly because war is not actually a major theme of Horace&#x27;s work. The Spanish poet Miquel Costa i Llobera published his renowned collection of poems named &quot;Horacianes&quot;, thus being dedicated to the Latin poet Horace, and employing Sapphics, Alcaics and similar types of stanzas.
Both W. H. Auden and Louis MacNeice began their careers as teachers of classics and both responded as poets to Horace&#x27;s influence. Auden for example evoked the fragile world of the 1930s in terms echoing &quot;Odes&quot; 2.11.1–4, where Horace advises a friend not to let worries about frontier wars interfere with current pleasures.

The American poet Robert Frost echoed Horace&#x27;s &quot;Satires&quot; in the conversational and sententious idiom of some of his longer poems, such as &quot;The Lesson for Today&quot; (1941), and also in his gentle advocacy of life on the farm, as in &quot;Hyla Brook&quot; (1916), evoking Horace&#x27;s &quot;fons Bandusiae&quot; in &quot;Ode&quot; 3.13. Now at the start of the third millennium, poets are still absorbing and re-configuring the Horatian influence, sometimes in translation (such as a 2002 English/American edition of the &quot;Odes&quot; by thirty-six poets) and sometimes as inspiration for their own work (such as a 2003 collection of odes by a New Zealand poet).

Horace&#x27;s &quot;Epodes&quot; have largely been ignored in the modern era, excepting those with political associations of historical significance. The obscene qualities of some of the poems have repulsed even scholars yet more recently a better understanding of the nature of Iambic poetry has led to a re-evaluation of the &quot;whole&quot; collection. A re-appraisal of the &quot;Epodes&quot; also appears in creative adaptations by recent poets (such as a 2004 collection of poems that relocates the ancient context to a 1950s industrial town).

==Translations==
*The &quot;Ars Poetica&quot; was first translated into English by Thomas Drant in 1556, and later by Ben Jonson and Lord Byron.
*John Dryden, &quot;Sylvæ; or, The second Part of Poetical Miscellanies&quot; (London: Jacob Tonson, 1685) with adaptations of three of the &quot;Odes&quot;, and one Epode.
*Philip Francis, &quot;The Odes, Epodes, and Carmen Seculare&quot; &quot;of Horace&quot; (Dublin, 1742; London, 1743) 
*——— &quot;The Satires, Epistles, and Art of Poetry&quot; &quot;of Horace&quot; (1746) Samuel Johnson favoured these translations. 
*C. S. Calverley, &quot;Verses and Translations&quot; (1860; rev. 1862) Included versions of ten of the &quot;Odes.&quot; 
*John Conington, (1863; rev. 1872)
*——— &quot;The Satires&quot;, &quot;Epistles&quot; &quot;and&quot; &quot;Ars Poëtica of Horace&quot; (1869)
*Theodore Martin, &quot;The Odes of Horace, Translated Into English Verse, with a Life and Notes&quot; (Boston: Ticknor &amp; Fields, 1866)

* Edward Marsh, &quot;The Odes of Horace. Translated into English Verse by Edward Marsh&quot; (London: Macmillan &amp; Co., 1941).

*James Michie, &quot;The Odes of Horace&quot; (London: Rupert Hart-Davis, 1964) Included a dozen &quot;Odes&quot; in the original Sapphic and Alcaic metres.
*More recent verse translations of the Odes include those by David West (free verse), and Colin Sydenham (rhymed).
*In 1983, Charles E. Passage translated all the works of Horace in the original metres.
*&quot;Horace&#x27;s Odes and the Mystery of Do-Re-Mi&quot; Stuart Lyons (rhymed) Aris &amp; Phillips 

== In literature and the arts ==
The Oxford Latin Course textbooks use the life of Horace to illustrate an average Roman&#x27;s life in the late Republic to Early Empire. Horace was portrayed by Norman Shelley in the 1976 miniseries &quot;I, Claudius&quot;.

==See also==

* Carpe diem
* Horatia gens
* List of ancient Romans
* Otium
* Prosody (Latin)
* Translation
* Horace&#x27;s Villa

==Notes==
==Citations==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* 
* 
* Q. Horati Flacci &quot;opera&quot;, recensuerunt O. Keller et A. Holder, 2 voll., Lipsiae in aedibus B. G. Teubneri, 1864–9.
* Q. Horati Flacci opera (critical edition of all Horace&#x27;s poems), edited by O. Keller &amp; A. Holder, published by B. G. Teubner, 1878.
* Common sayings from Horace
* The works of Horace at The Latin Library
* Carmina Horatiana All &quot;Carmina&quot; of Horace in Latin recited by Thomas Bervoets.
* Selected Poems of Horace
* Works by Horace at Perseus Digital Library
* Horace&#x27;s works: text, concordances and frequency list
* SORGLL: Horace, &quot;Odes&quot; I.22, read by Robert Sonkowsky 
* Translations of several odes in the original meters (with accompaniment).
* A discussion and comparison of three different contemporary translations of Horace&#x27;s &quot;Odes&quot; 
* academia.edu: Tossing Augustus out of Horace&#x27;s Ars Poetica 
* Horati opera, Acronis et Porphyrionis commentarii, varia lectio etc. (latine)
* Horace MS 1a Ars Poetica and Epistulae at OPenn</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6197" start="0" end="24" title="Horace" label="Quintus Horatius Flaccus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197" start="114" end="120" title="Horace" label="Horace"/>
<link wikidata="Q182357" start="147" end="157" title="Lyric poetry" label="lyric poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="177" end="185" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193769" start="228" end="238" title="Quintilian" label="Quintilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q943884" start="258" end="262" title="Odes (Horace)" label="Odes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153809" start="491" end="507" title="Prosody (Latin)" label="hexameter verses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226154" start="515" end="522" title="Satires (Horace)" label="Satires"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226213" start="539" end="547" title="Epistles (Horace)" label="Epistles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906966" start="567" end="580" title="Iambus (genre)" label="iambic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3730710" start="588" end="594" title="Epodes (Horace)" label="Epodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q332785" start="696" end="703" title="Persius" label="Persius"/>
<link wikidata="Q335330" start="981" end="999" title="Battle of Philippi" label="Battle of Philippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8833" start="1080" end="1088" title="Maecenas" label="Maecenas"/>
<link wikidata="Q213355" start="1348" end="1359" title="John Dryden" label="John Dryden"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="1769" end="1778" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="1872" end="1878" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q913582" start="1892" end="1897" title="Italy (Roman Empire)" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q52691" start="1914" end="1921" title="Venosa" label="Venusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447" start="1961" end="1967" title="Apulia" label="Apulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131978" start="1987" end="1994" title="Lucania" label="Lucania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452" start="1996" end="2006" title="Basilicata" label="Basilicata"/>
<link wikidata="Q23187" start="2259" end="2267" title="Canusium" label="Canusium"/>
<link wikidata="Q193058" start="2347" end="2364" title="Livius Andronicus" label="Livius Andronicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q745133" start="2400" end="2408" title="Orbilius" label="Orbilius"/>
<link wikidata="Q677316" start="2576" end="2597" title="Social War (91–88 BC)" label="Social War (91–88 BC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q500272" start="2809" end="2817" title="Samnites" label="Samnites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036346" start="3006" end="3014" title="Sabellus" label="Sabellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q108356" start="3386" end="3392" title="Sabine" label="Sabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q109251" start="3409" end="3421" title="Samnite Wars" label="Samnite Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358144" start="3797" end="3804" title="scholia" label="scholia"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="4106" end="4110" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q193093" start="5298" end="5309" title="Platonic Academy" label="The Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="5322" end="5327" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q179541" start="5362" end="5372" title="Epicureans" label="Epicureans"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="5377" end="5383" title="Stoics" label="Stoics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="5569" end="5575" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q319273" start="5927" end="5941" title="Asinius Pollio" label="Asinius Pollio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="6010" end="6023" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q172248" start="6056" end="6076" title="Marcus Junius Brutus" label="Marcus Junius Brutus"/>
<link wikidata="Q849288" start="6416" end="6432" title="tribunus militum" label="tribunus militum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="6823" end="6831" title="Octavian" label="Octavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="6839" end="6847" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="6867" end="6878" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q335330" start="6916" end="6934" title="Battle of Philippi" label="Battle of Philippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q212872" start="7244" end="7251" title="Alcaeus of Mytilene" label="Alcaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q201323" start="7256" end="7267" title="Archilochus" label="Archilochus"/>
<link wikidata="Q204096" start="7436" end="7442" title="Thasos" label="Thasos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="7770" end="7776" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4012755" start="8660" end="8679" title="Horace&amp;#x27;s Villa" label="Horace&amp;#x27;s Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q242844" start="8733" end="8740" title="Licenza" label="Licenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906966" start="8839" end="8852" title="iambic poetry" label="iambic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q201323" start="9251" end="9262" title="Archilochus" label="Archilochus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="9328" end="9336" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q295228" start="9553" end="9566" title="Sextus Pompey" label="Sextus Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q194378" start="9722" end="9739" title="Third Servile War" label="Third Servile War"/>
<link wikidata="Q83406" start="9746" end="9755" title="Spartacus" label="Spartacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q546203" start="10521" end="10529" title="Eclogues" label="Eclogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q13496" start="11605" end="11615" title="Brundisium" label="Brundisium"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11847" end="11865" title="Treaty of Tarentum" label="Treaty of Tarentum"/>
<link wikidata="Q679636" start="12153" end="12162" title="Palinurus" label="Palinurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q160387" start="12308" end="12324" title="Battle of Actium" label="Battle of Actium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4012755" start="12457" end="12468" title="Horace&amp;#x27;s Villa" label="Sabine farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q122166" start="12931" end="12944" title="Equites" label="eques Romanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="13265" end="13276" title="Greek world" label="Greek world"/>
<link wikidata="Q4012755" start="13391" end="13405" title="Horace&amp;#x27;s Villa" label="his own estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q739680" start="16309" end="16322" title="Secular Games" label="Secular Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226154" start="17119" end="17128" title="Satires (Horace)" label="Satires 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226154" start="17157" end="17166" title="Satires (Horace)" label="Satires 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3730710" start="17192" end="17198" title="Epodes (Horace)" label="Epodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q943884" start="17221" end="17229" title="Odes (Horace)" label="Odes 1–3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226213" start="17255" end="17265" title="Epistles (Horace)" label="Epistles 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246446" start="17291" end="17307" title="Carmen Saeculare" label="Carmen Saeculare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226213" start="17330" end="17340" title="Epistles (Horace)" label="Epistles 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q943884" start="17366" end="17372" title="Odes (Horace)" label="Odes 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q677997" start="17398" end="17409" title="Ars Poetica (Horace)" label="Ars Poetica"/>
<link wikidata="Q192624" start="17486" end="17492" title="Meter (poetry)" label="metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q271834" start="17507" end="17521" title="Archaic Greece" label="Archaic Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q109548" start="17533" end="17542" title="hexameter" label="hexameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q207686" start="17601" end="17606" title="iamb (poetry)" label="iambs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153809" start="17682" end="17693" title="Prosody (Latin)" label="Latin forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q640214" start="17758" end="17765" title="Alcaic verse" label="alcaics"/>
<link wikidata="Q545332" start="17770" end="17778" title="Sapphic stanza" label="sapphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="17841" end="17847" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q657246" start="18006" end="18017" title="Hellenistic poetry" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192417" start="18089" end="18100" title="Callimachus" label="Callimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q298729" start="18642" end="18650" title="Gaius Lucilius" label="Lucilius"/>
<link wikidata="Q201323" start="19460" end="19471" title="Archilochus" label="Archilochus"/>
<link wikidata="Q212872" start="19539" end="19546" title="Alcaeus of Mytilene" label="Alcaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q245122" start="20503" end="20512" title="scapegoat" label="scapegoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q206883" start="21028" end="21037" title="symposium" label="symposium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129855" start="21576" end="21584" title="libertas" label="libertas"/>
<link wikidata="Q133337" start="22387" end="22392" title="Solon" label="Solon"/>
<link wikidata="Q316129" start="22396" end="22405" title="Mimnermus" label="Mimnermus"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="22434" end="22440" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q335634" start="22444" end="22462" title="Hieron of Syracuse" label="Hieron of Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q163079" start="22563" end="22571" title="Catullus" label="Catullus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8827" start="22576" end="22586" title="Propertius" label="Propertius"/>
<link wikidata="Q485459" start="23763" end="23771" title="Cynicism (philosophy)" label="Cynicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q359231" start="23842" end="23861" title="Bion of Borysthenes" label="Bion of Borysthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q485459" start="23996" end="24004" title="Cynicism (philosophy)" label="Cynicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179541" start="24142" end="24154" title="Epicureanism" label="Epicureanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q47154" start="24202" end="24211" title="Lucretius" label="Lucretius"/>
<link wikidata="Q190273" start="24258" end="24268" title="carpe diem" label="carpe diem"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="24448" end="24453" title="Stoicism" label="Stoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q194414" start="24455" end="24466" title="Peripatetic school" label="Peripatetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="24471" end="24479" title="Platonic Dialogues" label="Platonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226154" start="24662" end="24667" title="Satires (Horace)" label="genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q179541" start="25133" end="25145" title="Epicureanism" label="Epicureanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054131" start="25605" end="25616" title="golden mean (philosophy)" label="golden mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="26461" end="26469" title="Stoicism" label="Stoicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179541" start="26474" end="26486" title="Epicureanism" label="Epicureanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179541" start="27069" end="27078" title="Epicureanism" label="Epicurean"/>
<link wikidata="Q943884" start="28605" end="28612" title="Carmina" label="Carmina"/>
<link wikidata="Q212719" start="28776" end="28788" title="Wilfred Owen" label="Wilfred Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q940007" start="28893" end="28929" title="Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori" label="Dulce et decorum est pro patria mori"/>
<link wikidata="Q347250" start="29024" end="29034" title="Prudentius" label="Prudentius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="29313" end="29317" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8827" start="29322" end="29332" title="Propertius" label="Propertius"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="29843" end="29849" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29918" end="29948" title="Pindar#Influence and legacy" label="Influence and Legacy of Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192417" start="30146" end="30157" title="Callimachus" label="Callimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098" start="30197" end="30204" title="Martial" label="Martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q163079" start="30238" end="30246" title="Catullus" label="Catullus"/>
<link wikidata="Q332785" start="30441" end="30448" title="Persius" label="Persius"/>
<link wikidata="Q193800" start="30555" end="30562" title="Juvenal" label="Juvenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q243203" start="30763" end="30770" title="Statius" label="Statius"/>
<link wikidata="Q856970" start="31100" end="31114" title="Caesius Bassus" label="Caesius Bassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="31259" end="31277" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244718" start="31413" end="31426" title="Helenius Acro" label="Helenius Acro"/>
<link wikidata="Q934244" start="31431" end="31450" title="Pomponius Porphyrio" label="Pomponius Porphyrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q234593" start="31872" end="31880" title="Ausonius" label="Ausonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q205947" start="31885" end="31893" title="Claudian" label="Claudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q347250" start="31895" end="31905" title="Prudentius" label="Prudentius"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="32054" end="32063" title="St Jerome" label="St Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q102851" start="32388" end="32396" title="Boethius" label="Boethius"/>
<link wikidata="Q157123" start="32850" end="32869" title="Carolingian Renaissance" label="Carolingian revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="33129" end="33135" title="Alsace" label="Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="33232" end="33240" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q157123" start="33406" end="33429" title="Carolingian Renaissance" label="Carolingian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281873" start="33459" end="33476" title="Heiric of Auxerre" label="Heiric of Auxerre"/>
<link wikidata="Q41867" start="33513" end="33519" title="neumes" label="neumes"/>
<link wikidata="" start="33629" end="33633" title=":wikisource:la:Carmina (Horatius)/Liber IV/Carmen XI" label="4.11"/>
<link wikidata="Q428307" start="33697" end="33712" title="Ut queant laxis" label="Ut queant laxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q545332" start="33732" end="33746" title="Sapphic stanza" label="Sapphic stanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q159563" start="33789" end="33796" title="solfege" label="solfege"/>
<link wikidata="Q76044" start="34214" end="34227" title="Ludwig Traube (palaeographer)" label="Ludwig Traube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="35580" end="35585" title="Dante" label="Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="35710" end="35715" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188646" start="35726" end="35731" title="Lucan" label="Lucan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35921" end="35945" title="Prosody (Latin)#Two rhythms" label="quantitative Latin meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q31961118" start="36021" end="36042" title="Metellus of Tegernsee" label="Metellus of Tegernsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q448527" start="36090" end="36105" title="Tegernsee Abbey" label="Tegernsee Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q30691241" start="36107" end="36118" title="Quirinus of Tegernsee" label="St Quirinus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36579" end="36594" title="Sextus Amarcius" label="Sextus Amarcius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401" start="36701" end="36709" title="Petrarch" label="Petrarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="37216" end="37222" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q528648" start="37291" end="37298" title="Pléiade" label="Pléiade"/>
<link wikidata="Q49752" start="37322" end="37339" title="Pierre de Ronsard" label="Pierre de Ronsard"/>
<link wikidata="Q18420" start="37344" end="37361" title="Joachim du Bellay" label="Joachim du Bellay"/>
<link wikidata="Q41568" start="37363" end="37372" title="Montaigne" label="Montaigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q311405" start="37588" end="37608" title="Garcilaso de la Vega (poet)" label="Garcilaso de la Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q375056" start="37610" end="37621" title="Juan Boscán" label="Juan Boscán"/>
<link wikidata="Q186872" start="37623" end="37636" title="Sá de Miranda" label="Sá de Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q610870" start="37638" end="37654" title="António Ferreira (poet)" label="Antonio Ferreira"/>
<link wikidata="Q450246" start="37659" end="37676" title="Fray Luis de León" label="Fray Luis de León"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789052" start="37998" end="38010" title="Thomas Drant" label="Thomas Drant"/>
<link wikidata="Q158825" start="38039" end="38047" title="Jeremiah" label="Jeremiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q715169" start="38150" end="38165" title="George Buchanan" label="George Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41064" start="38182" end="38188" title="Psalms" label="Psalms"/>
<link wikidata="Q193857" start="38212" end="38222" title="Ben Jonson" label="Ben Jonson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16354838" start="38264" end="38273" title="Poetaster (play)" label="Poetaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="38596" end="38616" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821020" start="38718" end="38726" title="Augustan literature" label="Augustan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43631" start="39157" end="39163" title="Leiden" label="Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="39172" end="39181" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q803" start="39202" end="39209" title="Utrecht" label="Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="39222" end="39231" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252938" start="39350" end="39359" title="John Pine" label="John Pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q194177" start="39363" end="39374" title="copperplate engraving" label="copperplate"/>
<link wikidata="Q555029" start="39385" end="39398" title="James Thomson (poet, born 1700)" label="James Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q321500" start="39459" end="39472" title="James Douglas (physician)" label="James Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q581322" start="39574" end="39587" title="The Spectator (1711)" label="The Spectator"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39724" end="39741" title="simplex munditiis" label="simplex munditiis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39780" end="39796" title="splendide mendax" label="splendide mendax"/>
<link wikidata="Q310264" start="39829" end="39840" title="sapere aude" label="sapere aude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436045" start="39869" end="39886" title="nunc est bibendum" label="nunc est bibendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q190273" start="39927" end="39937" title="carpe diem" label="carpe diem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339765" start="40055" end="40068" title="Edmund Quincy (1703-1788)" label="Edmund Quincy"/>
<link wikidata="Q248096" start="40144" end="40153" title="The History of Tom Jones, a Foundling" label="Tom Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="40530" end="40541" title="John Milton" label="John Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645997" start="40549" end="40556" title="Lycidas" label="Lycidas"/>
<link wikidata="Q28754" start="40744" end="40757" title="Paradise Lost" label="Paradise Lost"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41077" end="41094" title="Benjamin Loveling" label="Benjamin Loveling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771993" start="41334" end="41347" title="Anthony Alsop" label="Anthony Alsop"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="41385" end="41393" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q365935" start="41420" end="41434" title="Andrew Marvell" label="Andrew Marvell"/>
<link wikidata="Q365935" start="41528" end="41581" title="Horatian Ode upon Cromwell&amp;#x27;s Return from Ireland" label="Horatian Ode upon Cromwell&amp;#x27;s Return from Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="41639" end="41648" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q635" start="41703" end="41712" title="Cleopatra" label="Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="41821" end="41835" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q164047" start="41894" end="41908" title="Alexander Pope" label="Alexander Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823920" start="42047" end="42067" title="The Rape of the Lock" label="The Rape of the Lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="42155" end="42160" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131816" start="42214" end="42225" title="Anna Seward" label="Anna Seward"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363623" start="42321" end="42337" title="Elizabeth Tollet" label="Elizabeth Tollet"/>
<link wikidata="Q206883" start="42497" end="42505" title="symposium" label="sympotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q213355" start="42865" end="42876" title="John Dryden" label="John Dryden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195011" start="43143" end="43152" title="Pindarics" label="Pindarics"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="43181" end="43187" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617795" start="43269" end="43286" title="Christopher Smart" label="Christopher Smart"/>
<link wikidata="" start="43321" end="43325" title=":wikisource:la:Carmina (Horatius)/Liber IV/Carmen X" label="4.10"/>
<link wikidata="" start="43409" end="43412" title=":wikisource:la:Carmina (Horatius)/Liber IV/Carmen I" label="4.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525012" start="43414" end="43427" title="Thomas Creech" label="Thomas Creech"/>
<link wikidata="" start="43455" end="43456" title=":wikisource:la:Epodi#VIII" label="8"/>
<link wikidata="" start="43461" end="43463" title=":wikisource:la:Epodi#XII" label="12"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379012" start="43527" end="43541" title="Philip Francis (translator)" label="Philip Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421766" start="43757" end="43767" title="bowdlerize" label="bowdlerize"/>
<link wikidata="Q63985" start="43845" end="43867" title="Friedrich von Hagedorn" label="Friedrich von Hagedorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q471723" start="43913" end="43940" title="Maciej Kazimierz Sarbiewski" label="Maciej Kazimierz Sarbiewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q545363" start="44026" end="44039" title="Henry Vaughan" label="Henry Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q329896" start="44044" end="44058" title="Abraham Cowley" label="Abraham Cowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q131579" start="44066" end="44076" title="Urban VIII" label="Urban VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="44494" end="44499" title="Lord Byron" label="Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072741" start="44531" end="44544" title="Childe Harold&amp;#x27;s Pilgrimage" label="Childe Harold"/>
<link wikidata="Q45546" start="44568" end="44586" title="William Wordsworth" label="William Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239796" start="44623" end="44630" title="Preface to the Lyrical Ballads" label="preface"/>
<link wikidata="Q738958" start="44640" end="44655" title="Lyrical Ballads" label="Lyrical Ballads"/>
<link wikidata="Q82083" start="44805" end="44815" title="John Keats" label="John Keats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349126" start="44904" end="44924" title="Ode to a Nightingale" label="Ode to a Nightingale"/>
<link wikidata="Q167768" start="45022" end="45039" title="William Makepeace Thackeray" label="William Thackeray"/>
<link wikidata="" start="45079" end="45083" title=":wikisource:la:Carmina (Horatius)/Liber I/Carmen XXXVIII" label="1.38"/>
<link wikidata="Q313693" start="45152" end="45173" title="Gerard Manley Hopkins" label="Gerard Manley Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404813" start="45251" end="45270" title="Sir Theodore Martin" label="Sir Theodore Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q152245" start="45286" end="45299" title="Albert, Prince Consort" label="Prince Albert"/>
<link wikidata="" start="45374" end="45378" title=":wikisource:la:Carmina (Horatius)/Liber I/Carmen XXV" label="1.25"/>
<link wikidata="Q318462" start="45412" end="45432" title="Edward Bulwer-Lytton" label="Edward Bulwer-Lytton"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="45468" end="45485" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q532457" start="45551" end="45568" title="Edward FitzGerald (poet)" label="Edward FitzGerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059358" start="45582" end="45606" title="Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam" label="Rubaiyat of Omar Khayyam"/>
<link wikidata="Q250090" start="45661" end="45672" title="ruba&amp;#x27;i" label="ruba&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q43216" start="45911" end="45920" title="Epicurus" label="Epicurean"/>
<link wikidata="Q206883" start="45942" end="45950" title="Symposium" label="sympotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80968" start="46044" end="46052" title="nihilism" label="nihilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q271032" start="46066" end="46080" title="Matthew Arnold" label="Matthew Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="" start="46164" end="46168" title=":wikisource:la:Carmina (Horatius)/Liber II/Carmen XI" label="2.11"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="46269" end="46278" title="Victorian Age" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q236596" start="46447" end="46465" title="Christina Rossetti" label="Christina Rossetti"/>
<link wikidata="" start="46612" end="46620" title=":wikisource:la:Carmina (Horatius)/Liber I/Carmen XIX" label="1.19.5–6"/>
<link wikidata="" start="46655" end="46659" title=":wikisource:la:Carmina (Horatius)/Liber I/Carmen XXXVII" label="1.37"/>
<link wikidata="Q351410" start="46661" end="46674" title="A. E. Housman" label="A. E. Housman"/>
<link wikidata="" start="46703" end="46706" title=":wikisource:la:Carmina (Horatius)/Liber IV/Carmen VII" label="4.7"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46711" end="46723" title="Prosody (Latin)#First Archilochian" label="Archilochian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231493" start="46925" end="46938" title="Ernest Dowson" label="Ernest Dowson"/>
<link wikidata="" start="47014" end="47017" title=":wikisource:la:Carmina (Horatius)/Liber IV/Carmen I" label="4.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="47130" end="47137" title="Kipling" label="Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439259" start="47419" end="47435" title="Stalky &amp;amp; Co." label="Stalky &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="" start="47478" end="47481" title=":wikisource:la:Carmina (Horatius)/Liber III/Carmen V" label="3.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424185" start="47781" end="47803" title="Miquel Costa i Llobera" label="Miquel Costa i Llobera"/>
<link wikidata="Q178698" start="47991" end="48002" title="W. H. Auden" label="W. H. Auden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353378" start="48007" end="48021" title="Louis MacNeice" label="Louis MacNeice"/>
<link wikidata="" start="48212" end="48220" title=":wikisource:la:Carmina (Horatius)/Liber II/Carmen XI" label="2.11.1–4"/>
<link wikidata="Q168728" start="48344" end="48356" title="Robert Frost" label="Robert Frost"/>
<link wikidata="" start="48678" end="48682" title=":wikisource:la:Carmina (Horatius)/Liber III/Carmen XIII" label="3.13"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906966" start="49293" end="49306" title="Iambus (genre)" label="Iambic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q677997" start="49594" end="49605" title="Ars Poetica (Horace)" label="Ars Poetica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789052" start="49649" end="49661" title="Thomas Drant" label="Thomas Drant"/>
<link wikidata="Q193857" start="49684" end="49694" title="Ben Jonson" label="Ben Jonson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="49699" end="49709" title="Lord Byron" label="Lord Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q213355" start="49712" end="49723" title="John Dryden" label="John Dryden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379012" start="49885" end="49899" title="Philip Francis (translator)" label="Philip Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="50090" end="50104" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4209191" start="50136" end="50151" title="Charles Stuart Calverley" label="C. S. Calverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226858" start="50259" end="50273" title="John Conington" label="John Conington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404813" start="50402" end="50417" title="Theodore Martin" label="Theodore Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366728" start="50675" end="50687" title="James Michie" label="James Michie"/>
<link wikidata="Q545332" start="50804" end="50811" title="Sapphic stanza" label="Sapphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q640214" start="50816" end="50822" title="Alcaic" label="Alcaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="51278" end="51291" title="Roman Republic" label="late Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="51295" end="51307" title="Roman Empire" label="Early Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q609931" start="51333" end="51347" title="Norman Shelley" label="Norman Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q135096" start="51377" end="51388" title="I, Claudius (TV series)" label="I, Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q190273" start="51413" end="51423" title="Carpe diem" label="Carpe diem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639293" start="51426" end="51438" title="Horatia gens" label="Horatia gens"/>
<link wikidata="Q875625" start="51441" end="51463" title="List of ancient Romans" label="List of ancient Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751418" start="51466" end="51471" title="Otium" label="Otium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153809" start="51474" end="51489" title="Prosody (Latin)" label="Prosody (Latin)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51492" end="51503" title="Translation#Western theory" label="Translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4012755" start="51506" end="51525" title="Horace&amp;#x27;s Villa" label="Horace&amp;#x27;s Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q570837" start="52031" end="52048" title="The Latin Library" label="The Latin Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13694" wikidata="Q1141703" url="?curid=13694" title="Microsoft Windows version history">
<text>Microsoft Windows was announced by Bill Gates on November 10, 1983, 2 years before it was first released. Microsoft introduced Windows as a graphical user interface for MS-DOS, which had been introduced two years earlier, on August 12, 1981. The product line evolved in the 1990s from an operating environment into a fully complete, modern operating system over two lines of development, each with their own separate codebase.

The first versions of Windows (1.0 through to 3.11) were graphical shells that ran from MS-DOS. Windows 95, though still being based on MS-DOS, was its own operating system. Windows 95 also had a significant amount of 16-bit code ported from Windows 3.1. Windows 95 introduced multiple features that have been part of the product ever since, including the Start menu, the taskbar, and Windows Explorer (renamed File Explorer in Windows 8). In 1997, Microsoft released Internet Explorer 4 which included the (at the time controversial) Windows Desktop Update. It aimed to integrate Internet Explorer and the web into the user interface and also brought new features into Windows, such as the ability to display JPEG images as the desktop wallpaper and single window navigation in Windows Explorer. In 1998, Microsoft released Windows 98, which also included the Windows Desktop Update and Internet Explorer 4 by default. The inclusion of Internet Explorer 4 and the Desktop Update led to an antitrust case in the United States. Windows 98 included USB support out of the box, and also plug and play, which allows devices to work when plugged in without requiring a system reboot or manual configuration. Windows Me, the last DOS-based version of Windows, was aimed at consumers and released in 2000. It introduced System Restore, Help and Support Center, updated versions of the Disk Defragmenter and other system tools.

In 1993, Microsoft released Windows NT 3.1, the first version of the newly developed Windows NT operating system, followed by Windows NT 3.5 in 1994, and Windows NT 3.51 in 1995. &quot;NT&quot; is an initialism for &quot;New Technology&quot;. Unlike the Windows 9x series of operating systems, it was a fully 32-bit operating system. NT 3.1 introduced NTFS, a file system designed to replace the older File Allocation Table (FAT) which was used by DOS and the DOS-based Windows operating systems. In 1996, Windows NT 4.0 was released, which included a fully 32-bit version of Windows Explorer written specifically for it, making the operating system work like Windows 95. Windows NT was originally designed to be used on high-end systems and servers, but with the release of Windows 2000, many consumer-oriented features from Windows 95 and Windows 98 were included, such as the Windows Desktop Update, Internet Explorer 5, USB support and Windows Media Player. These consumer-oriented features were further extended in Windows XP in 2001, which included a new visual style called Luna, a more user-friendly interface, updated versions of Windows Media Player and Internet Explorer 6 by default, and extended features from Windows Me, such as the Help and Support Center and System Restore. Windows Vista, which was released in 2007, focused on securing the Windows operating system against computer viruses and other malicious software by introducing features such as User Account Control. New features include Windows Aero, updated versions of the standard games (e.g. Solitaire), Windows Movie Maker, and Windows Mail to replace Outlook Express. Despite this, Windows Vista was critically panned for its poor performance on older hardware and its at-the-time high system requirements. Windows 7 followed in 2009 nearly three years after its launch, and despite it technically having higher system requirements, reviewers noted that it ran better than Windows Vista. Windows 7 removed many applications, such as Windows Movie Maker, Windows Photo Gallery and Windows Mail, instead requiring users to download separate Windows Live Essentials to gain some of those features and other online services. Windows 8, which was released in 2012, introduced many controversial changes, such as the replacement of the Start menu with the Start Screen, the removal of the Aero interface in favor of a flat, colored interface as well as the introduction of &quot;Metro&quot; apps (later renamed to Universal Windows Platform apps), and the Charms Bar user interface element, all of which received considerable criticism from reviewers. Windows 8.1, a free upgrade to Windows 8, was released in 2013.

The following version of Windows, Windows 10, which was released in 2015, reintroduced the Start menu and added the ability to run Universal Windows Platform apps in a window instead of always in full screen. Windows 10 was generally well-received, with many reviewers stating that Windows 10 is what Windows 8 should have been.

The latest version of Windows, Windows 11, was released to the general public on October 5, 2021. Windows 11 incorporates a redesigned user interface, including a new Start menu, a visual style featuring rounded corners, and a new layout for the Microsoft Store, and also included Microsoft Edge by default.

==Windows 1.0==

Windows 1.0, the first independent version of Microsoft Windows, released on November 20, 1985, achieved little popularity. The project was briefly codenamed &quot;Interface Manager&quot; before the windowing system was implemented—contrary to popular belief that it was the original name for Windows and Rowland Hanson, the head of marketing at Microsoft, convinced the company that the name &quot;Windows&quot; would be more appealing to customers.

Windows 1.0 was not a complete operating system, but rather an &quot;operating environment&quot; that extended MS-DOS, and shared the latter&#x27;s inherent flaws.

The first version of Microsoft Windows included a simple graphics painting program called Windows Paint; Windows Write, a simple word processor; an appointment calendar; a card-filer; a notepad; a clock; a control panel; a computer terminal; Clipboard; and RAM driver. It also included the MS-DOS Executive and a game called Reversi.

Microsoft had worked with Apple Computer to develop applications for Apple&#x27;s new Macintosh computer, which featured a graphical user interface. As part of the related business negotiations, Microsoft had licensed certain aspects of the Macintosh user interface from Apple; in later litigation, a district court summarized these aspects as &quot;screen displays&quot;.
In the development of Windows 1.0, Microsoft intentionally limited its borrowing of certain GUI elements from the Macintosh user interface, to comply with its license. For example, windows were only displayed &quot;tiled&quot; on the screen; that is, they could not overlap or overlie one another.

On December 31, 2001, Microsoft declared Windows 1.0 obsolete and stopped providing support and updates for the system.

==OS/2 and Windows 2.x==


During the mid to late 1980s, Microsoft and IBM had cooperatively been developing OS/2 as a successor to DOS. OS/2 would take full advantage of the aforementioned protected mode of the Intel 80286 processor and up to 16 MB of memory. OS/2 1.0, released in 1987, supported swapping and multitasking and allowed running of DOS executables.

IBM licensed Windows&#x27; GUI for OS/2 as Presentation Manager, and the two companies stated that it and Windows 2.0 would be almost identical. Presentation Manager was not available with OS/2 until version 1.1, released in 1988. Its API was incompatible with Windows. Version 1.2, released in 1989, introduced a new file system, HPFS, to replace the FAT file system.

By the early 1990s, conflicts developed in the Microsoft/IBM relationship. They cooperated with each other in developing their PC operating systems and had access to each other&#x27;s code. Microsoft wanted to further develop Windows, while IBM desired for future work to be based on OS/2. In an attempt to resolve this tension, IBM and Microsoft agreed that IBM would develop OS/2 2.0, to replace OS/2 1.3 and Windows 3.0, while Microsoft would develop the next version, OS/2 3.0.

This agreement soon fell apart however, and the Microsoft/IBM relationship was terminated. IBM continued to develop OS/2, while Microsoft changed the name of its (as yet unreleased) OS/2 3.0 to Windows NT. Both retained the rights to use OS/2 and Windows technology developed up to the termination of the agreement; Windows NT, however, was to be written anew, mostly independently (see below).

After an interim 1.3 version to fix up many remaining problems with the 1.x series, IBM released OS/2 version 2.0 in 1992. This was a major improvement: it featured a new, object-oriented GUI, the Workplace Shell (WPS), that included a desktop and was considered by many to be OS/2&#x27;s best feature. Microsoft would later imitate much of it in Windows 95. Version 2.0 also provided a full 32-bit API, offered smooth multitasking and could take advantage of the 4 gigabytes of address space provided by the Intel 80386. Still, much of the system had 16-bit code internally which required, among other things, device drivers to be 16-bit code as well. This was one of the reasons for the chronic shortage of OS/2 drivers for the latest devices. Version 2.0 could also run DOS and Windows 3.0 programs, since IBM had retained the right to use the DOS and Windows code as a result of the breakup.

Microsoft Windows version 2.0 (2.01 and 2.03 internally) came out on December 9, 1987, and proved slightly more popular than its predecessor. Much of the popularity for Windows 2.0 came by way of its inclusion as a &quot;run-time version&quot; with Microsoft&#x27;s new graphical applications, Excel and Word for Windows. They could be run from MS-DOS, executing Windows for the duration of their activity, and closing down Windows upon exit.

Microsoft Windows received a major boost around this time when Aldus PageMaker appeared in a Windows version, having previously run only on Macintosh. Some computer historians date this, the first appearance of a significant &quot;and&quot; non-Microsoft application for Windows, as the start of the success of Windows.

Like prior versions of Windows, version 2.0 could use the real-mode memory model, which confined it to a maximum of 1 megabyte of memory. In such a configuration, it could run under another multitasker like DESQview, which used the 286 protected mode. It was also the first version to support the High Memory Area when running on an Intel 80286 compatible processor. This edition was renamed Windows/286 with the release of Windows 2.1.

A separate Windows/386 edition had a protected mode kernel, which required an 80386 compatible processor, with LIM-standard EMS emulation and VxD drivers in the kernel. All Windows and DOS-based applications at the time were real mode, and Windows/386 could run them over the protected mode kernel by using the virtual 8086 mode, which was new with the 80386 processor.

Version 2.1 came out on May 27, 1988, followed by version 2.11 on March 13, 1989; they included a few minor changes.

In Apple Computer, Inc. v. Microsoft Corp., version 2.03, and later 3.0, faced challenges from Apple over its overlapping windows and other features Apple charged mimicked the ostensibly copyrighted &quot;look and feel&quot; of its operating system and &quot;embodie[d] and generated a copy of the Macintosh&quot; in its OS. Judge William Schwarzer dropped all but 10 of Apple&#x27;s 189 claims of copyright infringement, and ruled that most of the remaining 10 were over uncopyrightable ideas.

On December 31, 2001, Microsoft declared Windows 2.x obsolete and stopped providing support and updates for the system.

==Windows 3.0==

Windows 3.0, released in May 1990, improved capabilities given to native applications. It also allowed users to better multitask older MS-DOS based software compared to Windows/386, thanks to the introduction of virtual memory.

Windows 3.0&#x27;s user interface finally resembled a serious competitor to the user interface of the Macintosh computer. PCs had improved graphics by this time, due to VGA video cards, and the protected/enhanced mode allowed Windows applications to use more memory in a more painless manner than their DOS counterparts could. Windows 3.0 could run in real, standard, or 386 enhanced modes, and was compatible with any Intel processor from the 8086/8088 up to the 80286 and 80386. This was the first version to run Windows programs in protected mode, although the 386 enhanced mode kernel was an enhanced version of the protected mode kernel in Windows/386.

Windows 3.0 received two updates. A few months after introduction, Windows 3.0a was released as a maintenance release, resolving bugs and improving stability. A &quot;multimedia&quot; version, Windows 3.0 with Multimedia Extensions 1.0, was released in October 1991. This was bundled with &quot;multimedia upgrade kits&quot;, comprising a CD-ROM drive and a sound card, such as the Creative Labs Sound Blaster Pro. This version was the precursor to the multimedia features available in Windows 3.1 (first released in April 1992) and later, and was part of Microsoft&#x27;s specification for the Multimedia PC.

The features listed above and growing market support from application software developers made Windows 3.0 wildly successful, selling around 10 million copies in the two years before the release of version 3.1. Windows 3.0 became a major source of income for Microsoft, and led the company to revise some of its earlier plans. Support was discontinued on December 31, 2001.

==Windows 3.1==
In response to the impending release of OS/2 2.0, Microsoft developed Windows 3.1 (first released in April 1992), which included several improvements to Windows 3.0, such as display of TrueType scalable fonts (developed jointly with Apple), improved disk performance in 386 Enhanced Mode, multimedia support, and bugfixes. It also removed Real Mode, and only ran on an 80286 or better processor. Later Microsoft also released Windows 3.11, a touch-up to Windows 3.1 which included all of the patches and updates that followed the release of Windows 3.1 in 1992.

In 1992 and 1993, Microsoft released Windows for Workgroups (WfW), which was available both as an add-on for existing Windows 3.1 installations and in a version that included the base Windows environment and the networking extensions all in one package. Windows for Workgroups included improved network drivers and protocol stacks, and support for peer-to-peer networking. There were two versions of Windows for Workgroups – 3.1 and 3.11. Unlike prior versions, Windows for Workgroups 3.11 ran in 386 Enhanced Mode only, and needed at least an 80386SX processor. One optional download for WfW was the &quot;Wolverine&quot; TCP/IP protocol stack, which allowed for easy access to the Internet through corporate networks.

All these versions continued version 3.0&#x27;s impressive sales pace. Even though the 3.1x series still lacked most of the important features of OS/2, such as long file names, a desktop, or protection of the system against misbehaving applications, Microsoft quickly took over the OS and GUI markets for the IBM PC. The Windows API became the de facto standard for consumer software.

On December 31, 2001, Microsoft declared Windows 3.1 obsolete and stopped providing support and updates for the system. However, OEM licensing for Windows for Workgroups 3.11 on embedded systems continued to be available until November 1, 2008.

==Windows NT 3.x==
Meanwhile, Microsoft continued to develop Windows NT. The main architect of the system was Dave Cutler, one of the chief architects of VAX/VMS at Digital Equipment Corporation. Microsoft hired him in October 1988 to create a successor to OS/2, but Cutler created a completely new system instead. Cutler had been developing a follow-on to VMS at DEC called MICA, and when DEC dropped the project he brought the expertise and around 20 engineers with him to Microsoft.

Windows NT Workstation (Microsoft marketing wanted Windows NT to appear to be a continuation of Windows 3.1) arrived in Beta form to developers at the July 1992 Professional Developers Conference in San Francisco. Microsoft announced at the conference its intentions to develop a successor to both Windows NT and Windows 3.1&#x27;s replacement (Windows 95, codenamed Chicago), which would unify the two into one operating system. This successor was codenamed Cairo. In hindsight, Cairo was a much more difficult project than Microsoft had anticipated and, as a result, NT and Chicago would not be unified until Windows XP—albeit Windows 2000, oriented to business, had already unified most of the system&#x27;s bolts and gears, it was XP that was sold to home consumers like Windows 95 and came to be viewed as the final unified OS. Parts of Cairo have still not made it into Windows : most notably, the WinFS file system, which was the much touted Object File System of Cairo. Microsoft announced in 2006 that they would not make a separate release of WinFS for Windows XP and Windows Vista and would gradually incorporate the technologies developed for WinFS in other products and technologies, notably Microsoft SQL Server.

Driver support was lacking due to the increased programming difficulty in dealing with NT&#x27;s superior hardware abstraction model. This problem plagued the NT line all the way through Windows 2000. Programmers complained that it was too hard to write drivers for NT, and hardware developers were not going to go through the trouble of developing drivers for a small segment of the market. Additionally, although allowing for good performance and fuller exploitation of system resources, it was also resource-intensive on limited hardware, and thus was only suitable for larger, more expensive machines.

However, these same features made Windows NT perfect for the LAN server market (which in 1993 was experiencing a rapid boom, as office networking was becoming common). NT also had advanced network connectivity options and NTFS, an efficient file system. Windows NT version 3.51 was Microsoft&#x27;s entry into this field, and took away market share from Novell (the dominant player) in the following years.

One of Microsoft&#x27;s biggest advances initially developed for Windows NT was a new 32-bit API, to replace the legacy 16-bit Windows API. This API was called Win32, and from then on Microsoft referred to the older 16-bit API as Win16. The Win32 API had three levels of implementation: the complete one for Windows NT, a subset for Chicago (originally called Win32c) missing features primarily of interest to enterprise customers (at the time) such as security and Unicode support, and a more limited subset called Win32s which could be used on Windows 3.1 systems. Thus Microsoft sought to ensure some degree of compatibility between the Chicago design and Windows NT, even though the two systems had radically different internal architectures.

Windows NT was the first Windows operating system based on a hybrid kernel. The hybrid kernel was designed as a modified microkernel, influenced by the Mach microkernel developed by Richard Rashid at Carnegie Mellon University, but without meeting all of the criteria of a pure microkernel.

As released, Windows NT 3.x went through three versions (3.1, 3.5, and 3.51), changes were primarily internal and reflected back end changes. The 3.5 release added support for new types of hardware and improved performance and data reliability; the 3.51 release was primarily to update the Win32 APIs to be compatible with software being written for the Win32c APIs in what became Windows 95. Support for Windows NT 3.51 ended in 2001 and 2002 for the Workstation and Server editions, respectively.

==Windows 95==
After Windows 3.11, Microsoft began to develop a new consumer-oriented version of the operating system codenamed Chicago. Chicago was designed to have support for 32-bit preemptive multitasking like OS/2 and Windows NT, although a 16-bit kernel would remain for the sake of backward compatibility. The Win32 API first introduced with Windows NT was adopted as the standard 32-bit programming interface, with Win16 compatibility being preserved through a technique known as &quot;thunking&quot;. A new object-oriented GUI was not originally planned as part of the release, although elements of the Cairo user interface were borrowed and added as other aspects of the release (notably Plug and Play) slipped.

Microsoft did not change all of the Windows code to 32-bit; parts of it remained 16-bit (albeit not directly using real mode) for reasons of compatibility, performance, and development time. Additionally it was necessary to carry over design decisions from earlier versions of Windows for reasons of backwards compatibility, even if these design decisions no longer matched a more modern computing environment. These factors eventually began to impact the operating system&#x27;s efficiency and stability.
Microsoft marketing adopted Windows 95 as the product name for Chicago when it was released on August 24, 1995. Microsoft had a double gain from its release: first, it made it impossible for consumers to run Windows 95 on a cheaper, non-Microsoft DOS, secondly, although traces of DOS were never completely removed from the system and MS DOS 7 would be loaded briefly as a part of the booting process, Windows 95 applications ran solely in 386 enhanced mode, with a flat 32-bit address space and virtual memory. These features make it possible for Win32 applications to address up to 2 gigabytes of virtual RAM (with another 2 GB reserved for the operating system), and in theory prevented them from inadvertently corrupting the memory space of other Win32 applications. In this respect the functionality of Windows 95 moved closer to Windows NT, although Windows 95/98/Me did not support more than 512 megabytes of physical RAM without obscure system tweaks. Three years after its introduction, Windows 95 was succeeded by Windows 98.

IBM continued to market OS/2, producing later versions in OS/2 3.0 and 4.0 (also called Warp). Responding to complaints about OS/2 2.0&#x27;s high demands on computer hardware, version 3.0 was significantly optimized both for speed and size. Before Windows 95 was released, OS/2 Warp 3.0 was even shipped pre-installed with several large German hardware vendor chains. However, with the release of Windows 95, OS/2 began to lose market share.

It is probably impossible to choose one specific reason why OS/2 failed to gain much market share. While OS/2 continued to run Windows 3.1 applications, it lacked support for anything but the Win32s subset of Win32 API (see above). Unlike with Windows 3.1, IBM did not have access to the source code for Windows 95 and was unwilling to commit the time and resources to emulate the moving target of the Win32 API. IBM later introduced OS/2 into the United States v. Microsoft case, blaming unfair marketing tactics on Microsoft&#x27;s part.

Microsoft went on to release five different versions of Windows 95:
* Windows 95 – original release
* Windows 95 A – included Windows 95 OSR1 slipstreamed into the installation
* Windows 95 B (OSR2) – included several major enhancements, Internet Explorer (IE) 3.0 and full FAT32 file system support
* Windows 95 B USB (OSR2.1) – included basic USB support
* Windows 95 C (OSR2.5) – included all the above features, plus IE 4.0; this was the last 95 version produced

OSR2, OSR2.1, and OSR2.5 were not released to the general public, rather, they were available only to OEMs that would preload the OS onto computers. Some companies sold new hard drives with OSR2 preinstalled (officially justifying this as needed due to the hard drive&#x27;s capacity).

The first Microsoft Plus! add-on pack was sold for Windows 95. Microsoft ended extended support for Windows 95 on December 31, 2001.

===Phases in development===
==Windows NT 4.0==
Microsoft released the successor to NT 3.51, Windows NT 4.0, on August 24, 1996, one year after the release of Windows 95. It was Microsoft&#x27;s primary business-oriented operating system until the introduction of Windows 2000. Major new features included the new Explorer shell from Windows 95, scalability and feature improvements to the core architecture, kernel, USER32, COM and MSRPC.

Windows NT 4.0 came in five versions:
* Windows NT 4.0 Workstation
* Windows NT 4.0 Server
* Windows NT 4.0 Server, Enterprise Edition (includes support for 8-way SMP and clustering)
* Windows NT 4.0 Terminal Server
* Windows NT 4.0 Embedded

Microsoft ended mainstream support for Windows NT 4.0 Workstation on June 30, 2002, and ended extended support on June 30, 2004, while Windows NT 4.0 Server mainstream support ended on December 31, 2002, and extended support ended on December 31, 2004. Both editions were succeeded by Windows 2000 Professional and the Windows 2000 Server Family, respectively.

Microsoft ended mainstream support for Windows NT 4.0 Embedded on June 30, 2003, and ended extended support on July 11, 2006. This edition was succeeded by Windows XP Embedded.

==Windows 98==


On June 25, 1998, Microsoft released Windows 98 (code-named Memphis), three years after the release of Windows 95, two years after the release of Windows NT 4.0, and 21 months before the release of Windows 2000. It included new hardware drivers and the FAT32 file system which supports disk partitions that are larger than 2 GB (first introduced in Windows 95 OSR2). USB support in Windows 98 is marketed as a vast improvement over Windows 95. The release continued the controversial inclusion of the Internet Explorer browser with the operating system that started with Windows 95 OEM Service Release 1. The action eventually led to the filing of the United States v. Microsoft case, dealing with the question of whether Microsoft was introducing unfair practices into the market in an effort to eliminate competition from other companies such as Netscape.

In 1999, Microsoft released Windows 98 Second Edition, an interim release. One of the more notable new features was the addition of Internet Connection Sharing, a form of network address translation, allowing several machines on a LAN (Local Area Network) to share a single Internet connection. Hardware support through device drivers was increased and this version shipped with Internet Explorer 5. Many minor problems that existed in the first edition were fixed making it, according to many, the most stable release of the Windows 9x family.

Mainstream support for Windows 98 and 98 SE ended on June 30, 2002. Extended support ended on July 11, 2006.

==Windows 2000==

Microsoft released Windows 2000 on February 17, 2000, as the successor to Windows NT 4.0, 17 months after the release of Windows 98. It has the version number Windows NT 5.0, and it was Microsoft&#x27;s business-oriented operating system starting with the official release on February 17, 2000, until 2001 when it was succeeded by Windows XP. Windows 2000 has had four official service packs. It was successfully deployed both on the server and the workstation markets. Amongst Windows 2000&#x27;s most significant new features was Active Directory, a near-complete replacement of the NT 4.0 Windows Server domain model, which built on industry-standard technologies like DNS, LDAP, and Kerberos to connect machines to one another. Terminal Services, previously only available as a separate edition of NT 4, was expanded to all server versions. A number of features from Windows 98 were incorporated also, such as an improved Device Manager, Windows Media Player, and a revised DirectX that made it possible for the first time for many modern games to work on the NT kernel. Windows 2000 is also the last NT-kernel Windows operating system to lack product activation.

While Windows 2000 upgrades were available for Windows 95 and Windows 98, it was not intended for home users.

Windows 2000 was available in four editions:
* Windows 2000 Professional
* Windows 2000 Server
* Windows 2000 Advanced Server
* Windows 2000 Datacenter Server

Microsoft ended support for both Windows 2000 and Windows XP Service Pack 2 on July 13, 2010.

==Windows Me==


On September 14, 2000, Microsoft released a successor to Windows 98 called Windows Me, short for &quot;Millennium Edition&quot;. It was the last DOS-based operating system from Microsoft. Windows Me introduced a new multimedia-editing application called Windows Movie Maker, came standard with Internet Explorer 5.5 and Windows Media Player 7, and debuted the first version of System Restore – a recovery utility that enables the operating system to revert system files back to a prior date and time. System Restore was a notable feature that would continue to thrive in all later versions of Windows.

Windows Me was conceived as a quick one-year project that served as a stopgap release between Windows 98 and Windows XP. Many of the new features were available from the Windows Update site as updates for older Windows versions (&quot;System Restore&quot; and &quot;Windows Movie Maker&quot; were exceptions). Windows Me was criticized for stability issues, as well as for lacking real mode DOS support, to the point of being referred to as the &quot;Mistake Edition&quot;. Windows Me was the last operating system to be based on the Windows 9x (monolithic) kernel and MS-DOS, with its successor Windows XP being based on Microsoft&#x27;s Windows NT kernel instead.

==Windows XP, Server 2003 series and Fundamentals for Legacy PCs==


On October 25, 2001, Microsoft released Windows XP (codenamed &quot;Whistler&quot;). The merging of the Windows NT/2000 and Windows 95/98/Me lines was finally achieved with Windows XP. Windows XP uses the Windows NT 5.1 kernel, marking the entrance of the Windows NT core to the consumer market, to replace the aging Windows 9x branch. The initial release was met with considerable criticism, particularly in the area of security, leading to the release of three major Service Packs. Windows XP SP1 was released in September 2002, SP2 was released in August 2004 and SP3 was released in April 2008. Service Pack 2 provided significant improvements and encouraged widespread adoption of XP among both home and business users. Windows XP was one of Microsoft&#x27;s longest-running flagship operating systems, beginning with the public release on October 25, 2001, for at least 5 years, and ending on January 30, 2007, when it was succeeded by Windows Vista.

Windows XP is available in a number of versions:
* Windows XP Home Edition, for home users
* Windows XP Professional, for business and power users contained a number of features not available in Home Edition.
* Windows XP N, like above editions, but without a default installation of Windows Media Player, as mandated by a European Union ruling

* Windows XP Media Center Edition (MCE), released in October 2002 for desktops and notebooks with an emphasis on home entertainment. Contained all features offered in Windows XP Professional and the Windows Media Center. Subsequent versions are the same but have an updated Windows Media Center.
** Windows XP Media Center Edition 2004, released on September 30, 2003
** Windows XP Media Center Edition 2005, released on October 12, 2004. Included the Royale theme, support for Media Center Extenders, themes and screensavers from &quot;Microsoft Plus! for Windows XP&quot;. The ability to join an Active Directory domain is disabled.
* Windows XP Tablet PC Edition, for tablet PCs
** Windows XP Tablet PC Edition 2005
* Windows XP Embedded, for embedded systems
* Windows XP Starter Edition, for new computer users in developing countries
* Windows XP Professional x64 Edition, released on April 25, 2005, for home and workstation systems utilizing 64-bit processors based on the x86-64 instruction set originally developed by AMD as AMD64; Intel calls their version Intel 64. Internally, XP x64 was a somewhat updated version of Windows based on the Server 2003 codebase.
* Windows XP 64-bit Edition, is a version for Intel&#x27;s Itanium line of processors; maintains 32-bit compatibility solely through a software emulator. It is roughly analogous to Windows XP Professional in features. It was discontinued in September 2005 when the last vendor of Itanium workstations stopped shipping Itanium systems marketed as &quot;Workstations&quot;.

===Windows Server 2003===
On April 25, 2003, Microsoft launched Windows Server 2003, a notable update to Windows 2000 Server encompassing many new security features, a new &quot;Manage Your Server&quot; wizard that simplifies configuring a machine for specific roles, and improved performance. It is based on the Windows NT 5.2 kernel. A few services not essential for server environments are disabled by default for stability reasons, most noticeable are the &quot;Windows Audio&quot; and &quot;Themes&quot; services; users have to enable them manually to get sound or the &quot;Luna&quot; look as per Windows XP. The hardware acceleration for display is also turned off by default, users have to turn the acceleration level up themselves if they trust the display card driver.

In December 2005, Microsoft released Windows Server 2003 R2, which is actually Windows Server 2003 with SP1 (Service Pack 1), together with an add-on package.
Among the new features are a number of management features for branch offices, file serving, printing and company-wide identity integration.

Windows Server 2003 is available in six editions:
* Web Edition (32-bit)
* Enterprise Edition (32 and 64-bit)
* Datacenter Edition (32 and 64-bit)
* Small Business Server (32-bit)
* Storage Server (OEM channel only)

Windows Server 2003 R2, an update of Windows Server 2003, was released to manufacturing on December 6, 2005. It is distributed on two CDs, with one CD being the Windows Server 2003 SP1 CD. The other CD adds many optionally installable features for Windows Server 2003. The R2 update was released for all x86 and x64 versions, except Windows Server 2003 R2 Enterprise Edition, which was not released for Itanium.

===Windows XP x64 and Server 2003 x64 Editions===
On April 25, 2005, Microsoft released Windows XP Professional x64 Edition and Windows Server 2003, x64 Editions in Standard, Enterprise and Datacenter SKUs. Windows XP Professional x64 Edition is an edition of Windows XP for x86-64 personal computers. It is designed to use the expanded 64-bit memory address space provided by the x86–64 architecture.

Windows XP Professional x64 Edition is based on the Windows Server 2003 codebase, with the server features removed and client features added. Both &quot;Windows Server 2003 x64&quot; and Windows XP Professional x64 Edition use identical kernels.

Windows XP &quot;Professional&quot; &quot;x64 Edition&quot; is not to be confused with Windows XP &quot;64-bit Edition&quot;, as the latter was designed for Intel Itanium processors. During the initial development phases, Windows XP Professional x64 Edition was named &quot;Windows XP 64-Bit Edition for 64-Bit Extended Systems&quot;.

===Windows Fundamentals for Legacy PCs===
In July 2006, Microsoft released a thin-client version of Windows XP Service Pack 2, called Windows Fundamentals for Legacy PCs (WinFLP). It is only available to Software Assurance customers. The aim of WinFLP is to give companies a viable upgrade option for older PCs that are running Windows 95, 98, and Me that will be supported with patches and updates for the next several years. Most user applications will typically be run on a remote machine using Terminal Services or Citrix.

While being visually the same as Windows XP, it has some differences. For example, if the screen has been set to 16 bit colors, the Windows 2000 recycle bin icon and some XP 16-bit icons will show. Paint and some games like Solitaire aren&#x27;t present too.

===Windows Home Server 2007===
Windows Home Server (code-named Q, Quattro) is a server product based on Windows Server 2003, designed for consumer use. The system was announced on January 7, 2007, by Bill Gates. Windows Home Server can be configured and monitored using a console program that can be installed on a client PC. Such features as Media Sharing, local and remote drive backup and file duplication are all listed as features. The release of Windows Home Server Power Pack 3 added support for Windows 7 to Windows Home Server.
==Windows Vista and Server 2008==


Windows Vista was released on November 30, 2006, to business customers—consumer versions followed on January 30, 2007. Windows Vista intended to have enhanced security by introducing a new restricted user mode called User Account Control, replacing the &quot;administrator-by-default&quot; philosophy of Windows XP. Vista was the target of much criticism and negative press, and in general was not well regarded, this was seen as leading to the relatively swift release of Windows 7.

One major difference between Vista and earlier versions of Windows, Windows 95 and later, was that the original start button was replaced with the Windows icon in a circle (called the Start Orb). Vista also featured new graphics features, the Windows Aero GUI, new applications (such as Windows Calendar, Windows DVD Maker and some new games including Chess, Mahjong, and Purble Place), Internet Explorer 7, Windows Media Player 11, and a large number of underlying architectural changes. Windows Vista had the version number NT 6.0. During its lifetime, Windows Vista had two service packs.

Windows Vista shipped in six editions:
* Starter (only available in developing countries)
* Home Basic
* Home Premium
* Business
* Enterprise (only available to large business and enterprise)
* Ultimate (combines both Home Premium and Enterprise)

All editions (except Starter edition) were available in both 32-bit and 64-bit versions. The biggest advantage of the 64-bit version was breaking the 4 gigabyte memory barrier, which 32-bit computers cannot fully access.

===Windows Server 2008===
Windows Server 2008, released on February 27, 2008, was originally known as Windows Server Codename &quot;Longhorn&quot;. Windows Server 2008 built on the technological and security advances first introduced with Windows Vista, and was significantly more modular than its predecessor, Windows Server 2003.

Windows Server 2008 shipped in ten editions:
* Windows Server 2008 Foundation (for OEMs only)
* Windows Server 2008 Standard (32-bit and 64-bit)
* Windows Server 2008 Enterprise (32-bit and 64-bit)
* Windows Server 2008 Datacenter (32-bit and 64-bit)
* Windows Server 2008 for Itanium-based Systems (IA-64)
* Windows HPC Server 2008
* Windows Web Server 2008 (32-bit and 64-bit)
* Windows Storage Server 2008 (32-bit and 64-bit)
* Windows Small Business Server 2008 (64-bit only)
* Windows Essential Business Server 2008 (32-bit and 64-bit)

==Windows 7 and Server 2008 R2==

Windows 7 was released to manufacturing on July 22, 2009, and reached general retail availability on October 22, 2009. Since its release, Windows 7 had one service pack.

Some features of Windows 7 were faster booting, Device Stage, Windows PowerShell, less obtrusive User Account Control, multi-touch, and improved window management. The interface was renewed with a bigger taskbar and some improvements in the searching system and the Start menu. Features included with Windows Vista and not in Windows 7 include the sidebar (although gadgets remain) and several programs that were removed in favor of downloading their Windows Live counterparts. Windows 7 met with positive reviews, which said the OS was faster and easier to use than Windows Vista.

Windows 7 shipped in six editions:
* Starter (available worldwide)
* Home Basic
* Home Premium
* Professional
* Enterprise (available to volume-license business customers only)
* Ultimate
In some countries in the European Union, there were other editions that lacked some features such as Windows Media Player, Windows Media Center and Internet Explorer—these editions were called names such as &quot;Windows 7 N.&quot;
Microsoft focused on selling Windows 7 Home Premium and Professional. All editions, except the Starter edition, were available in both 32-bit and 64-bit versions.
Unlike the corresponding Vista editions, the Professional and Enterprise editions were supersets of the Home Premium edition.

At the Professional Developers Conference (PDC) 2008, Microsoft also announced Windows Server 2008 R2, as the server variant of Windows 7. Windows Server 2008 R2 shipped in 64-bit versions (x64 and Itanium) only.

===Windows Thin PC===

In 2010, Microsoft released Windows Thin PC or WinTPC, which was a feature-and size-reduced locked-down version of Windows 7 expressly designed to turn older PCs into thin clients. WinTPC was available for software assurance customers and relied on cloud computing in a business network. Wireless operation is supported since WinTPC has full wireless stack integration, but wireless operation may not be as good as the operation on a wired connection.
==Windows Home Server 2011==
Windows Home Server 2011 code named &#x27;Vail&#x27; was released on April 6, 2011. Windows Home Server 2011 is built on the Windows Server 2008 R2 code base and removed the Drive Extender drive pooling technology in the original Windows Home Server release. Windows Home Server 2011 is considered a &quot;major release&quot;. Its predecessor was built on Windows Server 2003. WHS 2011 only supports x86-64 hardware.

Microsoft decided to discontinue Windows Home Server 2011 on July 5, 2012, while including its features into Windows Server 2012 Essentials. Windows Home Server 2011 was supported until April 12, 2016.

==Windows 8 and Server 2012==
On June 1, 2011, Microsoft previewed Windows 8 at both Computex Taipei and the D9: All Things Digital conference in California. The first public preview of Windows Server 2012 was shown by Microsoft at the 2011 Microsoft Worldwide Partner Conference. Windows 8 Release Preview and Windows Server 2012 Release Candidate were both released on May 31, 2012. Product development on Windows 8 was completed on August 1, 2012, and it was released to manufacturing the same day. Windows Server 2012 went on sale to the public on September 4, 2012. Windows 8 went on sale to the public on October 26, 2012. One edition, Windows RT, runs on some system-on-a-chip devices with mobile 32-bit ARM (ARMv7) processors. Windows 8 features a redesigned user interface, designed to make it easier for touchscreen users to use Windows. The interface introduced an updated Start menu known as the Start screen, and a new full-screen application platform. The desktop interface is also present for running windowed applications, although Windows RT will not run any desktop applications not included in the system. On the Building Windows 8 blog, it was announced that a computer running Windows 8 can boot up much faster than Windows 7. New features also include USB 3.0 support, the Windows Store, the ability to run from USB drives with Windows To Go, and others.

Windows 8.1 and Windows Server 2012 R2 were released on October 17, 2013. Windows 8.1 is available as an update in the Windows Store for Windows 8 users only and also available to download for clean installation. The update adds new options for resizing the live tiles on the Start screen. Windows 8 was given the kernel number NT 6.2, with its successor 8.1 receiving the kernel number 6.3. Neither had any service packs, although many consider Windows 8.1 to be a service pack for Windows 8. However, Windows 8.1 received two main updates in 2014. Both versions received some criticism due to the removal of the Start menu and some difficulties to perform tasks and commands.

Windows 8 is available in the following editions:
* Windows 8
* Windows 8 Pro
* Windows 8 Enterprise
* Windows RT

Microsoft ended support for Windows 8 on January 12, 2016, and for Windows 8.1 on January 10, 2023.

==Windows 10 and corresponding Server versions==
Windows 10 was unveiled on September 30, 2014, as the successor for Windows 8, and was released on July 29, 2015. It was distributed without charge to Windows 7 and 8.1 users for one year after release. A number of new features like Cortana, the Microsoft Edge web browser, the ability to view Windows Store apps as a window instead of fullscreen, the return of the Start menu, virtual desktops, revamped core apps, Continuum, and a unified Settings app were all features debuted in Windows 10. Like its successor, the operating system was announced as a service OS that would receive constant performance and stability updates. Unlike Windows 8, Windows 10 received mostly positive reviews, praising improvements of stability and practicality than its predecessor, however, it received some criticism due to mandatory update installation, privacy concerns and advertising-supported software tactics.

Although Microsoft claimed Windows 10 would be the last Windows version, eventually a new major release, Windows 11, was announced in 2021. That made Windows 10 last longer as Microsoft&#x27;s flagship operating system than any other version of Windows, beginning with the public release on July 29, 2015, for six years, and ending on October 5, 2021, when Windows 11 was released. Windows 10 had received thirteen main updates.

===Stable releases===
*Version 1507 (codenamed Threshold 1) was the original version of Windows 10 and released in July 2015. One of the big features was the introduction of Windows Hello, which at launch enabled users to log into Windows with facial recognition if the PC was equipped with a compatible active illuminated near-infrared, NIR, camera.
*Version 1511, announced as the &quot;November Update&quot; and codenamed Threshold 2. It was released in November 2015. This update added many visual tweaks, such as more consistent context menus and the ability to change the color of window titlebars. Windows 10 can now be activated with a product key for Windows 7 and later, thus simplifying the activation process and essentially making Windows 10 free for anyone who has Windows 7 or later, even after the free upgrade period ended. A &quot;Find My Device&quot; feature was added, allowing users to track their devices if they lose them, similar to the Find My iPhone service that Apple offers. Controversially, the Start menu now displays &quot;featured apps&quot;. A few tweaks were added to Microsoft Edge, including tab previews and the ability to sync the browser with other devices running Windows 10. Kernel version number: 10.0.10586.
*Version 1607, announced as the &quot;Anniversary Update&quot; and codenamed Redstone 1. It was the first of several planned updates with the &quot;Redstone&quot; codename. Its version number, 1607, means that it was supposed to launch in July 2016, however it was delayed until August 2016. Many new features were included in the version, including more integration with Cortana, a dark theme, browser extension support for Microsoft Edge, click-to-play Flash by default, tab pinning, web notifications, swipe navigation in Edge, and the ability for Windows Hello to use a fingerprint sensor to sign into apps and websites, similar to Touch ID on the iPhone. Also added was Windows Ink, which improves digital inking in many apps, and the Windows Ink Workspace which lists pen-compatible apps, as well as quick shortcuts to a sticky notes app and a sketchpad. Microsoft, through their partnership with Canonical, integrated a full Ubuntu bash shell via the Windows Subsystem for Linux. Notable tweaks in this version of Windows 10 include the removal of the controversial password-sharing feature of Microsoft&#x27;s Wi-Fi Sense service, a slightly redesigned Start menu, Tablet Mode working more like Windows 8, overhauled emoji, improvements to the lock screen, calendar integration in the taskbar, and the Blue Screen of Death now showing a QR code which users can scan to quickly find out what caused the error. This version of Windows 10&#x27;s kernel version is 10.0.14393.
*Version 1703, announced as the &quot;Creators Update&quot; and codenamed Redstone 2. Features for this update include a new Paint 3D application, which allows users to create and modify 3D models, integration with Microsoft&#x27;s HoloLens and other &quot;mixed-reality&quot; headsets produced by other manufacturers, Windows My People, which allows users to manage contacts, Xbox game broadcasting, support for newly developed APIs such as WDDM 2.2, Dolby Atmos support, improvements to the Settings app, and more Edge and Cortana improvements. This version also included tweaks to system apps, such as an address bar in the Registry Editor, Windows PowerShell being the default command line interface instead of the Command Prompt and the Windows Subsystem for Linux being upgraded to support Ubuntu 16.04. This version of Windows 10 was released on April 11, 2017, as a free update.
*Version 1709, announced as the &quot;Fall Creators Update&quot; and codenamed Redstone 3. It introduced a new design language—the Fluent Design System and incorporates it in UWP apps such as Calculator. It also added new features to the Photos application, which were once available only in Windows Movie Maker.
*Version 1803, announced as the &quot;April 2018 Update&quot; and codenamed Redstone 4 introduced Timeline, an upgrade to the task view screen such that it has the ability to show past activities and let users resume them. The respective icon on the taskbar was also changed to reflect this upgrade. Strides were taken to incorporate Fluent Design into Windows, which included adding Acrylic transparency to the Taskbar and Taskbar Flyouts. The Settings App was also redesigned to have an Acrylic left pane. Variable Fonts were introduced.
*Version 1809, announced as the &quot;Windows 10 October 2018 Update&quot; and codenamed Redstone 5 among new features, introduced Dark Mode for File Explorer, Your Phone App to link Android phone with Windows 10, new screenshot tool called Snip &amp; Sketch, Make Text Bigger for easier accessibility, and Clipboard History and Cloud Sync.
*Version 1903, announced as the &quot;Windows 10 May 2019 Update,&quot; codenamed 19H1, was released on May 21, 2019. It added many new features including the addition of a light theme to the Windows shell and a new feature known as Windows Sandbox, which allowed users to run programs in a throwaway virtual window. Notably, this was the first version to allow an application to default to using UTF-8 as the process code page and to default to UTF-8 as the code page in programs such as Notepad.
*Version 1909, announced as the &quot;Windows 10 November 2019 Update&quot;, codenamed 19H2, was released on November 12, 2019. It unlocked many features that were already present, but hidden or disabled, on 1903, such as an auto-expanding menu on Start while hovering the mouse on it, OneDrive integration on Windows Search and creating events from the taskbar&#x27;s clock. Some PCs with version 1903 had already enabled these features without installing 1909.
*Version 2004, announced as the &quot;Windows 10 May 2020 Update&quot;, codenamed 20H1, was released on May 27, 2020. It introduces several new features such as renaming virtual desktops, GPU temperature control and type of disk on task manager, chat-based interface and window appearance for Cortana, and cloud reinstalling and quick searches (depends from region) for search home.
*Version 20H2, announced as the &quot;Windows 10 October 2020 Update&quot;, codenamed 20H2, was released on October 20, 2020. It introduces resizing the start menu panels, a graphing mode for Calculator, process architecture view on task manager&#x27;s Details pane, and optional drivers delivery from Windows Update and an updated in-use location icon on taskbar.
*Version 21H1, announced as the &quot;Windows 10 May 2021 Update&quot;, codenamed 21H1, was released on May 18, 2021.
*Version 21H2, announced as the &quot;Windows 10 November 2021 Update&quot;, codenamed 21H2, was released on November 16, 2021.
*Version 22H2, announced as the &quot;Windows 10 2022 Update&quot;, codenamed 22H2, was released on October 18, 2022. It was the last version of Windows 10.

===Windows Server 2016===
Windows Server 2016 is a release of the Microsoft Windows Server operating system that was unveiled on September 30, 2014. Windows Server 2016 was officially released at Microsoft&#x27;s Ignite Conference, September 26–30, 2016. It is based on the Windows 10 Anniversary Update codebase.

===Windows Server 2019===
Windows Server 2019 is a release of the Microsoft Windows Server operating system that was announced on March 20, 2018. The first Windows Insider preview version was released on the same day. It was released for general availability on October 2, 2018. Windows Server 2019 is based on the Windows 10 October 2018 Update codebase.

On October 6, 2018, distribution of Windows version 1809 (build 17763) was paused while Microsoft investigated an issue with user data being deleted during an in-place upgrade. It affected systems where a user profile folder (e.g. Documents, Music or Pictures) had been moved to another location, but data was left in the original location. As Windows Server 2019 is based on the Windows version 1809 codebase, it too was removed from distribution at the time, but was re-released on November 13, 2018. The software product life cycle for Server 2019 was reset in accordance with the new release date.

===Windows Server 2022===
Windows Server 2022 was released on August 18, 2021. This is the first NT server version which does not share the build number with any of its client version counterpart, although its codename is 21H2, similar to the Windows 10 November 2021 Update.

==Windows 11 and corresponding Server versions==
Windows 11 is the latest release of Windows NT, and the successor to Windows 10. It was unveiled on June 24, 2021, and was released on October 5, serving as a free upgrade to compatible Windows 10 devices. The system incorporates a renewed interface called &quot;Mica&quot;, which includes translucent backgrounds, rounded edges and color combinations. The taskbar&#x27;s icons are center aligned by default, while the Start menu replaces the &quot;Live Tiles&quot; with pinned apps and recommended apps and files. The MSN widget panel, the Microsoft Store, and the file browser, among other applications, have also been redesigned. However, some features and programs such as Cortana, Internet Explorer (replaced by Microsoft Edge as the default web browser) and Paint 3D were removed. Apps like 3D Viewer, Paint 3D, Skype and OneNote for Windows 10 can be downloaded from the Microsoft Store. Beginning in 2021, Windows 11 included compatibility with Android applications, however, Microsoft has announced support for Android apps will end in March, 2025; the Amazon Appstore is included in Windows Subsystem for Android. Windows 11 received a positive reception from critics. While it was praised for its redesigned interface, and increased security and productivity, it was criticized for its high system requirements (which includes an installed TPM 2.0 chip, enabling the Secure Boot protocol, and UEFI firmware) and various UI changes and regressions (such as requiring a Microsoft account for first-time setup, preventing users from changing default browsers, and inconsistent dark theme) compared to Windows 10.

===Stable releases===
*Version 21H2, codenamed &quot;Sun Valley&quot;, was the initial version of Windows 11 released on October 5, 2021.
*Version 22H2, announced as the &quot;Windows 11 2022 Update&quot;, codenamed &quot;Sun Valley 2&quot;, was released on September 20, 2022. Features in this Windows 11 version include an updated, UWP version of the Task Manager and the Smart App Control feature within the Windows Security app. This version has had three major updates, with features including tabbed browsing in the File Explorer, iOS support for the Phone Link app, Bluetooth Low Energy audio support, and a preview of Microsoft Copilot within Windows.
*Version 23H2, announced as the &quot;Windows 11 2023 Update&quot;, codenamed &quot;Sun Valley 3&quot;, was released on October 31, 2023.
*Version 24H2, announced as the &quot;Windows 11 2024 Update&quot;, codenamed &quot;Hudson Valley&quot;, was released on October 1, 2024.

===Windows Server 2025===
Windows Server 2025 follows on Windows Server 2022 and was released on November 1, 2024. It is graphically based on Windows 11 and uses features like Hotpatching, among others.

==See also==
*Comparison of operating systems
*History of operating systems
*List of Microsoft codenames

==References==
==Further reading==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="0" end="17" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284" start="35" end="45" title="Bill Gates" label="Bill Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="140" end="164" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="169" end="175" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713600" start="288" end="309" title="operating environment" label="operating environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="340" end="356" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109" start="485" end="500" title="graphical shell" label="graphical shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q83370" start="524" end="534" title="Windows 95" label="Windows 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064733" start="784" end="794" title="Start menu" label="Start menu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="800" end="807" title="taskbar#Microsoft Windows" label="taskbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q196305" start="813" end="829" title="Windows Explorer" label="Windows Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367622" start="896" end="915" title="Internet Explorer 4" label="Internet Explorer 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606535" start="963" end="985" title="Windows Desktop Update" label="Windows Desktop Update"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="1035" end="1038" title="World Wide Web" label="web"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195" start="1138" end="1142" title="JPEG" label="JPEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345977" start="1418" end="1453" title="United States v. Microsoft Corp. (2001)" label="antitrust case in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q857815" start="1512" end="1525" title="plug and play" label="plug and play"/>
<link wikidata="Q484892" start="1631" end="1641" title="Windows Me" label="Windows Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066221" start="1741" end="1755" title="System Restore" label="System Restore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111903" start="1757" end="1780" title="Help and Support Center" label="Help and Support Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323800" start="1806" end="1823" title="Disk Defragmenter (Windows)" label="Disk Defragmenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q748319" start="1877" end="1891" title="Windows NT 3.1" label="Windows NT 3.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q486487" start="1934" end="1944" title="Windows NT" label="Windows NT"/>
<link wikidata="Q771202" start="1975" end="1989" title="Windows NT 3.5" label="Windows NT 3.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q858368" start="2003" end="2018" title="Windows NT 3.51" label="Windows NT 3.51"/>
<link wikidata="Q609733" start="2103" end="2113" title="Windows 9x" label="Windows 9x"/>
<link wikidata="Q183205" start="2201" end="2205" title="NTFS" label="NTFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q190167" start="2251" end="2272" title="File Allocation Table" label="File Allocation Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q488978" start="2355" end="2369" title="Windows NT 4.0" label="Windows NT 4.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q483881" start="2624" end="2636" title="Windows 2000" label="Windows 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606535" start="2728" end="2750" title="Windows Desktop Update" label="Windows Desktop Update"/>
<link wikidata="Q644560" start="2752" end="2771" title="Internet Explorer 5" label="Internet Explorer 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q192527" start="2789" end="2809" title="Windows Media Player" label="Windows Media Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="2869" end="2879" title="Windows XP" label="Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q48230658" start="2930" end="2934" title="Luna (theme)" label="Luna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072258" start="3013" end="3032" title="Internet Explorer 6" label="Internet Explorer 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q11230" start="3140" end="3153" title="Windows Vista" label="Windows Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q485" start="3240" end="3254" title="computer virus" label="computer virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14001" start="3267" end="3285" title="Malware" label="malicious software"/>
<link wikidata="Q818381" start="3318" end="3338" title="User Account Control" label="User Account Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q219710" start="3361" end="3373" title="Windows Aero" label="Windows Aero"/>
<link wikidata="Q909627" start="3420" end="3429" title="Microsoft Solitaire" label="Solitaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q850109" start="3481" end="3496" title="Outlook Express" label="Outlook Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q11215" start="3637" end="3646" title="Windows 7" label="Windows 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q165777" start="3863" end="3882" title="Windows Movie Maker" label="Windows Movie Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331807" start="3884" end="3905" title="Windows Photo Gallery" label="Windows Photo Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q70254876" start="3910" end="3922" title="Windows Mail" label="Windows Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q773424" start="3969" end="3992" title="Windows Live Essentials" label="Windows Live Essentials"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046" start="4051" end="4060" title="Windows 8" label="Windows 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q16829782" start="4338" end="4369" title="Universal Windows Platform apps" label="Universal Windows Platform apps"/>
<link wikidata="Q18168774" start="4575" end="4585" title="Windows 10" label="Windows 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q107269746" start="4902" end="4912" title="Windows 11" label="Windows 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q18698690" start="5152" end="5166" title="Microsoft Edge" label="Microsoft Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18631871" start="5502" end="5516" title="Rowland Hanson" label="Rowland Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="5760" end="5766" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q334046" start="5904" end="5917" title="Microsoft Paint" label="Windows Paint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332546" start="5919" end="5932" title="Microsoft Write" label="Windows Write"/>
<link wikidata="Q54277" start="5943" end="5957" title="word processor" label="word processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q274098" start="6000" end="6007" title="Notepad (Windows)" label="notepad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165883" start="6020" end="6033" title="control panel (computer)" label="control panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q216640" start="6037" end="6054" title="computer terminal" label="computer terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q244909" start="6056" end="6065" title="Clipboard (software)" label="Clipboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="6071" end="6074" title="RAM" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353026" start="6104" end="6120" title="MS-DOS Executive" label="MS-DOS Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q748139" start="6139" end="6146" title="Reversi" label="Reversi"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="6175" end="6189" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137478" start="6235" end="6244" title="Macintosh 128K" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="6272" end="6296" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="7013" end="7016" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q189794" start="7051" end="7055" title="OS/2" label="OS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q622888" start="7154" end="7165" title="Intel 80286" label="Intel 80286"/>
<link wikidata="Q170434" start="7290" end="7293" title="DOS" label="DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="7335" end="7338" title="graphical user interface" label="GUI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416080" start="7351" end="7371" title="Presentation Manager" label="Presentation Manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="7543" end="7546" title="application programming interface" label="API"/>
<link wikidata="Q174989" start="7626" end="7637" title="file system" label="file system"/>
<link wikidata="Q127319" start="7639" end="7643" title="High Performance File System" label="HPFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q190167" start="7660" end="7663" title="File Allocation Table" label="FAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q486487" start="8355" end="8365" title="Windows NT" label="Windows NT"/>
<link wikidata="Q237794" start="9066" end="9077" title="Intel 80386" label="Intel 80386"/>
<link wikidata="Q485021" start="9623" end="9634" title="Windows 2.0" label="Windows 2.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q11272" start="9748" end="9753" title="Microsoft Excel" label="Excel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11261" start="9758" end="9774" title="Microsoft Word" label="Word for Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q360355" start="9961" end="9976" title="Adobe PageMaker" label="Aldus PageMaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522376" start="10038" end="10047" title="Classic Mac OS" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064456" start="10277" end="10286" title="real mode" label="real-mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q66221" start="10287" end="10293" title="computer storage" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q79735" start="10337" end="10345" title="megabyte" label="megabyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153036" start="10426" end="10434" title="DESQview" label="DESQview"/>
<link wikidata="Q622888" start="10451" end="10454" title="Intel 80286" label="286"/>
<link wikidata="Q841064" start="10455" end="10469" title="protected mode" label="protected mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995363" start="10516" end="10532" title="High Memory Area" label="High Memory Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q485021" start="10611" end="10622" title="Windows/286" label="Windows/286"/>
<link wikidata="Q485021" start="10668" end="10679" title="Windows/386" label="Windows/386"/>
<link wikidata="Q841064" start="10694" end="10708" title="protected mode" label="protected mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q369664" start="10768" end="10784" title="LIM EMS" label="LIM-standard EMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656406" start="10785" end="10794" title="Hardware emulation" label="emulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q976308" start="10799" end="10802" title="VxD" label="VxD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196217" start="10968" end="10985" title="virtual 8086 mode" label="virtual 8086 mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781151" start="11149" end="11188" title="Apple Computer, Inc. v. Microsoft Corp." label="Apple Computer, Inc. v. Microsoft Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q491546" start="11780" end="11791" title="Windows 3.0" label="Windows 3.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q192969" start="11899" end="11908" title="Computer multitasking" label="multitask"/>
<link wikidata="Q189401" start="11992" end="12006" title="virtual memory" label="virtual memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="12111" end="12120" title="Macintosh" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q17194" start="12178" end="12181" title="VGA" label="VGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q207539" start="12453" end="12457" title="Intel 8086" label="8086"/>
<link wikidata="Q657808" start="12458" end="12462" title="Intel 8088" label="8088"/>
<link wikidata="Q622888" start="12473" end="12478" title="Intel 80286" label="80286"/>
<link wikidata="Q237794" start="12483" end="12488" title="Intel 80386" label="80386"/>
<link wikidata="Q9662" start="12591" end="12597" title="Kernel (operating system)" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982" start="13007" end="13019" title="CD-ROM drive" label="CD-ROM drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4343" start="13026" end="13036" title="sound card" label="sound card"/>
<link wikidata="Q477016" start="13050" end="13063" title="Creative Labs" label="Creative Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q726912" start="13064" end="13081" title="Sound Blaster Pro" label="Sound Blaster Pro"/>
<link wikidata="Q495432" start="13154" end="13165" title="Windows 3.1" label="Windows 3.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327685" start="13263" end="13276" title="Multimedia PC" label="Multimedia PC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13740" end="13751" title="Windows 3.1#Windows 3.1" label="Windows 3.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q751800" start="13855" end="13863" title="TrueType" label="TrueType"/>
<link wikidata="Q622888" start="14039" end="14044" title="Intel 80286" label="80286"/>
<link wikidata="Q237794" start="14777" end="14784" title="80386SX" label="80386SX"/>
<link wikidata="Q202712" start="15263" end="15269" title="IBM PC" label="IBM PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q828191" start="15275" end="15286" title="Windows API" label="Windows API"/>
<link wikidata="Q267558" start="15469" end="15472" title="OEM" label="OEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="15518" end="15533" title="embedded system" label="embedded system"/>
<link wikidata="Q92800" start="15696" end="15707" title="Dave Cutler" label="Dave Cutler"/>
<link wikidata="Q479882" start="15740" end="15747" title="OpenVMS" label="VAX/VMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="15751" end="15780" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="Digital Equipment Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q109406976" start="15961" end="15965" title="DEC MICA" label="MICA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243559" start="16234" end="16268" title="Professional Developers Conference" label="Professional Developers Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="16272" end="16285" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q83370" start="16418" end="16428" title="Windows 95" label="Windows 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148740" start="16532" end="16537" title="Cairo (operating system)" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="16684" end="16694" title="Windows XP" label="Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q483881" start="16702" end="16714" title="Windows 2000" label="Windows 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046390" start="16977" end="16982" title="WinFS" label="WinFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q215819" start="17278" end="17298" title="Microsoft SQL Server" label="Microsoft SQL Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q11381" start="17969" end="17972" title="local area network" label="LAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q183205" start="18130" end="18134" title="NTFS" label="NTFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q828191" start="18443" end="18454" title="Windows API" label="Windows API"/>
<link wikidata="Q828191" start="18476" end="18481" title="Win32" label="Win32"/>
<link wikidata="Q828191" start="18546" end="18551" title="Win16" label="Win16"/>
<link wikidata="Q828191" start="18676" end="18682" title="Win32c" label="Win32c"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="18782" end="18789" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133567" start="18832" end="18838" title="Win32s" label="Win32s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141941" start="19125" end="19138" title="hybrid kernel" label="hybrid kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q726378" start="19185" end="19196" title="microkernel" label="microkernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14643" start="19216" end="19232" title="Mach (kernel)" label="Mach microkernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q129627" start="19246" end="19260" title="Richard Rashid" label="Richard Rashid"/>
<link wikidata="Q495432" start="19877" end="19889" title="Windows 3.1x" label="Windows 3.11"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="20179" end="20182" title="Application programming interface" label="API"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429957" start="20350" end="20358" title="thunk (compatibility mapping)" label="thunking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237775" start="20372" end="20387" title="Object-oriented design" label="object-oriented"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064456" start="20694" end="20703" title="real mode" label="real mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q83370" start="21113" end="21123" title="Windows 95" label="Windows 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q180256" start="21470" end="21477" title="booting" label="booting"/>
<link wikidata="Q189401" start="21581" end="21595" title="virtual memory" label="virtual memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q79738" start="21671" end="21679" title="gigabyte" label="gigabyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q486487" start="21920" end="21930" title="Windows NT" label="Windows NT"/>
<link wikidata="Q79735" start="21988" end="21996" title="megabyte" label="megabyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q483132" start="22109" end="22119" title="Windows 98" label="Windows 98"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="22122" end="22125" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133567" start="22758" end="22764" title="Win32s" label="Win32s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345977" start="23014" end="23040" title="United States v. Microsoft" label="United States v. Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q208218" start="23249" end="23261" title="Slipstream (computing)" label="slipstreamed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575" start="23345" end="23362" title="Internet Explorer" label="Internet Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q190167" start="23381" end="23386" title="File Allocation Table" label="FAT32"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="23452" end="23455" title="Universal Serial Bus" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q267558" start="23677" end="23681" title="Original equipment manufacturer" label="OEMs"/>
<link wikidata="Q686425" start="23872" end="23887" title="Microsoft Plus!" label="Microsoft Plus!"/>
<link wikidata="Q488978" start="24088" end="24102" title="Windows NT 4.0" label="Windows NT 4.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q483881" start="24259" end="24271" title="Windows 2000" label="Windows 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596419" start="24390" end="24402" title="Architecture of Windows NT" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024460" start="24412" end="24418" title="Windows USER" label="USER32"/>
<link wikidata="Q662200" start="24420" end="24423" title="Component Object Model" label="COM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840198" start="24428" end="24433" title="MSRPC" label="MSRPC"/>
<link wikidata="Q178677" start="24599" end="24602" title="Symmetric multiprocessing" label="SMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q206637" start="24607" end="24617" title="cluster (computing)" label="clustering"/>
<link wikidata="Q483881" start="24964" end="24976" title="Windows 2000" label="Windows 2000"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25197" end="25216" title="Windows XP editions#Embedded" label="Windows XP Embedded"/>
<link wikidata="Q483132" start="25273" end="25283" title="Windows 98" label="Windows 98"/>
<link wikidata="Q83370" start="25339" end="25349" title="Windows 95" label="Windows 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q488978" start="25382" end="25396" title="Windows NT 4.0" label="Windows NT 4.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q483881" start="25434" end="25446" title="Windows 2000" label="Windows 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q190167" start="25489" end="25494" title="File Allocation Table" label="FAT32"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378" start="25603" end="25606" title="USB" label="USB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575" start="25737" end="25754" title="Internet Explorer" label="Internet Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345977" start="25888" end="25914" title="United States v. Microsoft" label="United States v. Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q210057" start="26084" end="26092" title="Netscape" label="Netscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359955" start="26227" end="26254" title="Internet Connection Sharing" label="Internet Connection Sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11182" start="26266" end="26293" title="network address translation" label="network address translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472399" start="26369" end="26388" title="Internet connection" label="Internet connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q609733" start="26621" end="26631" title="Windows 9x" label="Windows 9x"/>
<link wikidata="Q488978" start="26843" end="26857" title="Windows NT 4.0" label="Windows NT 4.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q483132" start="26890" end="26900" title="Windows 98" label="Windows 98"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="27100" end="27110" title="Windows XP" label="Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q55692" start="27301" end="27317" title="Active Directory" label="Active Directory"/>
<link wikidata="Q616902" start="27361" end="27382" title="Windows Server domain" label="Windows Server domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8767" start="27441" end="27444" title="Domain Name System" label="DNS"/>
<link wikidata="Q188816" start="27446" end="27450" title="Lightweight Directory Access Protocol" label="LDAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q506053" start="27456" end="27464" title="Kerberos (protocol)" label="Kerberos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745718" start="27501" end="27518" title="Terminal Services" label="Terminal Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q192527" start="27711" end="27731" title="Windows Media Player" label="Windows Media Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q188695" start="27747" end="27754" title="DirectX" label="DirectX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048265" start="27917" end="27935" title="Microsoft Product Activation" label="product activation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28259" end="28284" title="Windows XP#Service Pack 2" label="Windows XP Service Pack 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q484892" start="28396" end="28406" title="Windows Me" label="Windows Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q165777" start="28575" end="28594" title="Windows Movie Maker" label="Windows Movie Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q192527" start="28641" end="28663" title="Windows Media Player" label="Windows Media Player 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066221" start="28698" end="28712" title="System Restore" label="System Restore"/>
<link wikidata="Q383295" start="29094" end="29113" title="Windows Update" label="Windows Update site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064456" start="29305" end="29314" title="real mode" label="real mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q720353" start="29470" end="29480" title="monolithic kernel" label="monolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="29493" end="29499" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="29520" end="29530" title="Windows XP" label="Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29563" end="29580" title="Architecture of Windows NT#Kernel" label="Windows NT kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9662" start="29880" end="29886" title="Kernel (operating system)" label="kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q609733" start="29977" end="29987" title="Windows 9x" label="Windows 9x"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186827" start="30042" end="30051" title="Criticism of Windows XP" label="criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q189900" start="30081" end="30089" title="Information Security" label="security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047074" start="30129" end="30141" title="Service Pack" label="Service Pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134981" start="30669" end="30692" title="Windows XP Home Edition" label="Windows XP Home Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134981" start="30711" end="30734" title="Windows XP Professional" label="Windows XP Professional"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643528" start="30966" end="30997" title="Windows XP Media Center Edition" label="Windows XP Media Center Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134981" start="31601" end="31629" title="Windows XP Tablet PC Edition" label="Windows XP Tablet PC Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q842936" start="31635" end="31645" title="Microsoft Tablet PC" label="tablet PCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134981" start="31685" end="31704" title="Windows XP Embedded" label="Windows XP Embedded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134981" start="31729" end="31755" title="Windows XP Starter Edition" label="Windows XP Starter Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q245793" start="31806" end="31841" title="Windows XP Professional x64 Edition" label="Windows XP Professional x64 Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q272629" start="31945" end="31951" title="x86-64" label="x86-64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134981" start="32140" end="32165" title="Windows XP 64-bit Edition" label="Windows XP 64-bit Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q390389" start="32197" end="32204" title="Itanium" label="Itanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q483881" start="32616" end="32635" title="Windows 2000 Server" label="Windows 2000 Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526135" start="32658" end="32666" title="security" label="security"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288" start="32701" end="32707" title="Web server" label="Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q48230658" start="33091" end="33095" title="Luna (theme)" label="Luna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047074" start="33400" end="33412" title="Service Pack" label="Service Pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q184148" start="33434" end="33440" title="Plug-in (computing)" label="add-on"/>
<link wikidata="Q4485156" start="33464" end="33472" title="feature (software design)" label="features"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="34482" end="34492" title="Windows XP" label="Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q272629" start="34497" end="34503" title="x86-64" label="x86-64"/>
<link wikidata="Q11246" start="34677" end="34696" title="Windows Server 2003" label="Windows Server 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134981" start="34959" end="34996" title="Windows XP 64-bit Edition" label="Windows XP &amp;quot;64-bit Edition&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="35029" end="35034" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q390389" start="35035" end="35042" title="Itanium" label="Itanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q918090" start="35285" end="35296" title="thin-client" label="thin-client"/>
<link wikidata="Q719171" start="35342" end="35377" title="Windows Fundamentals for Legacy PCs" label="Windows Fundamentals for Legacy PCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251378" start="35412" end="35430" title="Microsoft Software Assurance" label="Software Assurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q916196" start="35727" end="35733" title="Citrix" label="Citrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q11246" start="36100" end="36119" title="Windows Server 2003" label="Windows Server 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284" start="36196" end="36206" title="Bill Gates" label="Bill Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q11215" start="36499" end="36508" title="Windows 7" label="Windows 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q11230" start="36569" end="36582" title="Windows Vista" label="Windows Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q818381" start="36786" end="36806" title="User Account Control" label="User Account Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q219710" start="37297" end="37309" title="Windows Aero" label="Windows Aero"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="37310" end="37313" title="GUI" label="GUI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330671" start="37341" end="37357" title="Windows Calendar" label="Windows Calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q718" start="37406" end="37411" title="Chess" label="Chess"/>
<link wikidata="Q12263" start="37413" end="37420" title="Mahjong" label="Mahjong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324740" start="37426" end="37438" title="Purble Place" label="Purble Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q865500" start="37441" end="37460" title="Internet Explorer 7" label="Internet Explorer 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q192527" start="37462" end="37485" title="Windows Media Player 11" label="Windows Media Player 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q463205" start="37672" end="37684" title="Windows Vista editions" label="six editions"/>
<link wikidata="Q180256" start="39236" end="39243" title="booting" label="booting"/>
<link wikidata="Q840410" start="39259" end="39277" title="Windows PowerShell" label="Windows PowerShell"/>
<link wikidata="Q841814" start="39648" end="39660" title="Windows Live" label="Windows Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211032" start="39801" end="39813" title="Windows 7 editions" label="six editions"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="39993" end="40007" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243559" start="40497" end="40531" title="Professional Developers Conference" label="Professional Developers Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q11226" start="40569" end="40591" title="Windows Server 2008 R2" label="Windows Server 2008 R2"/>
<link wikidata="Q11215" start="40618" end="40627" title="Windows 7" label="Windows 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q272629" start="40680" end="40683" title="X86-64" label="x64"/>
<link wikidata="Q390389" start="40688" end="40695" title="Itanium" label="Itanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251378" start="40933" end="40951" title="Microsoft Software Assurance" label="software assurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q483639" start="40976" end="40991" title="cloud computing" label="cloud computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11226" start="41333" end="41355" title="Windows Server 2008 R2" label="Windows Server 2008 R2"/>
<link wikidata="Q11246" start="41564" end="41583" title="Windows Server 2003" label="Windows Server 2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q272629" start="41608" end="41614" title="x86-64" label="x86-64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122733" start="41914" end="41929" title="Computex Taipei" label="Computex Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729783" start="41938" end="41960" title="All Things Digital" label="D9: All Things Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q17424" start="42471" end="42481" title="Windows RT" label="Windows RT"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="42533" end="42539" title="32-bit computing" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="42540" end="42562" title="ARMv7" label="ARM (ARMv7) processors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3735943" start="43103" end="43110" title="USB 3.0" label="USB 3.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q135288" start="43124" end="43137" title="Windows Store" label="Windows Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q610274" start="43179" end="43192" title="Windows To Go" label="Windows To Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q135288" start="43326" end="43339" title="Windows Store" label="Windows Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046" start="43344" end="43353" title="Windows 8" label="Windows 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046" start="44029" end="44038" title="Windows 8" label="Windows 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569290" start="44068" end="44079" title="Windows 8.1" label="Windows 8.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q15897235" start="44384" end="44391" title="Cortana (software)" label="Cortana"/>
<link wikidata="Q131598139" start="44397" end="44411" title="Microsoft Edge Legacy" label="Microsoft Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q65228430" start="46444" end="46458" title="Find My iPhone" label="Find My iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2766" start="47386" end="47392" title="iPhone" label="iPhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q39064" start="47637" end="47646" title="Canonical (company)" label="Canonical"/>
<link wikidata="Q381" start="47666" end="47672" title="Ubuntu (operating system)" label="Ubuntu"/>
<link wikidata="Q23894260" start="47692" end="47719" title="Windows Subsystem for Linux" label="Windows Subsystem for Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049294" start="47959" end="47964" title="emoji" label="emoji"/>
<link wikidata="Q214795" start="48044" end="48064" title="Blue Screen of Death" label="Blue Screen of Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q12203" start="48079" end="48086" title="QR code" label="QR code"/>
<link wikidata="Q18844389" start="48447" end="48455" title="HoloLens" label="HoloLens"/>
<link wikidata="Q545008" start="48657" end="48661" title="Windows Display Driver Model" label="WDDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033860" start="48667" end="48678" title="Dolby Atmos" label="Dolby Atmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q463244" start="48842" end="48857" title="Windows Registry" label="Registry Editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q840410" start="48859" end="48877" title="Windows PowerShell" label="Windows PowerShell"/>
<link wikidata="Q310897" start="48934" end="48948" title="Command prompt (Windows)" label="Command Prompt"/>
<link wikidata="Q29900635" start="49233" end="49253" title="Fluent Design System" label="Fluent Design System"/>
<link wikidata="Q16829782" start="49277" end="49280" title="Universal Windows Platform apps" label="UWP"/>
<link wikidata="Q165777" start="49394" end="49413" title="Windows Movie Maker" label="Windows Movie Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q30593402" start="49923" end="49937" title="Variable fonts" label="Variable Fonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q842193" start="50529" end="50544" title="Windows Sandbox" label="Windows Sandbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q193537" start="50693" end="50698" title="UTF-8" label="UTF-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q184766" start="50714" end="50723" title="code page" label="code page"/>
<link wikidata="Q274098" start="50785" end="50792" title="Windows Notepad" label="Notepad"/>
<link wikidata="Q19754851" start="52435" end="52454" title="Windows Server 2016" label="Windows Server 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q50911826" start="52750" end="52769" title="Windows Server 2019" label="Windows Server 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600398" start="52880" end="52895" title="Windows Insider" label="Windows Insider"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211457" start="53588" end="53615" title="software product life cycle" label="software product life cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039330" start="53710" end="53729" title="Windows Server 2022" label="Windows Server 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140366" start="55361" end="55368" title="Trusted Platform Module" label="TPM 2.0"/>
<link wikidata="Q859398" start="55388" end="55399" title="Secure Boot" label="Secure Boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q859398" start="55414" end="55418" title="UEFI" label="UEFI"/>
<link wikidata="Q776688" start="55985" end="55997" title="Task Manager" label="Task Manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638779" start="56205" end="56225" title="Bluetooth Low Energy" label="Bluetooth Low Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q116793893" start="56258" end="56275" title="Microsoft Copilot" label="Microsoft Copilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q124368037" start="56595" end="56614" title="Windows Server 2025" label="Windows Server 2025"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345986" start="56787" end="56818" title="Comparison of operating systems" label="Comparison of operating systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143393" start="56820" end="56848" title="History of operating systems" label="History of operating systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q786788" start="56850" end="56877" title="List of Microsoft codenames" label="List of Microsoft codenames"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13696" wikidata="Q1757" url="?curid=13696" title="Helsinki">
<text>Helsinki is the capital and most populous city in Finland. It is on the shore of the Gulf of Finland and is the seat of southern Finland&#x27;s Uusimaa region. About people live in the municipality, with  million in the capital region and  million in the metropolitan area. As the most populous urban area in Finland, it is the country&#x27;s most significant centre for politics, education, finance, culture, and research. Helsinki is north of Tallinn, Estonia, east of Stockholm, Sweden, and west of Saint Petersburg, Russia. Helsinki has significant historical connections with these three cities.

Together with the cities of Espoo, Vantaa and Kauniainen—and surrounding commuter towns, including the neighbouring municipality of Sipoo to the east—Helsinki forms a metropolitan area. This area is often considered Finland&#x27;s only metropolis and is the world&#x27;s northernmost metropolitan area with over one million inhabitants. Additionally, it is the northernmost capital of an EU member state. Helsinki is the third-largest municipality in the Nordic countries, after Stockholm and Oslo. Its urban area is the third-largest in the Nordic countries, after Stockholm and Copenhagen. Helsinki Airport, in the neighbouring city of Vantaa, serves the city with frequent flights to numerous destinations in Europe, North America, and Asia.

Helsinki is a bilingual municipality with Finnish and Swedish as its official languages. The population consists of Finnish speakers, Swedish speakers, and speakers of other languages (which is well above the national average).

Helsinki hosted the 1952 Summer Olympics, the first CSCE/OSCE Summit in 1975, the first World Athletics Championships in 1983, the 52nd Eurovision Song Contest in 2007 and it was the 2012 World Design Capital.

Helsinki has one of the highest standards of urban living in the world. In 2011, the British magazine &quot;Monocle&quot; ranked Helsinki as the world&#x27;s most liveable city in its livable cities index. In the Economist Intelligence Unit&#x27;s 2016 livability survey, Helsinki ranked ninth out of 140 cities. In July 2021, the American magazine &quot;Time&quot; named Helsinki one of the world&#x27;s greatest places, a city that &quot;can grow into a burgeoning cultural nest in the future&quot; and is already known as an environmental pioneer. In an international &quot;Cities of Choice&quot; survey conducted in 2021 by the Boston Consulting Group and the BCG Henderson Institute, Helsinki was ranked the third-best city in the world to live in, with London and New York City coming in first and second. In the &quot;Condé Nast Traveler&quot; magazine&#x27;s 2023 Readers&#x27; Choice Awards, Helsinki was ranked the 4th-friendliest city in Europe. Helsinki, along with Rovaniemi in Lapland, is also one of Finland&#x27;s most important tourist cities. Due to the large number of sea passengers, Helsinki is classified as a major port city, and in 2017 it was rated the world&#x27;s busiest passenger port.

==Etymology==
According to a theory put forward in the 1630s, at the time of Swedish colonisation of the Finnish coast, colonists from Hälsingland in central Sweden arrived at what is now the Vantaa River and called it (&#x27;Helsinge River&#x27;), giving rise to the names of the village and church of Helsinge in the 1300s. This theory is questionable, as dialect research suggests that the settlers came from Uppland and the surrounding areas. Others have suggested that the name derives from the Swedish word , an archaic form of the word (&#x27;neck&#x27;), which refers to the narrowest part of a river, the rapids. Other Scandinavian towns in similar geographical locations were given similar names at the time, such as Helsingør in Denmark and Helsingborg in Sweden.

When a town was founded in the village of Forsby (later ) in 1548, it was called , &#x27;Helsinge rapids&#x27;. The name refers to the rapids at the mouth of the river. The town was commonly known as or , from which the modern Finnish name is derived.

Official Finnish government documents and Finnish language newspapers have used the name &quot;Helsinki&quot; since 1819, when the Senate of Finland moved to the city from Turku, the former capital of Finland. Decrees issued in Helsinki were dated with Helsinki as the place of issue. This is how the form Helsinki came to be used in written Finnish. When Finland became a Grand Duchy of Finland, an autonomous state under the rule of the Russian Empire, Helsinki was known as () in Russian, because the main and official language of Grand Duchy of Finland was Swedish.

In Helsinki slang, the city is called (from the Swedish word , meaning &#x27;city&#x27;). Abbreviated form is equally common, but its use is associated with people of rural origin (&quot;junantuomat&quot;, lit. &quot;brought by a train&quot;) and frowned upon by locals. is the Northern Sami name for Helsinki.

==History==

=== Early history ===
After the end of the Ice Age and the retreat of the ice sheet, the first settlers arrived in the Helsinki area around 5000 BC. Their presence has been documented by archaeologists in Vantaa, Pitäjänmäki and Kaarela. Permanent settlements did not appear until the beginning of the 1st millennium AD, during the Iron Age, when the area was inhabited by the Tavastians. They used the area for fishing and hunting, but due to the lack of archaeological finds it is difficult to say how extensive their settlements were. Pollen analysis has shown that there were agricultural settlements in the area in the 10th century, and surviving historical records from the 14th century describe Tavastian settlements in the area.

Christianity does not gain a significant foothold in Finland before the 11th century. After that, a number of crosses and other objects related to Christianity can be found in archaeological material. According to the traditional view, the Kingdom of Sweden made three crusades to Finland, thanks to which the region was incorporated into both Christianity and the Swedish Empire. Recent research has shown that these expeditions, to the extent that there were even three of them, were not the crusades that had been imagined. Later, the conquest of Finland was justified in terms of &quot;civilisation&quot; and &quot;christianisation&quot;, and the myth of the Crusades was developed. It is more likely that it was a multidimensional combination of economic, cultural and political power ambitions.

The early settlements were raided by Vikings until 1008, and the Battle at Herdaler was a battle between the Norse Viking leader Olav Haraldsson (later King Olaf II of Norway, also known as Saint Olaf) and local Finns at Herdaler (now Ingå), not far from Helsinga, around 1007–8. The Saga of Olaf Haraldson tells how Olav raided the coasts of Finland and was almost killed in battle. He ran away in fear and after that the Vikings did not raid the coasts of Finland.

Later the area was settled by Christians from Sweden. They came mainly from the Swedish coastal regions of Norrland and Hälsingland, and their migration intensified around 1100. The Swedes permanently colonised the Helsinki region&#x27;s coastline in the late 13th century, after the successful crusade to Finland that led to the defeat of the Tavastians.

In the Middle Ages, the Helsinki area was a landscape of small villages. Some of the old villages from the 1240s in the area of present-day Helsinki, such as Koskela and Töölö, are now Helsinki districts, as are the rest of the 27 medieval villages. The area gradually became part of the Kingdom of Sweden and Christianity. Kuninkaantie, or the &quot;King&#x27;s Road&quot;, ran through the area and two interesting medieval buildings were built here: in the 1380s and the Church of St. Lawrence in 1455. In the Middle Ages, several thousand people lived in Helsinki&#x27;s keep.

There was a lot of trade across the Baltic Sea. The shipping route to the coast, and especially to Reval, meant that by the end of the Middle Ages the Helsinki region had become an important trading centre for wealthy peasants, priests and nobles in Finland, after Vyborg and Pohja. Furs, wood, tar, fish and animals were exported from Helsinki, and salt and grain were brought to the fortress. Helsinki was also the most important cattle-breeding area in Uusimaa. With the help of trade, Helsinki became one of the wealthiest cities in Finland and Uusimaa. Thanks to trade and travel, e.g. to Reval, people could speak several languages, at least helpfully. Depending on the situation, Finnish, Swedish, Latin or Low German could be heard in the Helsinki area.

Written chronicles from 1417 mention the village of Koskela near the rapids at the mouth of the River Vantaa, where Helsinki was to be founded.

=== Founding of Helsinki ===

Helsinki was founded by King Gustav I of Sweden on 12 June 1550 as a trading town called Helsingfors to rival the Hanseatic city of Reval (now Tallinn) on the southern shore of the Gulf of Finland. To populate the new town at the mouth of the Vantaa River, the king ordered the bourgeoisie of Porvoo, Raseborg, Rauma and Ulvila to move there. The shallowness of the bay made it impossible to build a harbour, and the king allowed the settlers to leave the unfortunate location. In 1640, Count Per Brahe the Younger, together with some descendants of the original settlers, moved the centre of the city to the Vironniemi peninsula by the sea, today&#x27;s Kruununhaka district, where the Senate Square and Helsinki Cathedral are located.

During the second half of the 17th century, Helsinki, as a wooden city, suffered from regular fires, and by the beginning of the 18th century the population had fallen below 1,700. For a long time Helsinki was mainly a small administrative town for the governors of Nyland and Tavastehus County, but its importance began to grow in the 18th century when plans were made to build a more solid naval defence in front of the city. Little came of these plans, however, as Helsinki remained a small town plagued by poverty, war and disease. The plague of 1710 killed most of Helsinki&#x27;s population. After the Russians captured Helsinki in May 1713 during the Great Northern War, the retreating Swedish administration set fire to parts of the city. Despite this, the city&#x27;s population grew to 3,000 by the beginning of the 19th century. The construction of the naval fortress of Sveaborg (&quot;Viapori&quot; in Finnish, now also called &quot;Suomenlinna&quot;) in the 18th century helped to improve Helsinki&#x27;s status. However, it wasn&#x27;t until Russia defeated Sweden in the Finnish War and annexed Finland as the autonomous Grand Duchy of Finland in 1809 that the city began to develop into a substantial city. The Russians besieged the Sveaborg fortress during the war, and about a quarter of the city was destroyed in a fire in 1808.

Emperor Alexander I of Russia moved the capital of Finland from Turku to Helsinki on 8 April 1812 to reduce Swedish influence in Finland and bring the capital closer to St Petersburg. After the Great Fire of Turku in 1827, the Royal Academy of Turku, the only university in the country at the time, was also moved to Helsinki and eventually became the modern University of Helsinki. The move consolidated the city&#x27;s new role and helped set it on a path of continuous growth. This transformation is most evident in the city centre, which was rebuilt in the neoclassical style to resemble St. Petersburg, largely according to a plan by the German-born architect C. L. Engel. As elsewhere, technological advances such as the railway and industrialisation were key factors in the city&#x27;s growth.

===Twentieth century===

By the 1910s, Helsinki&#x27;s population was already over 100,000, and despite the turbulence of Finnish history in the first half of the 20th century, Helsinki continued to grow steadily. This included the Finnish Civil War and the Winter War, both of which left their mark on the city. At the beginning of the 20th century, there were roughly equal numbers of Finnish and Swedish speakers in Helsinki; the majority of workers were Finnish-speaking. The local Helsinki slang (or &quot;stadin slangi&quot;) developed among Finnish children and young people from the 1890s as a mixed Finnish-Swedish language, with influences from German and Russian, and from the 1950s the slang began to become more Finnish. A landmark event was the 1952 Olympic Games, which were held in Helsinki. Finland&#x27;s rapid urbanisation in the 1970s, which occurred late compared to the rest of Europe, tripled the population of the metropolitan area, and the Helsinki Metro subway system was built.

==Geography==

Known as the &quot;Daughter of the Baltic&quot; or the &quot;Pearl of the Baltic&quot;, Helsinki is located at the tip of a peninsula and on 315 islands. The city centre is located on a southern peninsula, &quot;Helsinginniemi&quot; (&quot;Cape of Helsinki&quot;), which is rarely referred to by its actual name, Vironniemi (&quot;Cape of Estonia&quot;). Population density is comparatively high in certain parts of downtown Helsinki, reaching in the district of Kallio, overall Helsinki&#x27;s population density is 3,147 per square kilometre. Outside the city centre, much of Helsinki consists of post-war suburbs separated by patches of forest. A narrow, long Helsinki Central Park, which stretches from the city centre to Helsinki&#x27;s northern border, is an important recreational area for residents. The City of Helsinki has about 11,000 boat moorings and over of marine fishing waters adjacent to the capital region. About 60 species of fish are found in this area, and recreational fishing is popular.

Helsinki&#x27;s main islands include Seurasaari, Lauttasaari and Korkeasaari – the latter is home to Finland&#x27;s largest zoo, Korkeasaari Zoo. The former military islands of Vallisaari and Isosaari are now open to the public, but Santahamina is still in military use. The most historic and remarkable island is the fortress of Suomenlinna (Sveaborg). The island of Pihlajasaari is a popular summer resort, comparable to Fire Island in New York City.

There are 60 nature reserves in Helsinki with a total area of . Of the total area, are water areas and are land areas. The city also has seven nature reserves in Espoo, Sipoo, Hanko and Ingå. The largest nature reserve is the Vanhankaupunginselkä, with an area of . The city&#x27;s first nature reserve, Tiiraluoto of Lauttasaari, was established in 1948.

Helsinki&#x27;s official plant is the Norway maple and its official animal is the red squirrel.

===Metropolitan area===

The Helsinki capital region (, ) comprises four municipalities: Helsinki, Espoo, Vantaa, and Kauniainen. The Helsinki urban area is considered to be the only metropolis in Finland. It has a population of about million, and is the most densely populated area of Finland. The Capital Region spreads over a land area of and has a population density of 1,619 per sg km. With over 20 percent of the country&#x27;s population in just 0.2 percent of its surface area, the area&#x27;s housing density is high by Finnish standards.

The Helsinki metropolitan area or the Greater Helsinki consists of the cities of the capital region and ten surrounding municipalities: Hyvinkää, Järvenpää, Kerava, Kirkkonummi, Nurmijärvi, Sipoo, Tuusula, Pornainen, Mäntsälä and Vihti. The Metropolitan Area covers and has a population of about million, or about a fourth of the total population of Finland. The metropolitan area has a high concentration of employment: approximately 750,000 jobs. Despite the intensity of land use, the region also has large recreational areas and green spaces. The Helsinki metropolitan area is the world&#x27;s northernmost urban area with a population of over one million people, and the northernmost EU capital city.

The Helsinki urban area is an officially recognized urban area in Finland, defined by its population density. The area stretches throughout 11 municipalities, and is the largest such area in Finland, with a land area of and approximately 1.36  million inhabitants.

===Climate===
Helsinki has a cold hemiboreal humid continental climate (Köppen: &quot;Dfb&quot;, Trewartha &quot;Dcbo&quot;). Due to the moderating influence of the Baltic Sea and the North Atlantic Current (see also Extratropical cyclone), winter temperatures are higher than the northern location would suggest, with an average of in January and February.

Winters in Helsinki are significantly warmer than in the north of Finland, and the snow season in the capital is much shorter due to its location in the extreme south of Finland and the urban heat island effect. Temperatures below occur only a few times a year. However, due to the latitude, the days around the winter solstice are 5 hours and 48 minutes long, with the sun very low (at noon the sun is just over 6 degrees in the sky), and the cloudy weather at this time of year exacerbates the darkness. Conversely, Helsinki enjoys long days in summer, with 18 hours and 57 minutes of daylight around the summer solstice.

The average maximum temperature from June to August is around . Due to the sea effect, especially on hot summer days, daytime temperatures are slightly cooler and nighttime temperatures higher than further inland. The highest temperature recorded in the city was on 28 July 2019 at the Kaisaniemi weather station, breaking the previous record of set in July 1945 at the Ilmala weather station. The lowest temperature recorded in the city was on 10 January 1987, although an unofficial low of was recorded in December 1876. Helsinki Airport (in Vantaa, 17 km north of Helsinki city centre) recorded a maximum temperature of on 29 July 2010 and a minimum of on 9 January 1987. Precipitation comes from frontal passages and thunderstorms. Thunderstorms are most common in summer.



===Neighbourhoods and other subdivisions===

Helsinki is divided into three major areas: Helsinki Downtown (, ), North Helsinki (, ) and East Helsinki (, ). Of these, Helsinki Downtown means the undefined core area of capital, as opposed to suburbs. The designations business center and city center usually refer to Kluuvi, Kamppi and Punavuori. Other subdivisional centers outside the downtown area include Malmi (), located in the northeastern part of city, and Itäkeskus (), in the eastern part of city.

==Cityscape==

===Neoclassical and romantic nationalism trend===
Carl Ludvig Engel, appointed to plan a new city centre on his own, designed several neoclassical buildings in Helsinki. The focal point of Engel&#x27;s city plan was the Senate Square. It is surrounded by the Government Palace (to the east), the main building of Helsinki University (to the west), and (to the north) the large Helsinki Cathedral, which was finished in 1852, twelve years after Engel&#x27;s death. Helsinki&#x27;s epithet, &quot;The White City of the North&quot;, derives from this construction era. Most of Helsinki&#x27;s older buildings were built after the 1808 fire; before that time, the oldest surviving building in the center of Helsinki is the (1757) at the intersection of Senate Square and the Katariinankatu street. Suomenlinna also has buildings completed in the 18th century, including the Kuninkaanportti on the (1753–1754). The oldest church in Helsinki is the Östersundom church, built in 1754.

Helsinki is also home to numerous Art Nouveau-influenced (Jugend in Finnish) buildings belonging to the Kansallisromantiikka (romantic nationalism) trend, designed in the early 20th century and strongly influenced by &quot;Kalevala&quot;, which was a common theme of the era. Helsinki&#x27;s Art Nouveau style is also featured in central residential districts, such as Katajanokka and Ullanlinna. An important architect of the Finnish Art Nouveau style was Eliel Saarinen, whose architectural masterpiece was the Helsinki Central Station. Opposite the Bank of Finland building is the Renaissance Revivalish the House of the Estates (1891).

The only visible public buildings of the Gothic Revival architecture in Helsinki are St. John&#x27;s Church (1891) in Ullanlinna, which is the largest stone church in Finland, and its twin towers rise to 74 meters and have 2,600 seats. Other examples of neo-Gothic include the House of Nobility in Kruununhaka and the Catholic St. Henry&#x27;s Cathedral.

In addition to other cities in Northern Europe that were not under the Soviet Union, such as Stockholm, Sweden, Helsinki&#x27;s neoclassical buildings gained also popularity as a backdrop for scenes intended to depict the Soviet Union in numerous Hollywood movies during the Cold War era, when filming within the actual USSR was not possible. Some of them, including &quot;The Kremlin Letter&quot; (1970), &quot;Reds&quot; (1981), and &quot;Gorky Park&quot; (1983). was possible due to such Russian cities as Leningrad and Moscow also having similar neoclassical architecture. At the same time due to Cold War and Finnish relations with the USSR the government secretly instructed Finnish officials not to extend assistance to such film projects. There are some films where Helsinki has been represented on its own in films, most notably the 1967 British-American espionage thriller &quot;Billion Dollar Brain&quot;, starring Michael Caine. The city has large amounts of underground areas such as shelters and tunnels, many used daily as swimming pool, church, water management, entertainment etc.

===Functionalism and modern architecture===
Helsinki also features several buildings by Finnish architect Alvar Aalto, recognized as one of the pioneers of architectural functionalism. However, some of his works, such as the headquarters of the paper company Stora Enso and the concert venue Finlandia Hall, have been subject to divided opinions from the citizens.

Functionalist buildings in Helsinki by other architects include the Olympic Stadium, the Tennis Palace, the Rowing Stadium, the Swimming Stadium, the Velodrome, the Glass Palace, the Töölö Sports Hall, and Helsinki-Malmi Airport. The sports venues were built to serve the 1940 Helsinki Olympic Games; the games were initially cancelled due to the Second World War, but the venues fulfilled their purpose in the 1952 Olympic Games. Many of them are listed by DoCoMoMo as significant examples of modern architecture. The Olympic Stadium and Helsinki-Malmi Airport are also catalogued by the Finnish Heritage Agency as cultural-historical environments of national significance.

When Finland became heavily urbanized in the 1960s and 1970s, the district of Pihlajamäki, for example, was built in Helsinki for new residents, where for the first time in Finland, precast concrete was used on a large scale. Pikku Huopalahti, built in the 1980s and 1990s, has tried to get rid of a one-size-fits-all grid pattern, which means that its look is very organic and its streets are not repeated in the same way. Itäkeskus in Eastern Helsinki was the first regional center in the 1980s. Efforts have also been made to protect Helsinki in the late 20th century, and many old buildings have been renovated. Modern architecture is represented, for example, by the Museum of Contemporary Art Kiasma, which consists of two straight and curved-walled parts, though this style strongly divided the opinions from the citizens. Next to Kiasma is the glass-walled Sanomatalo (1999).

There have been many plans to build highrise buildings in Helsinki since the 1920s when architect Eliel Saarinen proposed the 85-meter-tall Kalevalatalo in 1921, but few tall buildings were built until the 21st century. In 1924 Oiva Kallio won Etu-Töölö competition with his plan (several 14- to 16-story buildings). A 32-story city hall was also proposed. Other plans of the 1930s included the 18-story &quot;Kino&quot; palace, a 17-story apartment building, and a 30-story Stockmann building were proposed but only the 70-meter-tall 14-story Hotel Torni was built. (Hotel Torni was the tallest high-rise in Finland until 1976, when the 83-meter-tall Neste headquarters were completed in Espoo; Helsinki had rejected the tower.) Twin 30-story buildings were proposed in Pasila in the 1970s but were rejected. In 1990 a planned 104-meter-tall tower for the Kone company was also cancelled.

Highrise construction only started in the beginning of the 21st century, when the city decided to allow the construction of skyscrapers. Highrises were first built in Kalasatama, a primarily-residential district built on a former container port. As of 2024, four residential towers have been completed: the 35-story, 282-apartment, in 2019 (which is the tallest building in Finland); the 32-story, 124-meter in 2021; the 31-story, 120-meter One in 2022; and the 24-story, 98-meter in 2023. The 26-story, 111-meter-tall office building is to be completed in 2025, and three further towers are to be built in the complex.
Tall residential towers have also been built in the eastern district of Vuosaari: the 87-meter, 26-story Cirrus was completed in 2006, the 24-story, 85-meter-tall was completed in 2023 and the 33-story, 288-apartment, 120-meter-tall is due to be completed in late 2024.

Skyscrapers have also be planned in the Pasila area, with a handful of over-100-meter-tall towers in various stages of planning or early construction as of 2024.
In Jätkäsaari, a 113-meter-tall hotel and a 24-story residential tower have been approved. 121- and 93-meter-tall office buildings are planned to be built in Ruoholahti. Well over 200 high-rise buildings will be built in Helsinki in the 2020s.

The freshest building styles in Helsinki also include low-carbon economy; for example, the white-colored Katajanokan Laituri building that opened in Katajanokka in the summer of 2024 is built from Finnish and Swedish wood. This building includes eco-friendly hotel Solo Sokos Pier 4.

===Statues and sculptures===

Well-known statues and monuments strongly embedded in the cityscape of Helsinki include the Keisarinnankivi (&quot;Stone of the Empress&quot;, 1835), the statue of Russian Emperor Alexander II (1894), the fountain sculpture &quot;Havis Amanda&quot; (1908), the Paavo Nurmi statue (1925), the &quot;Three Smiths Statue&quot; (1932), the Aleksis Kivi Memorial (1939), the Eino Leino Statue (1953), the Equestrian statue of Marshal Mannerheim (1960) and the &quot;Sibelius Monument&quot; (1967).

==Government==

As is the case with all Finnish municipalities, Helsinki&#x27;s city council is the main decision-making organ in local politics, dealing with issues such as urban planning, schools, health care, and public transport. The council is chosen in the nationally held municipal elections, which are held every four years.

Helsinki&#x27;s city council consists of eighty-five members. Following the most recent municipal elections in 2017, the three largest parties are the National Coalition Party (25), the Green League (21), and the Social Democratic Party (12).

The Mayor of Helsinki is Juhana Vartiainen.

==Demographics==
===Population===

The city of Helsinki has inhabitants, making it the most populous municipality in Finland and the third in the Nordics. The Helsinki region is the largest urbanised area in Finland with inhabitants. The city of Helsinki is home to 12% of Finland&#x27;s population. 19.9% of the population has a foreign background, which is twice above the national average. However, it is lower than in the major Finnish cities of Espoo or Vantaa.

At 53 percent of the population, women form a greater proportion of Helsinki residents than the national average of 51 percent. Helsinki&#x27;s population density of 3,147 people per square kilometre makes Helsinki the most densely-populated city in Finland. The life expectancy for men and women is slightly below the national averages: 75.1 years for men as compared to 75.7 years, 81.7 years for women as compared to 82.5 years.

Helsinki has experienced strong growth since the 1810s, when it replaced Turku as the capital of the Grand Duchy of Finland, which later became the sovereign Republic of Finland. The city continued its growth from that time on, with an exception during the Finnish Civil War. From the end of World War II up until the 1970s there was a massive exodus of people from the countryside to the cities of Finland, in particular Helsinki. Between 1944 and 1969 the population of the city nearly doubled from 275,000 to 525,600.

In the 1960s, the population growth of Helsinki began to decrease, mainly due to a lack of housing. Some residents began to move to the neighbouring cities of Espoo and Vantaa, resulting in increased population growth in both municipalities. Espoo&#x27;s population increased ninefold in sixty years, from 22,874 people in 1950 to 244,353 in 2009. Vantaa saw an even more dramatic change in the same time span: from 14,976 in 1950 to 197,663 in 2009, a thirteenfold increase. These population changes prompted the municipalities of metropolitan area into more intense cooperation in areas such as public transportation – resulting in the foundation of HSL – and waste management. The increasing scarcity of housing and the higher costs of living in the capital region have pushed many daily commuters to find housing in formerly rural areas, and even further, to cities such as Lohja, Hämeenlinna, Lahti, and Porvoo.

=== Language ===
The city of Helsinki is officially bilingual, with both Finnish and Swedish as official languages. In 2023, the majority of the population, , spoke Finnish as their mother tongue. There were Swedish speakers, or of the population. The number of people who speak Sámi, Finland&#x27;s third official language, is only inhabitants. In Helsinki, of the population speak a mother tongue other than Finnish or Swedish. As English and Swedish are compulsory school subjects, functional bilingualism or trilingualism acquired through language studies is not uncommon.

Although few people speak the Sámi languages as their mother tongue, there are 527 people of Sami origin. There are 93 Tatar speakers in Helsinki, almost half of the total number of Tatar speakers in Finland.

Helsinki slang is a regional dialect of the city. Historically, it was a combination of Finnish and Swedish, with influences from Russian and German. Nowadays it has a strong English influence. Today, however, Finnish is the common language of communication between Finnish speakers, Swedish speakers and speakers of other languages (New Finns) in everyday public life between strangers.

The city of Helsinki and the national authorities have specifically targeted Swedish speakers. Knowledge of Finnish is essential in business and is usually a basic requirement in the labour market. Swedish speakers are most concentrated in the southern parts of the city. The district with the most Swedish speakers is Ullanlinna/Ulrikasborg with 2,098 (19.6%), while Byholmen is the only district where Swedish is the majority language (at 82.8%). The number of Swedish speakers decreased every year until 2008, and has increased every year since then. Since 2007, the number of Swedish speakers has increased by 2,351. In 1890, Finnish speakers overtook Swedish speakers to become the majority of the city&#x27;s population. At that time, the population of Helsinki was 61,530.

The number of people with a foreign mother tongue is expected to reach 196,500 in 2035, representing 26% of the population. 114,000 will speak non-European languages, or 15% of the population. Today, at least 160 different languages are spoken in Helsinki. The most common foreign languages are Russian (3.1%), Somali (2.1%), Arabic (1.5%), English (1.5%) and Estonian (1.4%).

===Immigration===
, there were 134,084 people with an immigrant background living in Helsinki, or 20% of the population. There were 118,128 residents who were born abroad, or 17.5% of the population. The number of foreign citizens in Helsinki was 79,992.

The relative share of immigrants in Helsinki&#x27;s population is twice the national average, and the city&#x27;s new residents are increasingly of foreign origin. This will increase the proportion of foreign residents in the coming years. As a crossroads of many international ports and Finland&#x27;s largest airport, Helsinki is the global gateway to and from Finland.

Most foreign-born citizens come from the former Soviet Union, Estonia, Somalia, Iraq, and Russia.

=== Religion ===
In 2023, the Evangelical Lutheran Church was the largest religious group with 46.1% of the Helsinki population. Other religious groups made up 4.5% of the population. 49.4% of the population had no religious affiliation.

The most important churches in Helsinki are Helsinki Cathedral (1852), Uspenski Cathedral (1868), St. John&#x27;s Church (1891), Kallio Church (1912) and Temppeliaukio Church (1969).

There are 21 Lutheran congregations in Helsinki, 18 of which are Finnish-speaking and 3 are Swedish-speaking. These form Helsinki&#x27;s congregationgroup. Outside that there is Finland&#x27;s German congregation with 3,000 members and Rikssvenska Olaus Petri-församlingen for Swedish-citizens with 1,000 members.

The largest Orthodox congregation is the Orthodox Church of Helsinki. It has 20,000 members. Its main church is the Uspenski Cathedral. The two largest Catholic congregations are the Cathedral of Saint Henry, with 4,552 members, established in 1860 and St Mary&#x27;s Catholic Parish, with 4,107 members, established in 1954.
There are around 30 mosques in the Helsinki region. Many linguistic and ethnic groups such as Bangladeshis, Kosovars, Kurds and Bosniaks have established their own mosques. The largest congregation in both Helsinki and Finland is the , established in 1995. It has over 2,800 members , and it received €24,131 in government assistance.

In 2015, imam estimated that on big celebrations around 10,000 Muslims visit mosques. In 2004, it was estimated that there were 8,000 Muslims in Helsinki, 1.5% of the population at the time. The number of people in Helsinki with a background from Muslim majority countries was nearly 41,000 as of 2021, representing over 6% of the population.

The main synagogue of Helsinki is the Helsinki Synagogue from 1906, located in Kamppi. It has over 1,200 members, out of the 1,800 Jews in Finland, and it is the older of the two buildings in Finland originally built as a synagogue, followed by the Turku Synagogue in 1912. The congregation includes a synagogue, Jewish kindergarten, school, library, Jewish meat shop, two Jewish cemeteries and an retirement home. Many Jewish organizations and societies are based there, and the synagogue publishes the main Jewish magazine in Finland, &quot;&quot;.

==Economy==
Helsinki metropolitan area generates approximately one third of Finland&#x27;s GDP. GDP per capita is roughly 1.3 times the national average. Helsinki profits on serviced-related IT and public sectors. Having moved from heavy industrial works, shipping companies also employ a substantial number of people.

The metropolitan area&#x27;s gross value added per capita is 200% of the mean of 27 European metropolitan areas, equalling those of Stockholm and Paris. The gross value added annual growth has been around 4%.

83 of the 100 largest Finnish companies have their headquarters in the metropolitan area. Two-thirds of the 200 highest-paid Finnish executives live in the metropolitan area and 42% in Helsinki. The average income of the top 50 earners was 1.65 million euro.

The tap water is of excellent quality and it is supplied by the Päijänne Water Tunnel, one of the world&#x27;s longest continuous rock tunnels.

==Education==

Helsinki has 190 comprehensive schools, 41 upper secondary schools, and 15 vocational institutes. Half of the 41 upper secondary schools are private or state-owned, the other half municipal. There are two major research universities in Helsinki, the University of Helsinki and Aalto University, and a number of other higher level institutions and polytechnics which focus on higher-level professional education.

===Research universities===

*University of Helsinki
*Aalto University (Espoo)

===Other institutions of higher education===
*Hanken School of Economics
*University of the Arts Helsinki
*National Defence University
*Haaga-Helia University of Applied Sciences
*Laurea University of Applied Sciences
*Helsinki Metropolia University of Applied Sciences
*Arcada University of Applied Sciences
*Diaconia University of Applied Sciences
*HUMAK University of Applied Sciences

Helsinki is one of the co-location centres of the Knowledge and Innovation Community (Future information and communication society) of The European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIT).

==Culture==

===Museums===
The biggest historical museum in Helsinki is the National Museum of Finland, which displays a vast collection from prehistoric times to the 21st century. The museum building itself, a national romantic-style neomedieval castle, is a tourist attraction. Another major historical museum is the Helsinki City Museum, which introduces visitors to Helsinki&#x27;s 500-year history. The University of Helsinki also has many significant museums, including the Helsinki University Museum &quot;Arppeanum&quot; and the Finnish Museum of Natural History.

The Finnish National Gallery consists of three museums: Ateneum Art Museum for classical Finnish art, Sinebrychoff Art Museum for classical European art, and Kiasma Art Museum for modern art, in a building by architect Steven Holl. The old Ateneum, a neo-Renaissance palace from the 19th century, is one of the city&#x27;s major historical buildings. All three museum buildings are state-owned through Senate Properties.

The city of Helsinki hosts its own art collection in the Helsinki Art Museum (HAM), primarily located in its Tennispalatsi gallery. Around 200 pieces of public art lie outside. The art is all city property.

Helsinki Art Museum will in 2020 launch the Helsinki Biennial, which will bring art to maritime Helsinki – in its first year to the island of Vallisaari.

The Design Museum is devoted to the exhibition of both Finnish and foreign design, including industrial design, fashion, and graphic design. Other museums in Helsinki include the Military Museum of Finland, Didrichsen Art Museum, Amos Rex Art Museum, and the .
===Theatres===

Helsinki has three major theatres: The Finnish National Theatre, the Helsinki City Theatre, and the Swedish Theatre (&quot;Svenska Teatern&quot;). Other notable theatres in the city include the Alexander Theatre, &#x27;, , , and &#x27;.

===Music===
Helsinki is home to two full-size symphony orchestras, the Helsinki Philharmonic Orchestra and the Finnish Radio Symphony Orchestra, both of which perform at the Helsinki Music Centre concert hall. Acclaimed contemporary composers Kaija Saariaho, Magnus Lindberg, Esa-Pekka Salonen, and Einojuhani Rautavaara, among others, were born and raised in Helsinki, and studied at the Sibelius Academy. The Finnish National Opera, the only full-time, professional opera company in Finland, is located in Helsinki. The opera singer Martti Wallén, one of the company&#x27;s long-time soloists, was born and raised in Helsinki, as was mezzo-soprano Monica Groop.

Many widely renowned and acclaimed bands have originated in Helsinki, including Children of Bodom, Hanoi Rocks, HIM, Stratovarius, The 69 Eyes, Finntroll, Ensiferum, Wintersun, The Rasmus, Poets of the Fall, and Apocalyptica. The most significant of the metal music events in Helsinki is the Tuska Open Air Metal Festival in Suvilahti, Sörnäinen.

The city&#x27;s main musical venues are the Finnish National Opera, the Finlandia concert hall, and the Helsinki Music Centre. The Music Centre also houses a part of the Sibelius Academy. Bigger concerts and events are usually held at one of the city&#x27;s two big ice hockey arenas: the Helsinki Halli or the Helsinki Ice Hall. Helsinki has Finland&#x27;s largest fairgrounds, the Messukeskus Helsinki, which is attended by more than a million visitors a year.

Helsinki Arena hosted the Eurovision Song Contest 2007, the first Eurovision Song Contest arranged in Finland, following Lordi&#x27;s win in 2006.

===Art===
Helsinki Day (&quot;Helsinki-päivä&quot;) will be celebrated every 12 June, with numerous entertainment events culminating in an open-air concert. Also, the Helsinki Festival is an arts and culture festival that takes place every August (including the Night of the Arts).

At the Senate Square in fall 2010, Finland&#x27;s largest open-air art exhibition to date took place: About 1.4 million people saw the international exhibition of &quot;United Buddy Bears&quot;.

Helsinki was the 2012 World Design Capital, in recognition of the use of design as an effective tool for social, cultural, and economic development in the city. In choosing Helsinki, the World Design Capital selection jury highlighted Helsinki&#x27;s use of &#x27;Embedded Design&#x27;, which has tied design in the city to innovation, &quot;creating global brands, such as Nokia, Kone, and Marimekko, popular events, like the annual , outstanding education and research institutions, such as the Aalto University School of Arts, Design and Architecture, and exemplary architects and designers such as Eliel Saarinen and Alvar Aalto&quot;.

Helsinki hosts many film festivals. Most of them are small venues, while some have generated interest internationally. The most prolific of these is the Helsinki International Film Festival – Love &amp; Anarchy film festival, also known as Helsinki International Film Festival, which features films on a wide spectrum. Night Visions, on the other hand, focuses on genre cinema, screening horror, fantasy, and science fiction films in very popular movie marathons that last the entire night. Another popular film festival is , a festival that focuses solely on documentary cinema.

===Media===

Today, there are around 200 newspapers, 320 popular magazines, 2,100 professional magazines, 67 commercial radio stations, three digital radio channels, and one nationwide and five national public service radio channels.

Sanoma publishes Finland&#x27;s journal of record, , the tabloid &quot;Ilta-Sanomat&quot;, the commerce-oriented &quot;Taloussanomat&quot;, and the television channel Nelonen. Another Helsinki-based media house, Alma Media, publishes over thirty magazines, including the tabloid &quot;Iltalehti&quot;, and the commerce-oriented &quot;Kauppalehti&quot;.

Finland&#x27;s national public-broadcasting institution Yle operates five television channels and thirteen radio channels in both national languages. Yle is headquartered in the neighbourhood of Pasila. All TV channels are broadcast digitally, both terrestrially and on cable. Yle&#x27;s studio area houses the high television and radio tower, Yle Transmission Tower (&quot;Pasilan linkkitorni&quot;), which is the third tallest structure in Helsinki and one of Helsinki&#x27;s most famous landmarks, from the top of which, in good weather, can be seen even as far as Tallinn over the Gulf of Finland.

The commercial television channel MTV3 and commercial radio channel Radio Nova are owned by Nordic Broadcasting (Bonnier and Proventus).

===Food===

Helsinki was already known in the 18th century for its abundant number of inns and pubs, where both locals and those who landed in the harbor were offered plenty of alcoholic beverages. At that time, taxes on the sale of alcohol were a very significant source of income for Helsinki, and one of the most important sellers of alcohol was (1722–1805), a trade councilor who attracted rural merchants with alcohol and made good deals. Gradually, a new kind of beverage culture began to grow in the next century, and as early as 1852, the first café of Finland, Café Ekberg, was established by confectioner (1825–1891) after attending his studies in St. Petersburg. Ekberg has also been said to have created Finland&#x27;s &quot;national pastry tradition&quot;. At first, café culture was only a prerogative of sophisticated elite, when it recently began to take shape as the right of every man. Today, there are several hundred cafés in Helsinki, the most notable of which is Cafe Regatta, which is very popular with foreign tourists.
As an important port city on the Baltic Sea, Helsinki has long been known for its fish food, and it has recently started to become one of the leading fish food capitals in Northern Europe. Helsinki&#x27;s Market Square is especially known for its traditional herring market, which has been organized since 1743. Salmon is also a typical Helsinki fish dish, both fried and souped. The most prestigious restaurants specializing in seafood include Restaurant Fisken på Disken.
Helsinki is currently experiencing a period of booming food culture, and it has developed into an internationally acclaimed food city, receiving recognition for promoting food culture. The local food culture is made up of cuisines from around the world and the fusions they form. Various Asian restaurants such as Chinese, Thai, Indian and Nepalese are particularly prominent in Helsinki&#x27;s cityscape, but over the past couple of years, restaurants serving Vietnamese food have been very popular. Sushi restaurant buffets have also made their way into the city&#x27;s restaurant offerings in one fell swoop. The third prominent trend is restaurants serving pure local food, many of which specialize primarily in serving pure Nordic flavors. In past years Middle Eastern food culture rose in its popularity. Especially Helsinki&#x27;s eastern part offers many different options for Middle Eastern cuisine lovers. There is also some touches of Russian cuisine, one of which is the Finnish version of &quot;blinis&quot;, a thick pancakes that are usually fried in a cast-iron pan. One of the most significant food culture venues in Helsinki is the general public area known as Teurastamo in the Hermanni district, which operated as the city&#x27;s slaughterhouse between 1933 and 1992, to which the name of the place also refers.

A nationwide food carnival called Restaurant Day (&quot;Ravintolapäivä&quot;) has begun in Helsinki and has traditionally been celebrated since May 2011. The purpose of the day is to have fun, share new food experiences and enjoy the common environment with the group.

===Other===
Vappu is an annual carnival for students and workers on 1 May. The last week of June marks the Helsinki Pride human rights event, which was attended by 100,000 marchers in 2018.

==Sports==

Helsinki has a long tradition of sports: the city gained much of its initial international recognition during the 1952 Summer Olympics, and the city has arranged sporting events such as the first World Championships in Athletics 1983 and 2005, and the European Championships in Athletics 1971, 1994, and 2012. Helsinki hosts successful local teams in both of the most popular team sports in Finland: football and ice hockey. Helsinki houses HJK Helsinki, Finland&#x27;s largest and most successful football club, and IFK Helsingfors, their local rivals with 7 championship titles. The fixtures between the two are commonly known as Stadin derby. Helsinki&#x27;s track and field club Helsingin Kisa-Veikot is also dominant within Finland. Ice hockey is popular among many Helsinki residents, who usually support either of the local clubs IFK Helsingfors (HIFK) or Jokerit. HIFK, with 14 Finnish championships titles, also plays in the highest bandy division, along with Botnia-69. The Olympic stadium hosted the first Bandy World Championship in 1957.

Helsinki was elected host-city of the 1940 Summer Olympics, but due to World War II they were canceled. Instead Helsinki was the host of the 1952 Summer Olympics. The Olympics were a landmark event symbolically and economically for Helsinki and Finland as a whole that was recovering from the winter war and the continuation war fought with the Soviet Union. Helsinki was also in 1983 the first city to host the World Championships in Athletics. Helsinki also hosted the event in 2005, thus also becoming the first city to host the Championships for a second time. The Helsinki City Marathon has been held in the city every year since 1981, usually in August. A Formula 3000 race through the city streets was held on 25 May 1997. In 2009 Helsinki was host of the European Figure Skating Championships, and in 2017 it hosted World Figure Skating Championships. The city will host the 2021 FIBA Under-19 Basketball World Cup. American football and the Vaahteraliiga has a strong tradition in the city dating back to the early 1980s.

Most of Helsinki&#x27;s sports venues are under the responsibility of the city&#x27;s sports office, such as 70 sports halls and about 350 sports fields. There are nine ice rinks, three of which are managed by the Helsinki Sports Agency (&quot;Helsingin liikuntavirasto&quot;). In winter, there are seven artificial ice rinks. People can swim in Helsinki in 14 swimming pools, the largest of which is the , two inland swimming pools and more than 20 beaches, of which Hietaniemi Beach is probably the most famous.

==Transport==
===Roads===

The backbone of Helsinki&#x27;s motorway network consists of three semicircular beltways, Ring I, Ring II, and Ring III, which connect expressways heading to other parts of Finland, and the western and eastern arteries of &quot;Länsiväylä&quot; and &quot;Itäväylä&quot; respectively. While variants of a &quot;Keskustatunneli&quot; tunnel under the city centre have been repeatedly proposed, the plan remains on the drawing board.

Many important Finnish highways leave Helsinki for various parts of Finland; most of them in the form of motorways, but a few of these exceptions include &quot;Vihdintie&quot;. The most significant highways are:
* Finnish national road 1/E18 (to Lohja, Salo and Turku)
* Finnish national road 3/E12 (to Hämeenlinna, Tampere and Vaasa)
* Finnish national road 4/E75 (to Lahti, Jyväskylä, Oulu and Rovaniemi)
* Finnish national road 7/E18 (to Porvoo and Kotka).

Helsinki has some 390 cars per 1000 inhabitants. This is less than in cities of similar population and construction density, such as Brussels&#x27; 483 per 1000, Stockholm&#x27;s 401, and Oslo&#x27;s 413.

===Intercity rail===

Helsinki Central Railway Station is the main terminus of the rail network in Finland. Two rail corridors lead out of Helsinki, the Main Line to the north (to Tampere, Oulu, Rovaniemi), and the Coastal Line to the west (to Turku). The Main Line (&quot;päärata&quot;), which is the first railway line in Finland, was officially opened on 17 March 1862, between cities of Helsinki and Hämeenlinna. The railway connection to the east branches from the Main Line outside of Helsinki at Kerava, and leads via Lahti to eastern parts of Finland.

A majority of intercity passenger services in Finland originate or terminate at the Helsinki Central Railway Station. All major cities in Finland are connected to Helsinki by rail service, with departures several times a day. The most frequent service is to Tampere, with more than 25 intercity departures per day .

Until 2022 there also was an international services from Helsinki to Saint Petersburg and Moscow. The Saint Petersburg to Helsinki route was operated by Allegro high-speed trains.

A Helsinki to Tallinn Tunnel has been proposed and agreed upon by representatives of the cities. The rail tunnel would connect Helsinki to the Estonian capital Tallinn, further linking Helsinki to the rest of continental Europe by Rail Baltica.

===Aviation===
Air traffic is handled primarily from Helsinki Airport, located approximately north of Helsinki&#x27;s downtown area, in the neighbouring city of Vantaa. Helsinki&#x27;s own airport, Helsinki-Malmi Airport, is mainly used for general and private aviation. Charter flights are available from Hernesaari Heliport.

===Sea transport===
Like many other cities, Helsinki was deliberately founded at a location on the sea in order to take advantage of shipping. The freezing of the sea imposed limitations on sea traffic up to the end of the 19th century. But for the last hundred years, the routes leading to Helsinki have been kept open even in winter with the aid of icebreakers, many of them built in the Helsinki Hietalahti shipyard. The arrival and departure of ships has also been a part of everyday life in Helsinki. Regular route traffic from Helsinki to Stockholm, Tallinn, and Saint Petersburg began as far back as 1837. Over 300 cruise ships and 360,000 cruise passengers visit Helsinki annually. There are international cruise ship docks in South Harbour, Katajanokka, West Harbour, and Hernesaari. In terms of combined liner and cruise passengers, the Port of Helsinki overtook the Port of Dover in 2017 to become the busiest passenger port in the world.

Ferry connections to Tallinn, Mariehamn, and Stockholm are serviced by various companies; very popular MS &quot;J. L. Runeberg&quot; ferry connection to Finland&#x27;s second oldest city, medieval old town of Porvoo, is also available for tourists. Finnlines passenger-freight ferries to Gdynia, Poland; Travemünde, Germany; and Rostock, Germany are also available. St. Peter Line offers passenger ferry service to Saint Petersburg several times a week.

===Urban transport===

In the Helsinki metropolitan area, public transportation is managed by the Helsinki Regional Transport Authority, the metropolitan area transportation authority. The diverse public transport system consists of trams, commuter rail, the metro, bus lines, two ferry lines and a public bike system.

Helsinki&#x27;s tram system dates back to 1891 when the first horse-drawn trams were introduced; the system was electrified in 1900. , the system consists of 14 routes covering the inner part of the city center and one newer light rail style line connecting Keilaniemi in Espoo with Itäkeskus in eastern Helsinki. The length of the network is planned to more than double during the 2020s and 2030s compared to 2021, with major projects including Vantaa light rail, the Crown Bridges link to the island of Laajasalo and the West Helsinki light rail project connecting Kannelmäki to the city center. Construction work on the new tram as the number line 13 (Nihti–Kalasatama–Vallilanlaakso–Pasila) has begun in May 2020, and the line is scheduled for completion in 2024.

The commuter rail system includes purpose-built double track for local services in two rail corridors along intercity railways, and the Ring Rail Line, an urban double-track railway with a station at the Helsinki Airport in Vantaa. Electric operation of commuter trains was first begun in 1969, and the system has been gradually expanded since. 15 different services are operated , some extending outside of the Helsinki region. The frequent services run at a 10-minute headway in peak traffic.

==International relations==


===Twin towns and sister cities===
Helsinki has no official sister cities except Beijing, China. On July 14, 2006, Beijing and Helsinki officially became sister cities. In October 2019, the two cities signed the Work Plan for Promoting the Cooperation between Beijing and Helsinki (19-2023). In addition, the city has a special partnership relation with:
* Tallinn
* Stockholm
* Berlin
Until 2022, Helsinki also had an international partnership with the Russian cities of Moscow and Saint Petersburg, which was suspended after Russian invasion of Ukraine.

==Notable people==
=== Born before 1900 ===
* Peter Forsskål (1732–1763), Swedish-Finnish naturalist and orientalist
* Axel Hampus Dalström (1829–1882), architect
* Maria Tschetschulin (1850–1917), clerk
* Augusta Krook (1853–1941), politician and teacher
* Agnes Tschetschulin (1859–1942), composer and violinist
* Jakob Sederholm (1863–1934), petrologist
* Karl Fazer (1866–1932), baker, confectioner, chocolatier, entrepreneur, and sport shooter
* Emil Lindh (1867–1937), sailor
* Oskar Merikanto (1868–1924), composer
* Signe Lagerborg-Stenius (1870–1968), architect and member the Helsinki City Council
* Maggie Gripenberg (1881–1976), dancer
* Gunnar Nordström (1881–1923), theoretical physicist
* Väinö Tanner (1881–1966), politician
* Walter Jakobsson (1882–1957), figure-skater
* Mauritz Stiller (1883–1928), Finnish-Swedish director and screenwriter
* Karl Wiik (1883–1946), Social Democratic politician
* Lennart Lindroos (1886–1921), swimmer, Olympic games 1912
* Erkki Karu (1887–1935), film director and producer
* Kai Donner (1888–1935), linguist, anthropologist and politician
* Gustaf Molander (1888–1973), Swedish director and screenwriter
* Johan Helo (1889–1966), lawyer and politician
* Minna Craucher (1891–1932), socialite and spy
* Artturi Ilmari Virtanen (1895–1973), chemist (Nobel Prize, 1945)
* Rolf Nevanlinna (1895–1980), mathematician, university teacher and writer
* Elmer Diktonius (1896–1961), Finnish-Swedish writer and composer
* Yrjö Leino (1897–1961), communist politician
* Toivo Wiherheimo (1898–1970), economist and politician

=== Born after 1900 ===

* Aku Ahjolinna (born 1946), ballet dancer and choreographer
* Lars Ahlfors (1907–1996), mathematician, Fields medalist
* Laura Åkerlund (born 1987), opera stage director
* Ella Eronen (1900–1987), actress and poetic recite
* Helena Anhava (1925–2018), poet, author and translator
* Paavo Berglund (1929–2012), conductor
* Laci Boldemann (1921–1969), composer
* Irja Agnes Browallius (1901–1968), Swedish writer
* Bo Carpelan (1926–2011), Finland-Swedish writer, literary critic and translator
* Tarja Cronberg (born 1943), politician
* Jörn Donner (1933–2020), writer, film director and politician
* George Gaynes (1917–2016), American television and film actor
* Ragnar Granit (1900–1991), Finnish-Swedish neurophysiologist and Nobel laureate
* Mika Waltari (1908–1979), writer
* Elina Haavio-Mannila (born 1933), social scientist and professor 
* Tarja Halonen (born 1943), 11th President of Finland
* Reino Helismaa (1913–1965), writer, film actor and singer
* Kim Hirschovits (born 1982), ice hockey player
* Bengt Holmström (born 1949), Professor of Economics, Nobel laureate
* Shawn Huff (born 1984), basketball player
* Ville Husso (born 1995), ice hockey goaltender
* Kirsti Ilvessalo (1920–2019), textile artist
* Juha Jääskä (born 1998), ice hockey player
* Tove Jansson (1914–2001), Finland-Swedish writer, painter, illustrator, comic writer, graphic designer
* Kaapo Kähkönen (born 1996), ice hockey goaltender
* Aki Kaurismäki (born 1957), director, screenwriter and producer
* Emma Kimiläinen (born 1989), racing driver
* Kiti Kokkonen (born 1974), Finnish actress and writer
* Petteri Koponen, basketball player
* Lennart Koskinen (born 1944), Swedish, Lutheran bishop
* Sam Lake (born 1970), writer and actor; the creative director at Remedy Entertainment
* Olli Lehto (1925–2020), mathematician
* Samuel Lehtonen (1921–2010), bishop of the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland
* Juha Leiviskä (1936–2023), architect
* Magnus Lindberg (born 1958), composer and pianist
* Esa Lindell (born 1994), professional ice hockey player
* Lill Lindfors (born 1940), Finland-Swedish singer and TV presenter
* Jari Mäenpää (born 1977), founder, former lead guitarist and current lead singer in melodic death metal band Wintersun, former lead singer and guitarist of folk metal band Ensiferum
* Klaus Mäkelä (born 1996), cellist and conductor
* Susanna Mälkki (born 1969), conductor
* Georg Malmstén (1902–1981), singer, musician, composer, orchestra director and actor
* Tauno Marttinen (1912–2008), composer
* Vesa-Matti Loiri (1945–2022), actor, comedian, singer
* Abdirahim Hussein Mohamed (born 1978), Finnish-Somalian media personality and politician
* Hanno Möttölä, Finnish basketball player
* Väinö Myllyrinne (1909–1963), acromegalic giant and at time (1940–1963) the world&#x27;s tallest living person
* Peter Nygård (born 1941), businessman, arrested in December 2020 for sex crimes
* Markku Peltola (1956–2007), actor and musician
* Kimmo Pikkarainen (born 1976), professional ice hockey player
* Anne Marie Pohtamo (born 1955), actress, model, Miss Suomi 1975 and Miss Universe 1975
* Elisabeth Rehn (born 1935), politician
* Einojuhani Rautavaara (1928–2016), composer
* Susanne Ringell (born 1955), writer and actress
* Miron Ruina (born 1998), Finnish-Israeli basketball player
* Kaija Saariaho (1952–2023), composer
* Riitta Salin (born 1950), athlete
* Sasu Salin, Finnish basketball player
* Esa-Pekka Salonen (born 1958), composer and conductor
* Asko Sarkola (born 1945), actor
* Heikki Sarmanto (born 1939), jazz pianist and composer
* Teemu Selänne (born 1970), Hall of Fame ice hockey player
* Ann Selin (born 1960), trade union leader
* Birgit Sergelius (1907–1979), stage and film actress
* Alexander Stubb (born 1968), 13th President of Finland
* Teuvo Teräväinen (born 1994), professional ice hockey player
* Märta Tikkanen (born 1935), Finland-Swedish writer and philosophy teacher
* Linus Torvalds (born 1969), software engineer, creator of Linux
* Elin Törnudd (1924–2008), Finnish chief librarian and professor
* Klaus Törnudd (born 1931), diplomat and political scientist
* Sirkka Turkka (1939–2021), poet
* Jarno Tuunainen (born 1977), footballer
* Ville Valo (born 1976), lead singer of the rock band HIM
* Ulla Vuorela (1945–2011), professor of social anthropology
* Lauri Ylönen (born 1979), lead singer of the rock band The Rasmus

== See also ==
* Helsinki metropolitan area
* Helsinki urban area
* Subdivisions of Helsinki
* Helsinki Parish Village
* Underground Helsinki

==Notes==
== References ==
==External links==

*Hel.fi: Official City of Helsinki website
*My Helsinki: Your local guide to Helsinki
*Visit Finland: Discover Helsinki</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="0" end="8" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="16" end="23" title="Capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q183443" start="42" end="46" title="List of cities and towns in Finland" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="50" end="57" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q14686" start="85" end="100" title="Gulf of Finland" label="Gulf of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5711" start="144" end="151" title="Uusimaa" label="Uusimaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18691387" start="220" end="234" title="Helsinki capital region" label="capital region"/>
<link wikidata="Q673425" start="255" end="272" title="Helsinki metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084920" start="295" end="305" title="List of urban areas in Finland by population" label="urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770" start="445" end="461" title="Tallinn, Estonia" label="Tallinn, Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="471" end="488" title="Stockholm, Sweden" label="Stockholm, Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="502" end="526" title="Saint Petersburg, Russia" label="Saint Petersburg, Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319914" start="553" end="575" title="History of Helsinki" label="historical connections"/>
<link wikidata="Q47034" start="630" end="635" title="Espoo" label="Espoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q127623" start="637" end="643" title="Vantaa" label="Vantaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q208287" start="648" end="658" title="Kauniainen" label="Kauniainen"/>
<link wikidata="Q986320" start="734" end="739" title="Sipoo" label="Sipoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q673425" start="769" end="786" title="Helsinki metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="873" end="885" title="List of northernmost items#Cities and settlements" label="northernmost"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="990" end="1005" title="Member state of the European Union" label="EU member state"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643144" start="1023" end="1036" title="List of the most populated municipalities in the Nordic countries" label="third-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="1095" end="1099" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796203" start="1123" end="1136" title="List of urban areas in the Nordic countries" label="third-largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="1182" end="1192" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q215327" start="1194" end="1210" title="Helsinki Airport" label="Helsinki Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="1362" end="1371" title="bilingual" label="bilingual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="1390" end="1397" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="1402" end="1409" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8407" start="1597" end="1617" title="1952 Summer Olympics" label="1952 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11859074" start="1629" end="1633" title="Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="CSCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="1634" end="1638" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="OSCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q182653" start="1665" end="1694" title="World Athletics Championships" label="World Athletics Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q10153" start="1708" end="1736" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2007" label="52nd Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q494067" start="1765" end="1785" title="World Design Capital" label="World Design Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q646749" start="1896" end="1903" title="Monocle (UK magazine)" label="Monocle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199177" start="1972" end="1992" title="City quality of life indices" label="livable cities index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063288" start="2001" end="2028" title="Economist Intelligence Unit" label="Economist Intelligence Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="2143" end="2147" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q43619" start="2316" end="2329" title="Natural environment" label="environmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q135635" start="2420" end="2443" title="Boston Consulting Group" label="Boston Consulting Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2547" end="2553" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="2558" end="2571" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663233" start="2613" end="2632" title="Condé Nast Traveler" label="Condé Nast Traveler"/>
<link wikidata="Q103717" start="2766" end="2775" title="Rovaniemi" label="Rovaniemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5700" start="2779" end="2786" title="Lapland (Finland)" label="Lapland"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="2833" end="2840" title="tourism" label="tourist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42901487" start="3081" end="3101" title="Swedish colonisation of Finland" label="Swedish colonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q206564" start="3139" end="3150" title="Hälsingland" label="Hälsingland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="3162" end="3168" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092330" start="3196" end="3208" title="Vantaa (river)" label="Vantaa River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421374" start="3285" end="3292" title="Helsingin pitäjän kirkonkylä" label="village"/>
<link wikidata="Q679764" start="3297" end="3303" title="Church of St. Lawrence, Vantaa" label="church"/>
<link wikidata="Q203509" start="3416" end="3423" title="Uppland" label="Uppland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9633" start="3554" end="3558" title="neck" label="neck"/>
<link wikidata="Q695793" start="3618" end="3624" title="rapids" label="rapids"/>
<link wikidata="Q26881" start="3731" end="3740" title="Helsingør" label="Helsingør"/>
<link wikidata="Q25411" start="3756" end="3767" title="Helsingborg" label="Helsingborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132958" start="3822" end="3828" title="Koskela" label="Forsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366737" start="4042" end="4060" title="Council of State (Finland)" label="Finnish government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881775" start="4164" end="4181" title="Senate of Finland" label="Senate of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38511" start="4205" end="4210" title="Turku" label="Turku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097949" start="4367" end="4374" title="literary language" label="written"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="4472" end="4486" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424118" start="4607" end="4621" title="Helsinki slang" label="Helsinki slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q33947" start="4882" end="4895" title="Northern Sami" label="Northern Sami"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="4972" end="4979" title="Last Glacial Period" label="Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q127623" start="5134" end="5140" title="Vantaa" label="Vantaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132961" start="5142" end="5153" title="Pitäjänmäki" label="Pitäjänmäki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068775" start="5158" end="5165" title="Kaarela" label="Kaarela"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="5261" end="5269" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11864082" start="5306" end="5316" title="Tavastians" label="Tavastians"/>
<link wikidata="Q212919" start="5467" end="5482" title="Palynology" label="Pollen analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="5667" end="5679" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q392371" start="5777" end="5784" title="Christian cross" label="crosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460755" start="5907" end="5924" title="Kingdom of Sweden (800–1521)" label="Kingdom of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="6506" end="6513" title="Vikings" label="Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870135" start="6534" end="6552" title="Battle at Herdaler" label="Battle at Herdaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q208331" start="6626" end="6643" title="Olaf II of Norway" label="Olaf II of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q986331" start="6704" end="6708" title="Ingå" label="Ingå"/>
<link wikidata="Q215806" start="6753" end="6775" title="Heimskringla" label="Saga of Olaf Haraldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q203505" start="7044" end="7052" title="Norrland" label="Norrland"/>
<link wikidata="Q206564" start="7057" end="7068" title="Hälsingland" label="Hälsingland"/>
<link wikidata="Q42901487" start="7119" end="7147" title="Swedish colonisation of Finland" label="Swedes permanently colonised"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132958" start="7452" end="7459" title="Koskela" label="Koskela"/>
<link wikidata="Q520367" start="7464" end="7469" title="Töölö" label="Töölö"/>
<link wikidata="Q219015" start="7618" end="7630" title="King&amp;#x27;s Road (Finland)" label="Kuninkaantie"/>
<link wikidata="Q679764" start="7767" end="7789" title="Church of St. Lawrence, Vantaa" label="Church of St. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q91165" start="7868" end="7872" title="keep" label="keep"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="7911" end="7921" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770" start="7974" end="7979" title="Reval" label="Reval"/>
<link wikidata="Q838811" start="8093" end="8100" title="peasant" label="peasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="8103" end="8109" title="priest" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q134737" start="8115" end="8120" title="nobility" label="noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q14657" start="8140" end="8146" title="Vyborg" label="Vyborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010030" start="8151" end="8156" title="Pohja" label="Pohja"/>
<link wikidata="Q197204" start="8158" end="8161" title="Fur" label="Fur"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="8164" end="8168" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q186209" start="8170" end="8173" title="tar" label="tar"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="8175" end="8179" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q11254" start="8225" end="8229" title="salt" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995529" start="8234" end="8239" title="grain" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132958" start="8690" end="8697" title="Koskela" label="Koskela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092330" start="8734" end="8746" title="Vantaa River" label="River Vantaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q52947" start="8842" end="8860" title="Gustav I of Sweden" label="Gustav I of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="8927" end="8936" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770" start="8956" end="8963" title="Tallinn" label="Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q14686" start="8994" end="9009" title="Gulf of Finland" label="Gulf of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092330" start="9056" end="9068" title="Vantaa River" label="Vantaa River"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="9091" end="9102" title="bourgeoisie" label="bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q193367" start="9106" end="9112" title="Porvoo" label="Porvoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q633371" start="9114" end="9122" title="Raseborg" label="Raseborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q37013" start="9124" end="9129" title="Rauma, Finland" label="Rauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q247128" start="9134" end="9140" title="Ulvila" label="Ulvila"/>
<link wikidata="Q837556" start="9144" end="9148" title="Forced displacement" label="move"/>
<link wikidata="Q472692" start="9306" end="9327" title="Per Brahe the Younger" label="Per Brahe the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q407542" start="9422" end="9432" title="Vironniemi" label="Vironniemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772186" start="9468" end="9479" title="Kruununhaka" label="Kruununhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329554" start="9500" end="9513" title="Senate Square, Helsinki" label="Senate Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q738015" start="9518" end="9536" title="Helsinki Cathedral" label="Helsinki Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="9645" end="9649" title="fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269810" start="9817" end="9845" title="Nyland and Tavastehus County" label="Nyland and Tavastehus County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599700" start="10091" end="10097" title="Great Northern War plague outbreak" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q56401997" start="10159" end="10176" title="Battle of Helsinki (1713)" label="Russians captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q151616" start="10209" end="10227" title="Great Northern War" label="Great Northern War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292442" start="10433" end="10441" title="Suomenlinna" label="Sveaborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q736268" start="10638" end="10649" title="Finnish War" label="Finnish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q62633" start="10688" end="10710" title="Grand Duchy of Finland" label="Grand Duchy of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="10909" end="10930" title="Alexander I of Russia" label="Alexander I of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38511" start="10965" end="10970" title="Turku" label="Turku"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="11070" end="11083" title="St Petersburg" label="St Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989671" start="11095" end="11114" title="Great Fire of Turku" label="Great Fire of Turku"/>
<link wikidata="Q414481" start="11128" end="11150" title="Royal Academy of Turku" label="Royal Academy of Turku"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="11462" end="11474" title="neoclassicism" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q77103" start="11566" end="11577" title="Carl Ludvig Engel" label="C. L. Engel"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="11640" end="11657" title="industrialisation" label="industrialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q211855" start="11935" end="11952" title="Finnish Civil War" label="Finnish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q134949" start="11961" end="11971" title="Winter War" label="Winter War"/>
<link wikidata="Q726673" start="12102" end="12118" title="Swedish-speaking population of Finland" label="Swedish speakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424118" start="12189" end="12203" title="Helsinki slang" label="Helsinki slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="12358" end="12364" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="12369" end="12376" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8407" start="12462" end="12480" title="1952 Summer Olympics" label="1952 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q207287" start="12668" end="12682" title="Helsinki Metro" label="Helsinki Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q407542" start="13037" end="13047" title="Vironniemi" label="Vironniemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011613" start="13187" end="13193" title="Kallio" label="Kallio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041034" start="13387" end="13408" title="Central Park (Helsinki)" label="Helsinki Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153558" start="13575" end="13583" title="Berth (moorings)" label="moorings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165193" start="13774" end="13784" title="Seurasaari" label="Seurasaari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020168" start="13786" end="13797" title="Lauttasaari" label="Lauttasaari"/>
<link wikidata="Q54824182" start="13802" end="13813" title="Korkeasaari" label="Korkeasaari"/>
<link wikidata="Q220045" start="13866" end="13881" title="Korkeasaari Zoo" label="Korkeasaari Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17826263" start="13914" end="13924" title="Vallisaari" label="Vallisaari"/>
<link wikidata="Q16941292" start="13929" end="13937" title="Isosaari" label="Isosaari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634733" start="13970" end="13981" title="Santahamina" label="Santahamina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292442" start="14067" end="14078" title="Suomenlinna" label="Suomenlinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q24318062" start="14105" end="14117" title="Pihlajasaari" label="Pihlajasaari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418789" start="14160" end="14171" title="Fire Island" label="Fire Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="14175" end="14188" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="14204" end="14218" title="nature reserve" label="nature reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q47034" start="14353" end="14358" title="Espoo" label="Espoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q986320" start="14360" end="14365" title="Sipoo" label="Sipoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q216790" start="14367" end="14372" title="Hanko, Finland" label="Hanko"/>
<link wikidata="Q986331" start="14377" end="14381" title="Ingå" label="Ingå"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115516" start="14417" end="14437" title="Vanhankaupunginselkä" label="Vanhankaupunginselkä"/>
<link wikidata="Q26745" start="14586" end="14598" title="Norway maple" label="Norway maple"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388" start="14630" end="14642" title="red squirrel" label="red squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18691387" start="14674" end="14697" title="Helsinki capital region" label="Helsinki capital region"/>
<link wikidata="Q47034" start="14744" end="14749" title="Espoo" label="Espoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q127623" start="14751" end="14757" title="Vantaa" label="Vantaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q208287" start="14763" end="14773" title="Kauniainen" label="Kauniainen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11862153" start="14779" end="14798" title="Helsinki urban area" label="Helsinki urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q200250" start="14828" end="14838" title="metropolis" label="metropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="14842" end="14849" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="14931" end="14938" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q673425" start="15198" end="15224" title="Helsinki metropolitan area" label="Helsinki metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q207753" start="15330" end="15338" title="Hyvinkää" label="Hyvinkää"/>
<link wikidata="Q208293" start="15340" end="15349" title="Järvenpää" label="Järvenpää"/>
<link wikidata="Q216900" start="15351" end="15357" title="Kerava" label="Kerava"/>
<link wikidata="Q748092" start="15359" end="15370" title="Kirkkonummi" label="Kirkkonummi"/>
<link wikidata="Q597156" start="15372" end="15382" title="Nurmijärvi" label="Nurmijärvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q986320" start="15384" end="15389" title="Sipoo" label="Sipoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q214773" start="15391" end="15398" title="Tuusula" label="Tuusula"/>
<link wikidata="Q999249" start="15400" end="15409" title="Pornainen" label="Pornainen"/>
<link wikidata="Q986318" start="15411" end="15419" title="Mäntsälä" label="Mäntsälä"/>
<link wikidata="Q935858" start="15424" end="15429" title="Vihti" label="Vihti"/>
<link wikidata="Q11862153" start="15905" end="15924" title="Helsinki urban area" label="Helsinki urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q61492541" start="15953" end="15974" title="Urban areas in Finland" label="urban area in Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5711429" start="16201" end="16211" title="hemiboreal" label="hemiboreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="16212" end="16237" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="16239" end="16245" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17174435" start="16264" end="16273" title="Trewartha climate classification" label="Trewartha"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="16332" end="16342" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q211798" start="16351" end="16373" title="North Atlantic Current" label="North Atlantic Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063457" start="16384" end="16405" title="Extratropical cyclone" label="Extratropical cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q215712" start="16712" end="16729" title="urban heat island" label="urban heat island"/>
<link wikidata="Q207932" start="16838" end="16853" title="winter solstice" label="winter solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603898" start="17133" end="17148" title="summer solstice" label="summer solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721504" start="17437" end="17447" title="Kaisaniemi" label="Kaisaniemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3494277" start="17521" end="17527" title="Ilmala" label="Ilmala"/>
<link wikidata="Q215327" start="17674" end="17690" title="Helsinki Airport" label="Helsinki Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11862147" start="18020" end="18037" title="Helsinki City Centre" label="Helsinki Downtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q18661375" start="18044" end="18058" title="North Helsinki" label="North Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784748" start="18068" end="18081" title="East Helsinki" label="East Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="18172" end="18178" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q738570" start="18198" end="18213" title="Central business district" label="business center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393571" start="18247" end="18253" title="Kluuvi" label="Kluuvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q729552" start="18255" end="18261" title="Kamppi" label="Kamppi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037874" start="18266" end="18275" title="Punavuori" label="Punavuori"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087996" start="18339" end="18344" title="Malmi, Helsinki" label="Malmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267125" start="18395" end="18404" title="Itäkeskus" label="Itäkeskus"/>
<link wikidata="Q77103" start="18504" end="18521" title="Carl Ludvig Engel" label="Carl Ludvig Engel"/>
<link wikidata="Q54111" start="18588" end="18600" title="Neoclassical architecture" label="neoclassical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329554" start="18674" end="18687" title="Helsinki Senate Square" label="Senate Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129969" start="18713" end="18730" title="Government Palace (Finland)" label="Government Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q738015" start="18831" end="18849" title="Helsinki Cathedral" label="Helsinki Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q207869" start="18934" end="18941" title="epithet" label="epithet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495335" start="19324" end="19339" title="Kuninkaanportti" label="Kuninkaanportti"/>
<link wikidata="Q34636" start="19467" end="19478" title="Art Nouveau" label="Art Nouveau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294605" start="19491" end="19497" title="Jugendstil" label="Jugend"/>
<link wikidata="Q263985" start="19559" end="19579" title="romantic nationalism" label="romantic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q130924" start="19656" end="19664" title="Kalevala" label="Kalevala"/>
<link wikidata="Q976443" start="19802" end="19813" title="Katajanokka" label="Katajanokka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001800" start="19818" end="19828" title="Ullanlinna" label="Ullanlinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q312028" start="19890" end="19904" title="Eliel Saarinen" label="Eliel Saarinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044613" start="19946" end="19970" title="Helsinki Central railway station" label="Helsinki Central Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q194060" start="19985" end="20000" title="Bank of Finland" label="Bank of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q502163" start="20017" end="20039" title="Renaissance Revival architecture" label="Renaissance Revivalish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3279961" start="20044" end="20064" title="House of the Estates" label="House of the Estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="20115" end="20142" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic Revival architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698940" start="20159" end="20181" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s Church, Helsinki" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412714" start="20351" end="20368" title="House of Nobility (Finland)" label="House of Nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772186" start="20372" end="20383" title="Kruununhaka" label="Kruununhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="20392" end="20400" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q31204" start="20401" end="20427" title="St. Henry&amp;#x27;s Cathedral" label="St. Henry&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="20501" end="20513" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="20523" end="20532" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="20705" end="20713" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192655" start="20803" end="20821" title="The Kremlin Letter" label="The Kremlin Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q597239" start="20842" end="20846" title="Reds (film)" label="Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q594307" start="20871" end="20881" title="Gorky Park (film)" label="Gorky Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="20939" end="20948" title="Leningrad" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="20953" end="20959" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="21031" end="21039" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297927" start="21294" end="21303" title="espionage film" label="espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484376" start="21304" end="21312" title="Thriller film" label="thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629310" start="21319" end="21339" title="Billion Dollar Brain" label="Billion Dollar Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q123351" start="21356" end="21369" title="Michael Caine" label="Michael Caine"/>
<link wikidata="Q82840" start="21635" end="21646" title="Alvar Aalto" label="Alvar Aalto"/>
<link wikidata="Q47942" start="21699" end="21712" title="functionalism (architecture)" label="functionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q747265" start="21788" end="21798" title="Stora Enso" label="Stora Enso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142522" start="21821" end="21835" title="Finlandia Hall" label="Finlandia Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q332219" start="21963" end="21978" title="Helsinki Olympic Stadium" label="Olympic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117100" start="21984" end="21997" title="Tennispalatsi" label="Tennis Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7862362" start="22003" end="22017" title="Töölö Rowing Stadium" label="Rowing Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710554" start="22023" end="22039" title="Helsinki Swimming Stadium" label="Swimming Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604554" start="22045" end="22054" title="Helsinki Velodrome" label="Velodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q630304" start="22060" end="22072" title="Lasipalatsi" label="Glass Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7862365" start="22078" end="22095" title="Töölö Sports Hall" label="Töölö Sports Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q662434" start="22101" end="22123" title="Helsinki-Malmi Airport" label="Helsinki-Malmi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="22242" end="22258" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8407" start="22306" end="22324" title="1952 Summer Olympics" label="1952 Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q286911" start="22353" end="22361" title="DoCoMoMo" label="DoCoMoMo"/>
<link wikidata="Q332219" start="22410" end="22429" title="Helsinki Olympic Stadium" label="The Olympic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q662434" start="22434" end="22456" title="Helsinki-Malmi Airport" label="Helsinki-Malmi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029524" start="22484" end="22507" title="Finnish National Board of Antiquities" label="Finnish Heritage Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069685" start="22649" end="22660" title="Pihlajamäki" label="Pihlajamäki"/>
<link wikidata="Q831541" start="22753" end="22769" title="precast concrete" label="precast concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135412" start="22797" end="22813" title="Pikku Huopalahti" label="Pikku Huopalahti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267125" start="22995" end="23004" title="Itäkeskus" label="Itäkeskus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784748" start="23008" end="23024" title="Eastern Helsinki" label="Eastern Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="23187" end="23206" title="Modern architecture" label="Modern architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633361" start="23270" end="23276" title="Kiasma" label="Kiasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q10661594" start="23436" end="23446" title="Sanomatalo" label="Sanomatalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q646339" start="24000" end="24011" title="Hotel Torni" label="Hotel Torni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485890" start="24108" end="24126" title="Accountor Tower" label="Neste headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636613" start="24227" end="24233" title="Pasila" label="Pasila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146592" start="24313" end="24317" title="Kone" label="Kone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492372" start="24514" end="24524" title="Kalasatama" label="Kalasatama"/>
<link wikidata="Q11895812" start="24568" end="24591" title="Sörnäinen Harbour" label="a former container port"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253276" start="24701" end="24728" title="List of tallest buildings in Finland" label="tallest building in Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116584" start="25039" end="25047" title="Vuosaari" label="Vuosaari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3533051" start="25072" end="25078" title="Cirrus (Helsinki building)" label="Cirrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069090" start="25403" end="25413" title="Jätkäsaari" label="Jätkäsaari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370085" start="25558" end="25568" title="Ruoholahti" label="Ruoholahti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267905" start="25699" end="25717" title="low-carbon economy" label="low-carbon economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q976443" start="25794" end="25805" title="Katajanokka" label="Katajanokka"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116244" start="26052" end="26067" title="Keisarinnankivi" label="Keisarinnankivi"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="26140" end="26152" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q523268" start="26190" end="26202" title="Havis Amanda" label="Havis Amanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q17382947" start="26221" end="26239" title="Paavo Nurmi statue" label="Paavo Nurmi statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797830" start="26258" end="26277" title="Three Smiths Statue" label="Three Smiths Statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q11850731" start="26296" end="26317" title="Aleksis Kivi Memorial" label="Aleksis Kivi Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q23045040" start="26330" end="26347" title="Eino Leino (statue)" label="Eino Leino Statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511913" start="26360" end="26399" title="Equestrian statue of Marshal Mannerheim" label="Equestrian statue of Marshal Mannerheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584017" start="26421" end="26438" title="Sibelius Monument (Helsinki)" label="Sibelius Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q856076" start="26494" end="26516" title="Municipalities of Finland" label="Finnish municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117101" start="26518" end="26546" title="City Council of Helsinki" label="Helsinki&amp;#x27;s city council"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="26628" end="26642" title="urban planning" label="urban planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="26670" end="26686" title="public transport" label="public transport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26733" end="26752" title="Elections in Finland#Municipal elections" label="municipal elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q304191" start="26939" end="26963" title="National Coalition Party" label="National Coalition Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q196695" start="26974" end="26986" title="Green League" label="Green League"/>
<link wikidata="Q499029" start="27001" end="27024" title="Social Democratic Party of Finland" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11867451" start="27057" end="27074" title="Juhana Vartiainen" label="Juhana Vartiainen"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="27223" end="27230" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordics"/>
<link wikidata="Q673425" start="27236" end="27251" title="Helsinki metropolitan area" label="Helsinki region"/>
<link wikidata="Q47034" start="27527" end="27532" title="Espoo" label="Espoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q127623" start="27536" end="27542" title="Vantaa" label="Vantaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q38511" start="28051" end="28056" title="Turku" label="Turku"/>
<link wikidata="Q62633" start="28079" end="28101" title="Grand Duchy of Finland" label="Grand Duchy of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="28136" end="28155" title="Republic of Finland" label="Republic of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q211855" start="28235" end="28252" title="Finnish Civil War" label="Finnish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="28270" end="28282" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q473211" start="29152" end="29155" title="Helsinki Regional Transport Authority" label="HSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q214777" start="29378" end="29383" title="Lohja" label="Lohja"/>
<link wikidata="Q202158" start="29385" end="29396" title="Hämeenlinna" label="Hämeenlinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q28911" start="29398" end="29403" title="Lahti" label="Lahti"/>
<link wikidata="Q193367" start="29409" end="29415" title="Porvoo" label="Porvoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="29470" end="29479" title="bilingual" label="bilingual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="29491" end="29498" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="29503" end="29510" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="29600" end="29613" title="first language" label="mother tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q726673" start="29626" end="29642" title="Swedish-speaking population of Finland" label="Swedish speakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q56463" start="29697" end="29701" title="Sámi languages" label="Sámi"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="29803" end="29816" title="First language" label="mother tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="29851" end="29858" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="29863" end="29870" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424118" start="30206" end="30220" title="Helsinki slang" label="Helsinki slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q14912730" start="30540" end="30548" title="New Finn" label="New Finn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001800" start="30914" end="30936" title="Ullanlinna" label="Ullanlinna/Ulrikasborg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30963" end="30971" title="Kyläsaari" label="Byholmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="31671" end="31678" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13275" start="31687" end="31693" title="Somali language" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="31702" end="31708" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="31717" end="31724" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9072" start="31736" end="31744" title="Estonian language" label="Estonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q215327" start="32313" end="32328" title="Helsinki Airport" label="largest airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="32431" end="32443" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="32445" end="32452" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="32454" end="32461" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="32463" end="32467" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="32473" end="32479" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379849" start="32512" end="32539" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church of Finland" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q738015" start="32765" end="32783" title="Helsinki Cathedral" label="Helsinki Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355001" start="32792" end="32810" title="Uspenski Cathedral" label="Uspenski Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698940" start="32819" end="32841" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s Church, Helsinki" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981697" start="32850" end="32863" title="Kallio Church" label="Kallio Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132809" start="32875" end="32895" title="Temppeliaukio Church" label="Temppeliaukio Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q383258" start="33232" end="33240" title="Orthodoxy" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355001" start="33336" end="33354" title="Uspenski Cathedral" label="Uspenski Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="33372" end="33380" title="Catholicism" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q31204" start="33403" end="33427" title="Cathedral of Saint Henry" label="Cathedral of Saint Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405456" start="33473" end="33503" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Helsinki" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Catholic Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4855428" start="33640" end="33652" title="Bangladeshis" label="Bangladeshis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242155" start="33654" end="33662" title="Kosovo Albanians" label="Kosovars"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223" start="33664" end="33669" title="Kurds" label="Kurds"/>
<link wikidata="Q940348" start="33674" end="33682" title="Bosniaks" label="Bosniaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614280" start="34264" end="34282" title="Helsinki Synagogue" label="Helsinki Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q729552" start="34305" end="34311" title="Kamppi" label="Kamppi"/>
<link wikidata="Q45232" start="34357" end="34372" title="Jews in Finland" label="Jews in Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601015" start="34475" end="34490" title="Turku Synagogue" label="Turku Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120346" start="35632" end="35653" title="Päijänne Water Tunnel" label="Päijänne Water Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q28695" start="35978" end="36000" title="University of Helsinki" label="University of Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q300980" start="36005" end="36021" title="Aalto University" label="Aalto University"/>
<link wikidata="Q28695" start="36171" end="36193" title="University of Helsinki" label="University of Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q300980" start="36195" end="36211" title="Aalto University" label="Aalto University"/>
<link wikidata="Q47034" start="36213" end="36218" title="Espoo" label="Espoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558586" start="36267" end="36293" title="Hanken School of Economics" label="Hanken School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352418" start="36295" end="36326" title="University of the Arts Helsinki" label="University of the Arts Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041652" start="36328" end="36355" title="National Defence University (Finland)" label="National Defence University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636472" start="36357" end="36399" title="Haaga-Helia University of Applied Sciences" label="Haaga-Helia University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482866" start="36401" end="36438" title="Laurea University of Applied Sciences" label="Laurea University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710515" start="36440" end="36490" title="Helsinki Metropolia University of Applied Sciences" label="Helsinki Metropolia University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411479" start="36492" end="36529" title="Arcada University of Applied Sciences" label="Arcada University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q8095258" start="36531" end="36570" title="Diaconia University of Applied Sciences" label="Diaconia University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636183" start="36572" end="36608" title="HUMAK University of Applied Sciences" label="HUMAK University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q993120" start="36749" end="36796" title="European Institute of Innovation and Technology" label="European Institute of Innovation and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418136" start="36881" end="36907" title="National Museum of Finland" label="National Museum of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031357" start="37124" end="37144" title="Helsinki City Museum" label="Helsinki City Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q28695" start="37213" end="37235" title="University of Helsinki" label="University of Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329065" start="37285" end="37311" title="Helsinki University Museum" label="Helsinki University Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329689" start="37342" end="37375" title="Finnish Museum of Natural History" label="Finnish Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983474" start="37382" end="37406" title="Finnish National Gallery" label="Finnish National Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q754507" start="37434" end="37452" title="Ateneum" label="Ateneum Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393952" start="37480" end="37503" title="Sinebrychoff Art Museum" label="Sinebrychoff Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633361" start="37536" end="37553" title="Kiasma" label="Kiasma Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q451141" start="37597" end="37608" title="Steven Holl" label="Steven Holl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="37760" end="37771" title="state-owned" label="state-owned"/>
<link wikidata="Q739024" start="37780" end="37797" title="Senate Properties" label="Senate Properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710459" start="37857" end="37876" title="Helsinki Art Museum" label="Helsinki Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117100" start="37909" end="37922" title="Tennispalatsi" label="Tennispalatsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710459" start="38008" end="38027" title="Helsinki Art Museum" label="Helsinki Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17826263" start="38150" end="38160" title="Vallisaari" label="Vallisaari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330350" start="38167" end="38180" title="Design Museum, Helsinki" label="Design Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q283140" start="38342" end="38368" title="Military Museum of Finland" label="Military Museum of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5274238" start="38370" end="38391" title="Didrichsen Art Museum" label="Didrichsen Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q22662489" start="38393" end="38412" title="Amos Anderson Art Museum" label="Amos Rex Art Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q108560166" start="38479" end="38503" title="Finnish National Theatre" label="Finnish National Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393689" start="38509" end="38530" title="Helsinki City Theatre" label="Helsinki City Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q926046" start="38540" end="38555" title="Swedish Theatre" label="Swedish Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530985" start="38634" end="38651" title="Alexander Theatre" label="Alexander Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972132" start="38749" end="38780" title="Helsinki Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Helsinki Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368863" start="38789" end="38821" title="Finnish Radio Symphony Orchestra" label="Finnish Radio Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888459" start="38852" end="38873" title="Helsinki Music Centre" label="Helsinki Music Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q241432" start="38921" end="38935" title="Kaija Saariaho" label="Kaija Saariaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q503672" start="38937" end="38952" title="Magnus Lindberg (Finnish composer)" label="Magnus Lindberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q314587" start="38954" end="38971" title="Esa-Pekka Salonen" label="Esa-Pekka Salonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q433592" start="38977" end="38998" title="Einojuhani Rautavaara" label="Einojuhani Rautavaara"/>
<link wikidata="Q518851" start="39067" end="39083" title="Sibelius Academy" label="Sibelius Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418002" start="39089" end="39111" title="Finnish National Opera" label="Finnish National Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q11881369" start="39213" end="39226" title="Martti Wallén" label="Martti Wallén"/>
<link wikidata="Q4349879" start="39328" end="39340" title="Monica Groop" label="Monica Groop"/>
<link wikidata="Q171718" start="39423" end="39440" title="Children of Bodom" label="Children of Bodom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428813" start="39442" end="39453" title="Hanoi Rocks" label="Hanoi Rocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q23479" start="39455" end="39458" title="HIM (Finnish band)" label="HIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q201207" start="39460" end="39472" title="Stratovarius" label="Stratovarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q750286" start="39474" end="39485" title="The 69 Eyes" label="The 69 Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q498448" start="39487" end="39496" title="Finntroll" label="Finntroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q218178" start="39498" end="39507" title="Ensiferum" label="Ensiferum"/>
<link wikidata="Q622755" start="39509" end="39518" title="Wintersun" label="Wintersun"/>
<link wikidata="Q485679" start="39520" end="39530" title="The Rasmus" label="The Rasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q725517" start="39532" end="39549" title="Poets of the Fall" label="Poets of the Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q484421" start="39555" end="39567" title="Apocalyptica" label="Apocalyptica"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="39597" end="39608" title="metal music" label="metal music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473844" start="39635" end="39664" title="Tuska Open Air Metal Festival" label="Tuska Open Air Metal Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354686" start="39668" end="39677" title="Suvilahti" label="Suvilahti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090204" start="39679" end="39688" title="Sörnäinen" label="Sörnäinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418002" start="39735" end="39757" title="Finnish National Opera" label="Finnish National Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142522" start="39763" end="39785" title="Finlandia Hall" label="Finlandia concert hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888459" start="39795" end="39816" title="Helsinki Music Centre" label="Helsinki Music Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q518851" start="39861" end="39877" title="Sibelius Academy" label="Sibelius Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q33176" start="39980" end="39994" title="Helsinki Halli" label="Helsinki Halli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604560" start="40002" end="40019" title="Helsinki Ice Hall" label="Helsinki Ice Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945550" start="40074" end="40094" title="Messukeskus Helsinki" label="Messukeskus Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q33176" start="40155" end="40169" title="Helsinki Arena" label="Helsinki Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q10153" start="40181" end="40209" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2007" label="Eurovision Song Contest 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="40221" end="40244" title="Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q23471" start="40276" end="40281" title="Lordi" label="Lordi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10152" start="40296" end="40300" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2006" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604569" start="40313" end="40325" title="Helsinki Day" label="Helsinki Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q868557" start="40442" end="40458" title="open-air concert" label="open-air concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4349745" start="40470" end="40487" title="Helsinki Festival" label="Helsinki Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477940" start="40565" end="40582" title="Night of the Arts" label="Night of the Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329554" start="40593" end="40606" title="Helsinki Senate Square" label="Senate Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q152445" start="40755" end="40773" title="United Buddy Bears" label="United Buddy Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q494067" start="40804" end="40824" title="World Design Capital" label="World Design Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418" start="41156" end="41161" title="Nokia" label="Nokia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146592" start="41163" end="41167" title="Kone" label="Kone"/>
<link wikidata="Q534903" start="41173" end="41182" title="Marimekko" label="Marimekko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591673" start="41279" end="41335" title="Aalto University School of Arts, Design and Architecture" label="Aalto University School of Arts, Design and Architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q312028" start="41384" end="41398" title="Eliel Saarinen" label="Eliel Saarinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q82840" start="41403" end="41414" title="Alvar Aalto" label="Alvar Aalto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710494" start="41576" end="41633" title="Helsinki International Film Festival" label="Helsinki International Film Festival – Love &amp;amp; Anarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18660973" start="41742" end="41755" title="Night Visions (film festival)" label="Night Visions"/>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="41811" end="41817" title="horror film" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="41819" end="41826" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="41832" end="41847" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="41983" end="41994" title="documentary film" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257510" start="42146" end="42159" title="digital radio" label="digital radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q26398" start="42207" end="42236" title="Public broadcasting" label="public service radio channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540297" start="42239" end="42245" title="Sanoma" label="Sanoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416653" start="42271" end="42288" title="Newspaper of record" label="journal of record"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449648" start="42296" end="42303" title="Tabloid (newspaper format)" label="tabloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001384" start="42310" end="42322" title="Ilta-Sanomat" label="Ilta-Sanomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680310" start="42358" end="42371" title="Taloussanomat" label="Taloussanomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976966" start="42406" end="42413" title="Nelonen (television)" label="Nelonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053610" start="42451" end="42461" title="Alma Media" label="Alma Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421561" start="42524" end="42533" title="Iltalehti" label="Iltalehti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378858" start="42573" end="42584" title="Kauppalehti" label="Kauppalehti"/>
<link wikidata="Q54718" start="42649" end="42652" title="Yle" label="Yle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636613" start="42788" end="42794" title="Pasila" label="Pasila"/>
<link wikidata="Q202255" start="42826" end="42835" title="Digital television" label="digitally"/>
<link wikidata="Q385150" start="42937" end="42959" title="Yle Transmission Tower" label="Yle Transmission Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770" start="43161" end="43168" title="Tallinn" label="Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432558" start="43230" end="43234" title="MTV3" label="MTV3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280947" start="43264" end="43274" title="Radio Nova (Finland)" label="Radio Nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500487" start="43288" end="43307" title="Nordic Broadcasting" label="Nordic Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q892825" start="43309" end="43316" title="Bonnier Group" label="Bonnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252334" start="43321" end="43330" title="Proventus" label="Proventus"/>
<link wikidata="Q256020" start="43420" end="43423" title="inn" label="inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="43429" end="43432" title="pub" label="pub"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="43511" end="43530" title="Alcoholic drink" label="alcoholic beverages"/>
<link wikidata="Q215536" start="43734" end="43742" title="merchant" label="merchant"/>
<link wikidata="Q30022" start="43887" end="43891" title="Coffeehouse" label="café"/>
<link wikidata="Q11857235" start="43904" end="43915" title="Café Ekberg" label="Café Ekberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="43992" end="44006" title="St. Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q477248" start="44080" end="44086" title="pastry" label="pastry"/>
<link wikidata="Q192797" start="44167" end="44172" title="elite" label="elite"/>
<link wikidata="Q18913085" start="44319" end="44331" title="Cafe Regatta" label="Cafe Regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="44394" end="44403" title="port city" label="port city"/>
<link wikidata="Q600396" start="44460" end="44469" title="Fish as food" label="fish food"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="44550" end="44565" title="Northern Europe" label="Northern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q541933" start="44583" end="44596" title="Market Square, Helsinki" label="Market Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127419" start="44637" end="44644" title="herring" label="herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="44690" end="44696" title="Salmon" label="Salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454668" start="44750" end="44756" title="Fish soup" label="souped"/>
<link wikidata="Q192935" start="44807" end="44814" title="seafood" label="seafood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361145" start="44907" end="44919" title="food culture" label="food culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q728206" start="45140" end="45157" title="Asian cuisine" label="Asian restaurants"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876842" start="45166" end="45173" title="Chinese cuisine" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q841984" start="45175" end="45179" title="Thai cuisine" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q192087" start="45181" end="45187" title="Indian cuisine" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194855" start="45192" end="45200" title="Nepalese cuisine" label="Nepalese"/>
<link wikidata="Q826059" start="45313" end="45323" title="Vietnamese cuisine" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q46383" start="45353" end="45358" title="Sushi" label="Sushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q847462" start="45359" end="45377" title="restaurant buffets" label="restaurant buffets"/>
<link wikidata="Q17067317" start="45581" end="45595" title="Nordic cuisine" label="Nordic flavors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547037" start="45611" end="45625" title="Middle Eastern cuisine" label="Middle Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q12505" start="45798" end="45813" title="Russian cuisine" label="Russian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q815898" start="45860" end="45865" title="blini" label="blini"/>
<link wikidata="Q44541" start="45882" end="45889" title="pancake" label="pancake"/>
<link wikidata="Q98433146" start="46030" end="46040" title="Teurastamo" label="Teurastamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q139340" start="46048" end="46056" title="Hermanni (Helsinki)" label="Hermanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q385557" start="46101" end="46115" title="slaughterhouse" label="slaughterhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q200982" start="46466" end="46471" title="Vappu" label="Vappu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4134784" start="46561" end="46575" title="Helsinki Pride" label="Helsinki Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="46576" end="46588" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q8407" start="46771" end="46791" title="1952 Summer Olympics" label="1952 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q182653" start="46853" end="46885" title="IAAF World Championships in Athletics" label="World Championships in Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="47057" end="47065" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="47070" end="47080" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q208584" start="47098" end="47110" title="HJK Helsinki" label="HJK Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q11336634" start="47174" end="47189" title="HIFK Fotboll" label="IFK Helsingfors"/>
<link wikidata="Q19842500" start="47289" end="47301" title="Stadin derby" label="Stadin derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350626" start="47494" end="47509" title="HIFK (ice hockey)" label="IFK Helsingfors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357204" start="47520" end="47527" title="Jokerit" label="Jokerit"/>
<link wikidata="Q183018" start="47599" end="47604" title="bandy" label="bandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11854553" start="47626" end="47635" title="Botnia-69" label="Botnia-69"/>
<link wikidata="Q806391" start="47674" end="47698" title="Bandy World Championship" label="Bandy World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604568" start="48278" end="48300" title="Helsinki City Marathon" label="Helsinki City Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q362400" start="48371" end="48383" title="Formula 3000" label="Formula 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q869121" start="48472" end="48509" title="European Figure Skating Championships" label="European Figure Skating Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q285389" start="48533" end="48567" title="World Figure Skating Championships" label="World Figure Skating Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410516" start="48597" end="48631" title="FIBA Under-19 Basketball World Cup" label="FIBA Under-19 Basketball World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="48633" end="48650" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q912784" start="48659" end="48672" title="Vaahteraliiga" label="Vaahteraliiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q641226" start="48853" end="48864" title="sports hall" label="sports hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310214" start="48880" end="48892" title="sports field" label="sports field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282870" start="48910" end="48919" title="ice rinks" label="ice rinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501" start="49102" end="49115" title="swimming pool" label="swimming pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q40080" start="49191" end="49196" title="beach" label="beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041018" start="49209" end="49225" title="Hietaniemi Beach" label="Hietaniemi Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133242" start="49350" end="49362" title="semicircle" label="semicircular"/>
<link wikidata="Q510662" start="49363" end="49371" title="ring road" label="beltways"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101624" start="49373" end="49379" title="Ring I" label="Ring I"/>
<link wikidata="Q745716" start="49381" end="49388" title="Ring II" label="Ring II"/>
<link wikidata="Q771137" start="49394" end="49402" title="Ring III" label="Ring III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739026" start="49511" end="49521" title="Länsiväylä" label="Länsiväylä"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445372" start="49538" end="49546" title="Itäväylä" label="Itäväylä"/>
<link wikidata="Q742208" start="49730" end="49746" title="Highways in Finland" label="Finnish highways"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="49820" end="49828" title="motorway" label="motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677239" start="49875" end="49884" title="Vihdintie" label="Vihdintie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474027" start="49929" end="49952" title="Finnish national road 1" label="Finnish national road 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q945810" start="49953" end="49956" title="European route E18" label="E18"/>
<link wikidata="Q214777" start="49961" end="49966" title="Lohja" label="Lohja"/>
<link wikidata="Q210987" start="49968" end="49972" title="Salo, Finland" label="Salo"/>
<link wikidata="Q38511" start="49977" end="49982" title="Turku" label="Turku"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040469" start="49986" end="50009" title="Finnish national road 3" label="Finnish national road 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346648" start="50010" end="50013" title="European route E12" label="E12"/>
<link wikidata="Q202158" start="50018" end="50029" title="Hämeenlinna" label="Hämeenlinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q40840" start="50031" end="50038" title="Tampere" label="Tampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q125080" start="50043" end="50048" title="Vaasa" label="Vaasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006658" start="50052" end="50075" title="Finnish national road 4" label="Finnish national road 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q638912" start="50076" end="50079" title="European route E75" label="E75"/>
<link wikidata="Q28911" start="50084" end="50089" title="Lahti" label="Lahti"/>
<link wikidata="Q134620" start="50091" end="50100" title="Jyväskylä" label="Jyväskylä"/>
<link wikidata="Q47048" start="50102" end="50106" title="Oulu" label="Oulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q103717" start="50111" end="50120" title="Rovaniemi" label="Rovaniemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082812" start="50124" end="50147" title="Finnish national road 7" label="Finnish national road 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q945810" start="50148" end="50151" title="European route E18" label="E18"/>
<link wikidata="Q193367" start="50156" end="50162" title="Porvoo" label="Porvoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q192155" start="50167" end="50172" title="Kotka" label="Kotka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044613" start="50404" end="50436" title="Helsinki Central Railway Station" label="Helsinki Central Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q40840" start="50562" end="50569" title="Tampere" label="Tampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q47048" start="50571" end="50575" title="Oulu" label="Oulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q103717" start="50577" end="50586" title="Rovaniemi" label="Rovaniemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q38511" start="50626" end="50631" title="Turku" label="Turku"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357601" start="50638" end="50647" title="Finnish Main Line" label="Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q202158" start="50786" end="50797" title="Hämeenlinna" label="Hämeenlinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q28911" start="50907" end="50912" title="Lahti" label="Lahti"/>
<link wikidata="Q564549" start="51413" end="51438" title="Allegro (train)" label="Allegro high-speed trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035202" start="51443" end="51469" title="Helsinki to Tallinn Tunnel" label="Helsinki to Tallinn Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="51584" end="51591" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770" start="51601" end="51608" title="Tallinn" label="Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q581518" start="51672" end="51684" title="Rail Baltica" label="Rail Baltica"/>
<link wikidata="Q215327" start="51740" end="51756" title="Helsinki Airport" label="Helsinki Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q127623" start="51848" end="51854" title="Vantaa" label="Vantaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q662434" start="51885" end="51907" title="Helsinki-Malmi Airport" label="Helsinki-Malmi Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020862" start="51993" end="52012" title="Hernesaari Heliport" label="Hernesaari Heliport"/>
<link wikidata="Q14978" start="52366" end="52376" title="icebreaker" label="icebreaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059225" start="52750" end="52763" title="South Harbour, Helsinki" label="South Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q976443" start="52765" end="52776" title="Katajanokka" label="Katajanokka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008770" start="52778" end="52790" title="West Harbour, Helsinki" label="West Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098486" start="52796" end="52806" title="Hernesaari" label="Hernesaari"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357584" start="52862" end="52878" title="Port of Helsinki" label="Port of Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q739207" start="52892" end="52905" title="Port of Dover" label="Port of Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q19715481" start="52928" end="52963" title="List of busiest cruise ports by passengers" label="busiest passenger port in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q48329" start="52996" end="53005" title="Mariehamn" label="Mariehamn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718087" start="53069" end="53098" title="MS J. L. Runeberg" label="MS &amp;quot;J. L. Runeberg&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="53154" end="53162" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q193367" start="53175" end="53181" title="Porvoo" label="Porvoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418246" start="53215" end="53224" title="Finnlines" label="Finnlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q385" start="53254" end="53260" title="Gdynia" label="Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q321792" start="53270" end="53280" title="Travemünde" label="Travemünde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861" start="53295" end="53302" title="Rostock" label="Rostock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787659" start="53332" end="53346" title="St. Peter Line" label="St. Peter Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="53479" end="53495" title="public transport" label="public transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q473211" start="53519" end="53556" title="Helsinki Regional Transport Authority" label="Helsinki Regional Transport Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258016" start="53618" end="53641" title="Public transport in Helsinki" label="public transport system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192334" start="53654" end="53659" title="Helsinki tram" label="trams"/>
<link wikidata="Q109535646" start="53661" end="53674" title="VR commuter rail" label="commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q207287" start="53680" end="53685" title="Helsinki Metro" label="metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638" start="53687" end="53690" title="bus" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25653" start="53702" end="53707" title="ferry" label="ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q28129102" start="53720" end="53738" title="Helsinki City Bikes" label="public bike system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192334" start="53741" end="53768" title="Trams in Helsinki" label="Helsinki&amp;#x27;s tram system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112950" start="53803" end="53814" title="horse-drawn" label="horse-drawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q31085928" start="53956" end="53959" title="Helsinki light rail line 15" label="one"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="53966" end="53976" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383723" start="53999" end="54009" title="Keilaniemi" label="Keilaniemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267125" start="54024" end="54033" title="Itäkeskus" label="Itäkeskus"/>
<link wikidata="Q20744123" start="54084" end="54111" title="Planned tram projects in Helsinki" label="planned to more than double"/>
<link wikidata="Q65246199" start="54187" end="54204" title="Vantaa light rail" label="Vantaa light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q26723913" start="54210" end="54223" title="Crown Bridges" label="Crown Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552730" start="54246" end="54255" title="Laajasalo" label="Laajasalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q111592395" start="54264" end="54288" title="West Helsinki light rail" label="West Helsinki light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133441" start="54308" end="54318" title="Kannelmäki" label="Kannelmäki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754672" start="54514" end="54534" title="Helsinki commuter rail" label="commuter rail system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544570" start="54646" end="54660" title="Ring Rail Line" label="Ring Rail Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q215327" start="54714" end="54730" title="Helsinki Airport" label="Helsinki Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="55117" end="55124" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770" start="55393" end="55400" title="Tallinn" label="Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="55403" end="55412" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="55415" end="55421" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="55508" end="55514" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="55519" end="55535" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="55563" end="55590" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q27684" start="55639" end="55653" title="Peter Forsskål" label="Peter Forsskål"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373759" start="55712" end="55732" title="Axel Hampus Dalström" label="Axel Hampus Dalström"/>
<link wikidata="Q14554887" start="55758" end="55777" title="Maria Tschetschulin" label="Maria Tschetschulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17381886" start="55799" end="55812" title="Augusta Krook" label="Augusta Krook"/>
<link wikidata="Q17384316" start="55851" end="55870" title="Agnes Tschetschulin" label="Agnes Tschetschulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679148" start="55909" end="55924" title="Jakob Sederholm" label="Jakob Sederholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q933579" start="55952" end="55962" title="Karl Fazer" label="Karl Fazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q206989" start="56028" end="56041" title="Shooting sport" label="sport shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q376958" start="56044" end="56054" title="Emil Lindh" label="Emil Lindh"/>
<link wikidata="Q455630" start="56077" end="56092" title="Oskar Merikanto" label="Oskar Merikanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q17382012" start="56117" end="56140" title="Signe Lagerborg-Stenius" label="Signe Lagerborg-Stenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4149738" start="56203" end="56220" title="Maggie Gripenberg" label="Maggie Gripenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q726175" start="56243" end="56259" title="Gunnar Nordström" label="Gunnar Nordström"/>
<link wikidata="Q116190" start="56297" end="56309" title="Väinö Tanner" label="Väinö Tanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q959150" start="56336" end="56352" title="Walter Jakobsson" label="Walter Jakobsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q445917" start="56382" end="56397" title="Mauritz Stiller" label="Mauritz Stiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q542420" start="56455" end="56464" title="Karl Wiik" label="Karl Wiik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237071" start="56509" end="56525" title="Lennart Lindroos" label="Lennart Lindroos"/>
<link wikidata="Q132398" start="56569" end="56579" title="Erkki Karu" label="Erkki Karu"/>
<link wikidata="Q716614" start="56622" end="56632" title="Kai Donner" label="Kai Donner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365463" start="56688" end="56703" title="Gustaf Molander" label="Gustaf Molander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691981" start="56753" end="56763" title="Johan Helo" label="Johan Helo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867902" start="56801" end="56815" title="Minna Craucher" label="Minna Craucher"/>
<link wikidata="Q157239" start="56849" end="56872" title="Artturi Ilmari Virtanen" label="Artturi Ilmari Virtanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q540981" start="56916" end="56931" title="Rolf Nevanlinna" label="Rolf Nevanlinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q969743" start="56992" end="57007" title="Elmer Diktonius" label="Elmer Diktonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q765510" start="57059" end="57069" title="Yrjö Leino" label="Yrjö Leino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779747" start="57106" end="57122" title="Toivo Wiherheimo" label="Toivo Wiherheimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11850430" start="57189" end="57202" title="Aku Ahjolinna" label="Aku Ahjolinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q211642" start="57250" end="57262" title="Lars Ahlfors" label="Lars Ahlfors"/>
<link wikidata="Q28720782" start="57309" end="57323" title="Laura Åkerlund" label="Laura Åkerlund"/>
<link wikidata="Q11857479" start="57360" end="57371" title="Ella Eronen" label="Ella Eronen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8410945" start="57413" end="57426" title="Helena Anhava" label="Helena Anhava"/>
<link wikidata="Q920593" start="57470" end="57484" title="Paavo Berglund" label="Paavo Berglund"/>
<link wikidata="Q89216" start="57510" end="57524" title="Laci Boldemann" label="Laci Boldemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q128421" start="57549" end="57570" title="Irja Agnes Browallius" label="Irja Agnes Browallius"/>
<link wikidata="Q318198" start="57601" end="57612" title="Bo Carpelan" label="Bo Carpelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q444761" start="57683" end="57697" title="Tarja Cronberg" label="Tarja Cronberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q982339" start="57724" end="57735" title="Jörn Donner" label="Jörn Donner"/>
<link wikidata="Q279225" start="57788" end="57801" title="George Gaynes" label="George Gaynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q217722" start="57852" end="57865" title="Ragnar Granit" label="Ragnar Granit"/>
<link wikidata="Q193111" start="57934" end="57946" title="Mika Waltari" label="Mika Waltari"/>
<link wikidata="Q11857383" start="57969" end="57989" title="Elina Haavio-Mannila" label="Elina Haavio-Mannila"/>
<link wikidata="Q29213" start="58037" end="58050" title="Tarja Halonen" label="Tarja Halonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q958494" start="58092" end="58106" title="Reino Helismaa" label="Reino Helismaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741506" start="58152" end="58167" title="Kim Hirschovits" label="Kim Hirschovits"/>
<link wikidata="Q354897" start="58201" end="58216" title="Bengt Holmström" label="Bengt Holmström"/>
<link wikidata="Q541867" start="58271" end="58281" title="Shawn Huff" label="Shawn Huff"/>
<link wikidata="Q15623568" start="58315" end="58326" title="Ville Husso" label="Ville Husso"/>
<link wikidata="Q16299308" start="58364" end="58380" title="Kirsti Ilvessalo" label="Kirsti Ilvessalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22916799" start="58411" end="58422" title="Juha Jääskä" label="Juha Jääskä"/>
<link wikidata="Q102071" start="58456" end="58468" title="Tove Jansson" label="Tove Jansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981166" start="58561" end="58575" title="Kaapo Kähkönen" label="Kaapo Kähkönen"/>
<link wikidata="Q276186" start="58613" end="58627" title="Aki Kaurismäki" label="Aki Kaurismäki"/>
<link wikidata="Q11857851" start="58679" end="58694" title="Emma Kimiläinen" label="Emma Kimiläinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11871841" start="58724" end="58737" title="Kiti Kokkonen" label="Kiti Kokkonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q561862" start="58780" end="58795" title="Petteri Koponen" label="Petteri Koponen"/>
<link wikidata="Q449229" start="58817" end="58833" title="Lennart Koskinen" label="Lennart Koskinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065520" start="58874" end="58882" title="Sam Lake" label="Sam Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q830947" start="58939" end="58959" title="Remedy Entertainment" label="Remedy Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459204" start="58962" end="58972" title="Olli Lehto" label="Olli Lehto"/>
<link wikidata="Q466399" start="59002" end="59017" title="Samuel Lehtonen" label="Samuel Lehtonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q377633" start="59086" end="59099" title="Juha Leiviskä" label="Juha Leiviskä"/>
<link wikidata="Q503672" start="59125" end="59140" title="Magnus Lindberg" label="Magnus Lindberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11858583" start="59177" end="59188" title="Esa Lindell" label="Esa Lindell"/>
<link wikidata="Q262942" start="59235" end="59248" title="Lill Lindfors" label="Lill Lindfors"/>
<link wikidata="Q258898" start="59304" end="59316" title="Jari Mäenpää" label="Jari Mäenpää"/>
<link wikidata="Q253918" start="59388" end="59407" title="melodic death metal" label="melodic death metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q622755" start="59413" end="59422" title="Wintersun" label="Wintersun"/>
<link wikidata="Q484179" start="59460" end="59470" title="folk metal" label="folk metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q218178" start="59476" end="59485" title="Ensiferum" label="Ensiferum"/>
<link wikidata="Q50806463" start="59488" end="59500" title="Klaus Mäkelä" label="Klaus Mäkelä"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390288" start="59538" end="59552" title="Susanna Mälkki" label="Susanna Mälkki"/>
<link wikidata="Q563460" start="59578" end="59592" title="Georg Malmstén" label="Georg Malmstén"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850750" start="59665" end="59680" title="Tauno Marttinen" label="Tauno Marttinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q553742" start="59705" end="59721" title="Vesa-Matti Loiri" label="Vesa-Matti Loiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q11167368" start="59761" end="59786" title="Abdirahim Hussein Mohamed" label="Abdirahim Hussein Mohamed"/>
<link wikidata="Q557835" start="59852" end="59865" title="Hanno Möttölä" label="Hanno Möttölä"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702775" start="59895" end="59911" title="Väinö Myllyrinne" label="Väinö Myllyrinne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516402" start="59971" end="60005" title="List of tallest people" label="world&amp;#x27;s tallest living person"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176146" start="60008" end="60020" title="Peter Nygård" label="Peter Nygård"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395456" start="60090" end="60104" title="Markku Peltola" label="Markku Peltola"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410191" start="60139" end="60156" title="Kimmo Pikkarainen" label="Kimmo Pikkarainen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533986" start="60203" end="60221" title="Anne Marie Pohtamo" label="Anne Marie Pohtamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q962726" start="60251" end="60266" title="Miss Finland" label="Miss Suomi 1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636317" start="60271" end="60289" title="Miss Universe 1975" label="Miss Universe 1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q297856" start="60292" end="60306" title="Elisabeth Rehn" label="Elisabeth Rehn"/>
<link wikidata="Q433592" start="60333" end="60354" title="Einojuhani Rautavaara" label="Einojuhani Rautavaara"/>
<link wikidata="Q16596175" start="60379" end="60394" title="Susanne Ringell" label="Susanne Ringell"/>
<link wikidata="Q96863724" start="60429" end="60440" title="Miron Ruina" label="Miron Ruina"/>
<link wikidata="Q241432" start="60490" end="60504" title="Kaija Saariaho" label="Kaija Saariaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q546997" start="60529" end="60541" title="Riitta Salin" label="Riitta Salin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114754" start="60565" end="60575" title="Sasu Salin" label="Sasu Salin"/>
<link wikidata="Q314587" start="60605" end="60622" title="Esa-Pekka Salonen" label="Esa-Pekka Salonen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907661" start="60661" end="60673" title="Asko Sarkola" label="Asko Sarkola"/>
<link wikidata="Q366856" start="60695" end="60710" title="Heikki Sarmanto" label="Heikki Sarmanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q253073" start="60752" end="60765" title="Teemu Selänne" label="Teemu Selänne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136687" start="60779" end="60791" title="Hockey Hall of Fame" label="Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q11851516" start="60812" end="60821" title="Ann Selin" label="Ann Selin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978059" start="60856" end="60872" title="Birgit Sergelius" label="Birgit Sergelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q503143" start="60911" end="60926" title="Alexander Stubb" label="Alexander Stubb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519286" start="60968" end="60984" title="Teuvo Teräväinen" label="Teuvo Teräväinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q465912" start="61031" end="61045" title="Märta Tikkanen" label="Märta Tikkanen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34253" start="61107" end="61121" title="Linus Torvalds" label="Linus Torvalds"/>
<link wikidata="Q23040099" start="61173" end="61185" title="Elin Törnudd" label="Elin Törnudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q16633518" start="61239" end="61252" title="Klaus Törnudd" label="Klaus Törnudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q455651" start="61301" end="61314" title="Sirkka Turkka" label="Sirkka Turkka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6160426" start="61335" end="61350" title="Jarno Tuunainen" label="Jarno Tuunainen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25378" start="61377" end="61387" title="Ville Valo" label="Ville Valo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17384970" start="61436" end="61448" title="Ulla Vuorela" label="Ulla Vuorela"/>
<link wikidata="Q269402" start="61497" end="61509" title="Lauri Ylönen" label="Lauri Ylönen"/>
<link wikidata="Q673425" start="61581" end="61607" title="Helsinki metropolitan area" label="Helsinki metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q11862153" start="61610" end="61629" title="Helsinki urban area" label="Helsinki urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177944" start="61632" end="61656" title="Subdivisions of Helsinki" label="Subdivisions of Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421374" start="61659" end="61682" title="Helsinki Parish Village" label="Helsinki Parish Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348073" start="61685" end="61705" title="Underground Helsinki" label="Underground Helsinki"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13699" wikidata="Q40191" url="?curid=13699" title="Hobart">
<text>Hobart ( ) is the capital and most populous city of the island state of Tasmania, Australia. Located in Tasmania&#x27;s south-east on the estuary of the River Derwent, it is the southernmost capital city in Australia. Despite containing nearly half of Tasmania&#x27;s population, Hobart is the least-populated Australian state capital city, and second-smallest by population and area after Darwin if territories are taken into account. Its skyline is dominated by the kunanyi / Mount Wellington, and its harbour forms the second-deepest natural port in the world, with much of the city&#x27;s waterfront consisting of reclaimed land. The metropolitan area is often referred to as Greater Hobart, to differentiate it from the City of Hobart, one of the seven local government areas that cover the city. It has a mild maritime climate.

The city lies on country which was known by the local Muwinina people as nipaluna, a name which includes surrounding features such as kunanyi / Mount Wellington and timtumili minanya (River Derwent). Prior to British colonisation, the land had been occupied for possibly as long as 35,000 years by Aboriginal Tasmanians.

Founded in 1804 as a British penal colony, Hobart is Australia&#x27;s second-oldest capital city after Sydney, New South Wales. Whaling quickly emerged as a major industry in the area, and for a time Hobart served as the Southern Ocean&#x27;s main whaling port. Penal transportation ended in the 1850s, after which the city experienced periods of growth and decline. The early 20th century saw an economic boom on the back of mining, agriculture and other primary industries, and the loss of men who served in the world wars was counteracted by an influx of immigration. Despite the rise in migration from Asia and other non-English speaking regions, Hobart&#x27;s population is predominantly ethnically Anglo-Celtic and has the highest percentage of Australian-born residents among Australia&#x27;s capital cities.

Today, Hobart is the financial and administrative hub of Tasmania, serving as the home port for both Australian and French Antarctic operations and acting as a tourist destination. Well-known drawcards include its convict-era architecture, Salamanca Market and the Museum of Old and New Art (MONA), the Southern Hemisphere&#x27;s largest private museum.

==Name==
In 1804, the settlement was named &quot;Hobart Town&quot; or &quot;Hobarton&quot; by the first Lt-governor David Collins after then British Secretary of State for war and the colonies Lord Hobart (a variant of Hubert, his name was pronounced with emphasis on the second syllable) at Sullivans Cove (named after the under-secretary). Earlier in 1793, Risdon Cove was named after the second officer on the ship &quot;Duke of Clarence&quot; by the captain John Hayes, and the river after the River Derwent, Cumbria (also briefly named by Bruni D&#x27;Entrecasteaux as &quot;La Rivière du Nord&quot;). The city was named the singular &quot;Hobart&quot; in 1881, and an inhabitant is known as a &quot;Hobartian&quot;.

Though the city is not officially dual-named, the &#x27;saltwater country&#x27; of the western shore where the city is located has the Palawa kani name &quot;nipaluna&quot; which was originally documented on 16 January 1831 by George Augustus Robinson (as &quot;nibberloonne&quot;, later &quot;niberlooner&quot;) when he was told by Woureddy, a Nununi chief from Bruny Island who spoke five dialects. Though the island is offshore, the language is related and in the same family as the Southeastern Tasmanian language which the local Muwinina people spoke. Another recorded name was an Oyster Bay word &quot;lebralawaggena&quot; (Bedford).

A semi-permanent settlement at Little Sandy Bay was called &quot;kriwa&quot; beneath the hill of &quot;kriwalayti&quot;. The dividing line of the region is the &quot;timtumili minanya&quot; (river), which winds its way down from the centre of the island through the lands of the Big River (Lemerina) people. On the eastern shore, the name for the Clarence Plains was known as &quot;naniyilipata&quot; by the Mumirimina, a group of the Oyster Bay (Poredareme) people. Droughty Point was known as &quot;trumanyapayna&quot; (kangaroo point) as it was a hunting ground, and South Arm as &quot;mutatayna&quot;. Later names by the TAC include &quot;piyura kitina&quot; (little native hens) at Risdon Cove and &quot;turikina truwala&quot; (mountain waterfall) on the Myrtle Gully Falls track.

==History==

The first European settlement began in 1803 as a military camp at Risdon Cove on the eastern shores of the River Derwent, amid British concerns over the presence of French explorers. It was the site of the 1804 Risdon Cove massacre. Later that year, along with the military, settlers and convicts from the abandoned Port Phillip settlement, the camp at Risdon Cove was moved by Captain David Collins to a better location at the present site of Hobart at Sullivans Cove.

The area&#x27;s Indigenous inhabitants were members of the semi-nomadic &quot;Mouheneener&quot; tribe. Violent conflict with the European settlers, and the effects of diseases brought by them, dramatically reduced the Aboriginal population, which was rapidly replaced by free settlers and the convict population. In 1832, four years after martial law had been declared, 26 people, including Tongerlongeter (Tukalunginta) and Montpelliatta (Muntipiliyata) of the combined &quot;Big River&quot; and &quot;Oyster Bay&quot; nations, surrendered to G. A. Robinson&#x27;s &quot;friendly mission&quot; and were marched into Hobart to negotiate a truce with Governor George Arthur. They were forcibly exiled ten days later to Flinders Island.
Charles Darwin visited Hobart Town in February 1836 as part of the &quot;Beagle&quot; expedition. He compares it to Sydney and compliments the &quot;noble forest&quot;. He writes of Hobart and the Derwent estuary in &quot;The Voyage of the Beagle&quot;:&quot;...The lower parts of the hills which skirt the bay are cleared; and the bright yellow fields of corn, and dark green ones of potatoes, appear very luxuriant... I was chiefly struck with the comparative fewness of the large houses, either built or building. Hobart Town, from the census of 1835, contained 13,826 inhabitants, and the whole of Tasmania 36,505.&quot;
The River Derwent was one of Australia&#x27;s finest deepwater ports and was the centre of South Seas whaling and sealing trades. The settlement rapidly grew into a major port, with allied industries such as shipbuilding.
Hobart Town became a city on 21 August 1842, and was renamed Hobart from the beginning of 1881. The post-transportation era saw the city shift between periods of economic uncertainty in the 1860s and 1890s: &quot;...While brash Victorians talked of the future, Tasmanians nurtured memories of a more prosperous past. In the &#x27;sixties Martineau found elderly ladies lamenting the gaiety of the old days and merchants the time when &#x27;Hobart Town promised to be the emporium if not the metropolis of Australia&#x27;.&quot; However, this was mixed in with evolving politics, a greater connection with mainland Australia, tourism in the 1880s and the establishment of important cultural and social institutions including The University of Tasmania. &quot;When the Town Hall was opened in 1866 it symbolised the hope of future greatness for the city&quot;. The Russian navy visited the port multiple times, which had become a leading reason for the Hobart coastal defences. Mark Twain also visited in 1895 when he wrote &quot;Hobart has a peculiarity—it is the neatest town that the sun shines on; and I incline to believe that it is also the cleanest.&quot; 
On 7 September 1936, one of the last known surviving thylacines died at the Beaumaris Zoo in Hobart. During WW2, the city performed drills and built shelters, with German mines found in the estuary and a Japanese scout plane flyover in 1942. While Hobart was isolated, it also contained the not insignificant Electrolytic Zinc Company which was essential for ammunition production.

During the mid 20th century, the state and local governments invested in building Hobart&#x27;s reputation as a tourist attraction—in 1956 the Lanherne Airport (now Hobart Airport) was opened. Australia&#x27;s first legal casino, Wrest Point Hotel Casino, opened in 1973. Despite these successes, Hobart faced significant challenges during the 20th century, including the 1967 Tasmanian fires, which claimed 64 lives in Hobart itself and destroyed over 1200 homes, and the 1975 Tasman Bridge disaster, when a bulk ore carrier collided with and destroyed the concrete span bridge that connected the city to its eastern suburbs.

In the 21st century, Hobart benefited as Tasmania&#x27;s economy recovered from the 1990s recession, and the city&#x27;s long-stagnant population growth began to reverse. A period of significant growth has followed, including the redevelopment of the former Macquarie Point railyards, Parliament Square, and new hotel developments throughout the city.

==Geography==
===Topography===
Hobart is located on the estuary of the River Derwent in the state&#x27;s south-east. It is built predominantly on Jurassic dolerite around the foothills interspersed with smaller areas of Triassic siltstone and Permian mudstone, straddling the River Derwent.

The Western Shore extends from the Derwent Valley in the northwest through the flatter areas around Glenorchy (which rests on older Triassic sediment) bounded by peaks averaging around (including kunanyi / Mount Wellington, Mt Hull, Mt Faulkner and Mt Dromedary). The hilly inner areas rest on the younger Jurassic dolerite deposits, before stretching into the lower areas such as the beaches of Sandy Bay in the south, while the City and Kingston are separated by hills and Taroona&#x27;s Alum Cliffs. The Derwent estuary exits into Storm Bay wrapped by the South Arm Peninsula, Iron Pot and Betsey Island, with Turrakana / Tasman Peninsula and Bruny Island beyond.

The Eastern Shore also extends from the Derwent in a southeasterly direction hugging the Meehan Range (which hovers around with distinctive summits such as Mount Direction, Flagstaff Hill and Gunners Quoin towards the irregular valleys of Brighton) before sprawling into flatter land in suburbs such as Bellerive. These flatter areas of the eastern shore rest on far younger Quaternary deposits. From there the city wraps around the estuary to peninsulas and extends across the hills in an easterly direction into the valley area of Rokeby, before reaching into the tidal flatland area of Lauderdale (between Ralphs Bay and Frederick Henry Bay).

Hobart has access to a number of beach areas including those in the Derwent estuary itself: Long Beach, Nutgrove Beach, Bellerive Beach, Cornelian Bay, Kingston, and Howrah Beaches, as well as many more in Frederick Henry Bay such as Seven Mile, Roaches, Cremorne, Clifton and Goats Beaches.
===Ecology===

Hobart is located on the edge of the Tasmanian South East and Tasmanian Southern Ranges IBRA bioregions as well as being surrounded by parts of the South-east Tasmania Important Bird Area (such as the Meehan and Wellington Ranges) which provide important habitat for Tasmanian birds. The East Risdon State Reserve contains the wattles Derwent cascade and &quot;Acacia riceana&quot;, as well as the rare or endangered Risdon peppermint and &quot;Eucalyptus morrisbyi&quot;. Other local plant species like heartleaf silver gum and the abundant blue gum are also planted horticulturally, while many exotic species were planted as a result of aesthetic preferences from British colonisation. Black peppermint, silver peppermint, blue wattle, blackwood, drooping sheoak and cherry ballart are another common woodland combination.

Threatened species of wildlife found in Hobart include the swift parrot, grey goshawk, Tasmanian masked owl, eastern barred bandicoot and eastern quoll. These amount to 11 species of fauna, 10 of flora and 4 vegetation communities. 5 of the threatened species are endemic to Hobart. A common sight within the city are pademelons and wallabies, and the Hobart Rivulet is home to platypuses. Wildlife groups and road safety advocates have highlighted the role of slower speeds in reducing urban roadkill and traffic injuries.

While parts of kunanyi / Mt Wellington have been cleared in the past (and species like celery top pine were allegedly present), stands of old-growth white gums accompanied by giant stringybarks (such as the Octopus tree) remain there. A rare patch of non-sclerophyll Tasmanian rainforest dominated by myrtle beech and blackheart sassafras is located near Collinsvale. A famous tree within the city of Hobart is the Anglesea Barracks blue gum which may have been a seedling before the colonial era.

===Climate===

Hobart has a cool to mild oceanic climate (Köppen: &quot;Cfb&quot;; Trewartha: &quot;Cflk&quot;). The highest temperature recorded was on 4 January 2013 and the lowest was on 25 June 1972 and 11 July 1981. Annually, Hobart receives only 40.8 clear days. Compared to other major Australian cities, Hobart has the fewest daily average hours of sunshine, with only 5.9 hours per day. However, during the summer it has the most hours of daylight of any Australian city, with 15.3 hours on the summer solstice. Hobart is nonetheless very sunny by southern Tasmanian standards, with Strathgordon at the same latitude having only 1,478 hours of sunshine. 

By global standards, Hobart has cool summers and mild winters for its latitude, being influenced by its seaside location. Nevertheless, the strong northerly winds from the Australian outback ensure that Hobart experiences temperatures above most years. Light frost occurs most years, though air frosts are uncommon. Hobart is distinctly warmer than neighbouring areas, such as Dover only to the south, with annual mean temperatures some 1.5 °C cooler than Hobart&#x27;s. This is due to the foehn effect created by the Central Highlands to the west.

Although Hobart itself rarely receives snow due to the foehn effect, the adjacent kunanyi / Mount Wellington is frequently seen with a snowcap throughout the year. During the 20th century, the city itself has received snowfalls at sea level on average only once every 5 years; however, outer suburbs lying higher on the slopes of Mount Wellington receive snow more often, owing to the more exposed location coupled with their higher altitude. These snow-bearing winds often carry on through Tasmania and southern Victoria, to the Snowy Mountains in north-east Victoria and southern New South Wales (though to a much lesser degree outside of winter). Nevertheless, sleet can occur in Hobart from June to September. 

Average sea temperatures range from in September to in February.


==Urban structure==
===Parks and nature reserves===
Hobart has a diverse array of natural areas, parks and gardens. It is most notably defined by its large areas of native bushland owing to its location. The most prominent of these is Wellington Park which encompasses the plateau of kunanyi / Mt Wellington itself as well as much of the surrounding alpine woodland and dense forests. This is taken advantage of with a large number of trails for walking, hiking and mountain biking activities all across the Hobart metropolitan area, some of which follow watercourses like the Hobart Linear Park (Cascade Gardens), Lambert Park, New Town Rivulet (Ancanthe Park) and Tolosa Park, or ridgelines to viewing points in places like the Truganini Conservation Area and Bicentennial Park. The former Fern Tree Bower of &quot;Dicksonia antarctica&quot; can be visited on the Pipeline Track.

The city also has many urban bushland areas, most prominent of which is the centrally-located Queens Domain which contains the Royal Tasmanian Botanical Gardens established in 1818 (which, though ringed by expressways, remain a highly popular destination with a variety of attractions), the Hobart Cenotaph (accessed via the Bridge of Remembrance and Hobart Regatta grounds which link to the Intercity Cycleway), the University Rose Gardens, a number of sporting facilities (like the Domain Athletic Centre and Doone Kennedy Hobart Aquatic Centre), and formerly the Hobart Zoo (a role now taken up by Bonorong Wildlife Sanctuary in Brighton). Areas along the eastern shore also provide recreation, including many coastal walks to areas like Kangaroo Bluff (one of many former Hobart coastal defences which are now parks) and the Kangaroo Bay Parkland (near Charles Hand Park and the Rosny Parklands) in Bellerive, Anzac Park and Simmons Park in Lindisfarne, Wentworth park at Howrah Beach, as well as hills within the urban area such as Gordons Hill, Natone Hill, Rokeby Hills, Waverly Flora Park and the panoramic lookout at Rosny Hill.

In the city, many urban parks and gardens have sprung up over the years, like St David&#x27;s Park, Franklin Square, the Parliament or Salamanca Gardens, Boat Park (Princes Park), Fitzroy Gardens and St Andrews Park, along with newer pocket parks like the Garden of Memories on Elizabeth Street. Inner suburban parks like Wellesley Park in South Hobart, the Train Park (Caldew Park) in West Hobart, and the Cultural Skatepark and Soundy Park in North Hobart are also popular. Parks continue to extend along the complex coastline of the estuary, from the birdwatching area of Goulds Lagoon, Old Beach&#x27;s &quot;little doors&quot;, the Claremont Cenotaph by Windermere Beach, Moorilla Estate winery, Glenorchy Art and Sculpture Park (GASP) with the Montrose Boardwalk, Giblins Reserve and Cornelian Bay to the north, and the Battery Point Sculpture Trail, Errol Flynn Reserve, Long Beach Reserve by Nutgrove Beach and the Alexandra Battery, and Kingston Park to the south.
===Architecture===
Hobart&#x27;s architecture is stylistically eclectic and reflects various periods of Australian history. The city is known for its well-preserved Georgian and Victorian-era buildings, giving specific areas an &quot;old world&quot; feel. For locals, this became a source of discomfiture about the city&#x27;s convict past, but is now a draw card for tourists.
The city centre contains many of the city&#x27;s oldest buildings, including the Hope and Anchor Tavern (1807) and Ingle Hall (1811–14). The Cascade Brewery (1824), Australia&#x27;s longest operating brewery, was built using convict labour, as was the Cascades Female Factory (1828), now a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Other notable early buildings include: (1834), Australia&#x27;s oldest continuously operating hotel; the Theatre Royal (1837), Australia&#x27;s oldest continually operating theatre; the Greek revival Lady Franklin Gallery (1843), Australia&#x27;s first private museum; and the Hobart Synagogue (1845), which is Australia&#x27;s oldest synagogue and a rare example of an Egyptian revival synagogue. Salamanca Place contains many Georgian era buildings, as well as Kelly&#x27;s Steps, which were built in 1839 to provide a short-cut to Battery Point, a largely residential suburb known for its weatherboard cottages and multi-storey terraces.

Government architect John Lee Archer designed the Regency-style Customs House (1840), facing Sullivans Cove and now used as Parliament House. He also designed the Gothic revival Engineers Building (1847) later used as the Tasmanian Main Line Company headquarters. Nearby are more buildings in the same style, Australia&#x27;s oldest tertiary institution was based in the former Hobart High School from 1848 (Domain House, now owned by UTAS), and the Government House building was built in 1857 and is the third iteration. Henry Hunter was an architect known for churches such as St Mary&#x27;s Cathedral (1898), but he also designed Hobart Town Hall (1866), located on the site of the old Government House.

The TMAG building, built in 1902 as a new Second Empire style Customs House, is situated on Constitution Dock and incorporates the Bond (1824) and (1810), the latter of which contributed to Hobart&#x27;s early street layout when the Hobart Rivulet passed beside it. Away from the mouth of the rivulet was Hunter Island and after 1820 was also used for extensive warehousing.

Hobart is home to many historic churches. The Scots Church (formerly known as St Andrew&#x27;s) was built in Bathurst Street from 1834 to 1836, and a small sandstone building within the churchyard was used as the city&#x27;s first Presbyterian Church. St John&#x27;s in New Town, featuring a clocktower and turrets, sat in the middle of the Queens Orphanage complex (now near the Hobart City High School) from 1835. The Greek revival St George&#x27;s Anglican Church in Battery Point was completed in 1838, and a classical tower designed by James Blackburn (who also designed the Holy Trinity Church) was added in 1847. St Joseph&#x27;s was built in 1840 and the Davey Street Congregational Church in 1857. St David&#x27;s Cathedral, Hobart&#x27;s first, was consecrated in 1874. The grand Queen Anne style Mount Saint Canice (1893) sits above Sandy Bay.
The Edwardian Baroque GPO was built in 1905, and the Hobart City Hall was built in 1915 in a Federation warehouse style on the former city marketplace. The North Hobart Post Office (1913) of a John Smith Murdoch design is in a colourful Edwardian style. Hobart is also home to a number of Art Deco landmarks, including the T&amp;G building (1938) on Murray Street, the Old Mercury Building on Macquarie Street (1938), the former Hydro Tasmania (1938) and the Colonial Mutual Life buildings (1936) on Elizabeth Street. The 1939 Streamline Moderne Riviera Hotel is joined by what remains the tallest building in Tasmania, the Wrest Point Casino (1973) designed by Roy Grounds in Moderne. Several of the tallest buildings in Hobart were built in this era, such as the International Style MLC building (1958–77), the Empress Towers (1967), the Brutalist NAB House (1968) and former Reserve Bank Building (1977), and the brown-coloured Modernist Marine Board Building (1972) and Jaffa Building (1978). Dorney House (1978) at the former Fort Nelson is an example of residential modernism.

The postmodern Hotel Grand Chancellor was built in 1987 in what was the Wapping neighbourhood, which now features many examples of contemporary architecture, such as the 2001 Federation Concert Hall and The Hedberg, designed in 2013 around Conceptualism. The distinctive shapes of the 2020 K-Block redevelopment of the Royal Hobart Hospital was based on the street grid and convict-made Rajah Quilt. Nearby is the Menzies Institute and UTAS Medical Science Precinct, which features two 2009 examples of avant-garde styles inspired by land-water interplay. On Castray Esplanade, the Salamanca Wharf Hotel was built in 2013 and combines Antarctic colours with the surrounding former-ordnance warehouses. The Myer Centre Icon Complex was completed in 2020 as a replacement for the 1908 Liverpool Street building which burnt down in 2007, while retaining the façade on Murray Street. Projects designed by local architects include the Mövenpick Hotel, built in 2021 by Jaws.

===Housing===

Hobart as a city has delivered its housing by various means and forms. For its early history, housing was small-scale but clustered in very small areas (the highest concentration and diversity of Hobart&#x27;s heritage remains around the constantly-evolving city centre). With the development of streets and public transport, such as a railway in 1876 and Australia&#x27;s first fully-electric tram network in 1893, further growth of the urban area was enabled. Inner suburbs from this era typically have orderly streets (around planned subdivisions of former agriculture grants, often inspired by the City Beautiful movement) with shopfronts (the Hill Street Grocer franchise derives from the commercial legacy of a former tramway) and narrow lanes lined with timber and brick cottages, townhouses and small apartment buildings.

Social housing was usually organised by private societies and entities as outreach to those in need until crises brought greater attention from government authorities, such as the Homes Act (1919) and Housing Agreement (1945). The Housing Department focused mainly on mixing these with broad-acre suburban estates, which were sometimes expensive to service with adequate infrastructure. Architects such as Margaret Findlay were employed by the public works department. Bungalows were mass-produced in weatherboard and then fibro materials. The 1944 Town and Country Planning Act was the instrument to transfer control of urban housing to municipalities, which automatically resulted in tightly restricted homebuilding in existing urban areas. The advent of the automotive city and the 1965 Hobart Area Transportation Study (which ultimately resulted in cuts to public transport and parts of the inner city being converted into parking) further made Hobart a sprawling city. Zoning now applies and specific area plans can also be prepared (with the land use near Hobart&#x27;s northern suburbs transit corridor under particular focus), though planning reform and new provisions schedules are being prepared. While community and social housing projects do occur in expensive areas (such as 25 apartments on Goulburn Street in 2021), it is still difficult to achieve approval.

As of 2024, Hobart is the least dense Australian capital with the highest costs per capita (alongside Sydney) for housing and car-ownership (19.7% cost-to-income in 2024). This is credited with contributing to the broader Tasmanian demographic crisis and emigration. The median house price of inner Hobart was A$1,026,500 in 2021, which would be 12.8x the region&#x27;s median household income per year. Of the 76,686 total dwellings in urban Greater Hobart in 2021, only 10% were a flat or apartment and 7.2% semi-detached or terrace. Greater Hobart builds on average 700 new dwellings per year, which equates to between 3–3.5 per 1000 people (lower than the 6–9 of other states), mostly concentrated in outer suburbs like Bridgewater (which has the lowest life expectancy in Hobart at 67) which studies show can cost 8x more than infill, meaning they require more infrastructure per dwelling to service than areas closer to existing services (which are more often under-capacity). Rental vacancies have generally been on decline since about 2013 with the rate consistenly under 3% and listings 50.5% lower in southern Tasmania over 11 years. Renting is also typically less protected than other states.

Tenant-oriented housing models may become more common, with a few examples in Hobart such as 2020&#x27;s all-electric &quot;The Commons Hobart&quot; where expensive parking mandates were waivered to enable an affordable green lifestyle.

==Culture==
Since the 2000s, Hobart has gained a reputation as a &quot;cool&quot; and creative cultural capital with increasing numbers of tourists drawn to its unconventional or quirky events and art projects, many spurred by the Museum of Old and New Art (MONA). The term &quot;MONA effect&quot; refers to the museum&#x27;s significant impact on the local economy and Tasmanian tourism.

The city&#x27;s nightlife is primarily concentrated in Salamanca Place, North Hobart, the waterfront area, Elizabeth Street (which includes the pedestrianised Elizabeth Street Mall) and Sandy Bay. These areas are home to popular dining strips, pubs, bars and nightclubs.

===Theatre and entertainment===

The city centre is home to several theatres, including live theatre venues, picture palaces, and a multiplex operated by Village Cinemas.

The Theatre Royal, established in 1837, is Australia&#x27;s oldest continually operating theatre, designed by colonial architect John Lee Archer. Another historic theatre is the Playhouse Theatre. Built in the 1860s, it was originally a chapel designed by Henry Bastow. Today, it is owned by the Hobart Repertory Theatre Society.

Hobart&#x27;s largest arthouse cinema, the State Cinema in North Hobart, was established as the North Hobart Picture Palace in 1913. It was acquired by the Reading Cinemas chain in 2019. Located in New Town, the Rewind Cinema, formerly the Hidden Theatre, is housed in a 19th-century convict-built structure.

Another popular live entertainment location is the Hanging Garden precinct, which contains several venues and hosts Dark Mofo and Hobart Festival of Comedy events.

===Galleries and museums===

Australia&#x27;s first privately funded museum, the Lady Franklin Gallery, was established in Acanthe Park by Lady Jane Franklin in 1843 and is now run by The Art Society of Tasmania. Three years later, the Royal Society of Tasmania (the oldest Royal Society outside England) founded the Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery (TMAG). Its first permanent home opened in 1863 and the museum has gradually expanded to occupy several surrounding buildings, including the , built in 1810. The TMAG-run was founded in 1955 as the Van Diemen&#x27;s Land Memorial Folk Museum and is housed within an 1830s Georgian town house. Maritime Museum Tasmania is located near TMAG on the waterfront and has been in operation since 1974.

The Museum of Old and New Art (MONA) opened in 2011 to coincide with the third annual MONA FOMA festival. Located within the Moorilla winery on the Berriedale peninsula, the multi-storey MONA gallery houses the collection of David Walsh and is the Southern Hemisphere&#x27;s largest privately owned museum.

===Literature===
The first book of general Australian literature was published in Hobart. Titled &quot;The Last and Worst of the Bushrangers of Van Diemen&#x27;s Land&quot;, it was printed by convict Andrew Bent and details the life and crimes Michael Howe, the bushranger and outlaw. In 1824, Bent, as proprietor of the &quot;Hobart Town Gazette&quot;, established the first free press in Australia. The first Australian novel, &quot;Quintus Servinton&quot;, was written in 1831 by convict Henry Savery and published in Hobart. Written during his imprisonment, it is a semi-autobiographical work about the life of a convict in Van Diemen&#x27;s Land. Mary Leman Grimstone, whose book &quot;Woman&#x27;s Love&quot; was written in Hobart between 1826 and 1829, holds the distinction of being the author of the first non-biographical Australian novel. It was printed in London in 1832.

The State Library of Tasmania is located in the city centre and comprises the Allport Library and Museum of Fine Arts, which houses an extensive collection of colonial works and artefacts. In 2023, Hobart became a UNESCO City of Literature.

===Music===

The Tasmanian Symphony Orchestra is based at the Federation Concert Hall on the city&#x27;s waterfront. The Federation Concert Hall also hosts the University of Tasmania&#x27;s Australian International Symphony Orchestra Institute (AISOI) which fosters advanced young musicians from across Australia and internationally. Other live music venues in Hobart include Odeon Theatre, Avalon Theatre and Hobart City Hall. Major national and international music events are usually held at MyState Bank Arena, or the Tasman Room at Wrest Point Hotel Casino.

The city&#x27;s music scene has given rise to internationally acclaimed acts working in a variety of genres, including Striborg and Psycroptic (metal), The Paradise Motel (chamber pop), Sea Scouts (noise rock), and Monique Brumby (indie pop). Other Hobart musicians have co-founded successful mainland Australian bands, including singer-songwriters Sacha Lucashenko (of The Morning After Girls) and Michael Noga (of The Drones), and multi-instrumentalist Monika Fikerle (of Love of Diagrams). Theremin player Miles Brown, blues guitarist Phil Manning (of blues-rock band Chain), and TikTok artist Kim Dracula all originated in Hobart. In addition, founding member of Violent Femmes, Brian Ritchie, now calls Hobart home, and curated the annual international arts festival MONA FOMA. Chloe Alison Escott is from Hobart, and founded The Native Cats with Julian Teakle.

===Events===

Hobart&#x27;s recurring events consist of weekly markets, most notably Salamanca Market. The city also hosts festivals including Taste of Tasmania, which celebrates local produce, wine and music; Dark Mofo which is the city&#x27;s biggest winter festival leading into the solstice featuring the Winter Feast; and Tasmania&#x27;s biennial international arts festival Ten Days On The Island. Other festivals, including the Southern Roots Festival and the Falls Festival in Marion Bay, also capitalise on Hobart&#x27;s artistic communities.

The Australian Wooden Boat Festival is a biennial event held in Hobart celebrating wooden boats. It is held concurrently with the Royal Hobart Regatta, which began in 1830 and is therefore Tasmania&#x27;s oldest surviving sporting event. The Sandy Bay Regatta began in 1849. In October is Hobart Show Day where agriculture is showcased at the Hobart Showground in Glenorchy.

The Hobart International is an annual tennis tournament held since 1994. The city is the finishing point of the Targa Tasmania rally car event, which has been held annually in April since 1991.

===Sport===

Most professional Hobart-based sports teams represent Tasmania as a whole rather than exclusively the city.

Cricket is a popular sport in Hobart. The Tasmanian Tigers cricket team plays its home games at Bellerive Oval on the Eastern Shore, and the Hobart Hurricanes compete in the Big Bash League.

Australian rules football was introduced to Hobart in the 1860s and has long been the city&#x27;s most popular spectator sport. Founded in 1879 and headquartered at Hobart, the Tasmanian Football League features four Hobart-based clubs: Clarence, Glenorchy, Lauderdale and North Hobart. Hobart-based teams also play in the Southern Football League. Hobart has hosted Australian Football League (AFL) matches since 1991, and in 2023, Tasmania was awarded a conditional license to field the league&#x27;s 19th AFL team, nicknamed the Tasmanian Devils. The conditional license is contingent on a 23,000 seat roofed stadium being built at Hobart&#x27;s Macquarie Point. It is anticipated that the men&#x27;s team will join the AFL by 2028.

Tasmania is not represented by teams in the National Rugby League, nor the Super Rugby (rugby union), ANZ Championship (netball) and A-League (soccer) competitions. However, the Tasmania JackJumpers entered the National Basketball League in 2021. The Hobart Chargers also represent Hobart in the second-tier South East Australian Basketball League.

Hobart is internationally famous among the yachting community as the finish of the Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race which starts in Sydney on Boxing Day. The arrival of the yachts is celebrated as part of the Hobart Summer Festival, a food and wine festival beginning just after Christmas and ending in mid-January.

The Tassie Tigers field men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s representative sides in Hockey One, which replaced the Australian Hockey League in 2019. They play their home matches at the Tasmanian Hockey Centre, which has also hosted international competition matches, such as the Men&#x27;s FIH Pro League.

The city co-hosted the basketball FIBA Oceania Championship 1975, where the Australian national basketball team won the gold medal.

===Media===
Five free-to-air television stations service Hobart:
* ABC Tasmania (ABT)
* SBS Tasmania (SBS)
* Southern Cross Seven Tasmania (TNT) – Seven Network affiliate
* Nine Tasmania (TVT) – Nine Network affiliate
* Tasmanian Digital Television (TDT) – Network 10 affiliate
Each station broadcasts a primary channel and several multichannels.

Hobart is served by twenty-nine digital free-to-air television channels:

# ABC
# ABC HD (ABC broadcast in HD)
# ABC TV Plus/KIDS
# ABC ME
# ABC News
# SBS
# SBS HD (SBS broadcast in HD)
# SBS Viceland
# SBS Viceland HD (SBS Viceland broadcast in HD)
# Food Network
# NITV
# 7 Tasmania (on relay from Melbourne)
# 7HD (Seven broadcast in HD)
# 7two
# 7mate
# Racing.com
# Nine (on relay from Melbourne)
# 9HD (Nine broadcast in HD)
# 9Gem
# 9Go!
# 9Life
# TVSN
# Gold
# Sky News on WIN
# 10 (on relay from Melbourne)
# 10 HD (TDT broadcast in HD)
# 10 Bold
# 10 Peach
# 10 Shake
The majority of pay television services are provided by Foxtel via satellite, although other smaller pay television providers do service Hobart.

Commercial radio stations licensed to cover the Hobart market include Triple M Hobart, hit100.9 Hobart and 7HO FM. Local community radio stations include Christian radio station Ultra106five, Edge Radio and Hobart FM which targets the wider community with specialist programs. The five ABC radio networks available on analogue radio broadcast to Hobart via 936 ABC Hobart, Radio National, Triple J, NewsRadio and ABC Classic FM. Hobart is also home to the video creation company Biteable.

Hobart&#x27;s major newspaper is &quot;The Mercury&quot;, which was founded by John Davies in 1854 and has been continually published ever since. The paper is owned and operated by Rupert Murdoch&#x27;s News Limited. Pulse Tasmania, formerly Pulse Hobart, started as a radio station in Hobart and focuses mainly on short-form news media on its website.

==Demographics==
At the 2021 census, there were 247,068 people in the Greater Hobart. The City of Hobart local government area had a population of 55,077.

As of 2021, the median weekly household income was $1,542, compared with $1,746 nationally.

18.1% of households total weekly income is less than $650 week, while 18.9% of households weekly income exceeds $3,000. This compares to national rates of 16.5% and 24.3% respectively.

35.4% of renting households, and 10.3% of owned households with a mortgage experience housing stress, where rent or mortgage repayments exceed 30% of income.

At the 2016 census, The most common occupation categories were professionals (22.6%), clerical and administrative workers (14.7%), technicians and trades workers (13.3%), community and personal service workers (12.8%), and managers (11.3%).

===Ancestry and immigration===

4.5% of the population (11,216 people) are Indigenous Australians (Aboriginal Australians and Torres Strait Islanders).

At the 2021 census, the most commonly nominated ancestry groups include:
23.4% of the population was born overseas at the 2021 census. The five largest groups of overseas-born were from England (3.3%), Mainland China (2.2%), Nepal (1.7%), India (1.6%) and New Zealand (0.9%).

===Language===
At the 2021 census, 82.6% of the population spoke only English at home. The other languages most commonly spoken at home were Mandarin (2.6%), Nepali (1.8%), Punjabi (0.7%), Cantonese (0.5%) and Vietnamese (0.4%).

=== Religion ===

In the 2021 census, 49.9% of Greater Hobart residents specified no religion. Christianity comprised the largest religious affiliation (37.1%), with the largest denominations being Anglicanism (14.1%) and Catholicism (14.1%). Hinduism (2.6%), Buddhism (1.3%), Islam (1.3%) and Sikhism (0.6%) constitute the remaining largest religious affiliations.

Hobart has a small community of 456 members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, with meetinghouses in Glenorchy, Rosny, and Glen Huon. There is also a synagogue, with a Jewish community of 203 people. Hobart has a Baháʼí community, with a Baháʼí Centre of Learning, located within the city. In 2013, Hillsong Church established a Hillsong Connect campus in Hobart.

==Economy==
In 2021, Greater Hobart&#x27;s main occupations were professionals and service workers, trades, administration and management and other labour professions working in industries such as healthcare, the public service, and supermarkets and small businesses. Incomes are higher than the rest of Tasmania, but lower than the Australian median. These employment areas are reflected by the gross value added provided by industries, which is greatest among the &quot;healthcare and social assistance (17%), public administration and safety (11%), and financial and insurance services (10%).&quot; Healthcare is also the fastest-growing, while services and construction have the highest business count. The vast majority of this economic production is concentrated in the City of Hobart area, except manufacturing which is higher in Glenorchy City.

Major shopping areas include the Elizabeth Street Mall (the only fully-pedestrianised block in the city), which is connected with the Cat and Fiddle Arcade, Centrepoint and Liverpool Street in the CBD, Mayfair Shopping Plaza on Sandy Bay Road, New Town Plaza, Moonah Central (near a foodmarket), Northgate Shopping Centre and Centro in Glenorchy, Claremont Plaza, Eastlands Shopping Centre (Tasmania&#x27;s biggest) in Rosny Park, Lindisfarne village, Shoreline Plaza in Howrah, Glebe Hill Village Shopping Centre, Cambridge Homemaker Centre by the airport, Green Point Plaza and Covehill Fair Shopping Centre in Bridgewater, New Norfolk, and Channel Court Shopping Centre and Kingston Town Shopping Centre in Kingston.

Shipping is significant to the city&#x27;s economy. The city is a popular cruise ship destination during the summer months, with 47 such ships docking during the course of the 2016–17 summer season, and $34.5 million in direct expenditure in 2017 (an average spend of $172 per passenger).

Tourism is a significant part of the economy, with visitors coming to the city to explore its historic inner suburbs and nationally acclaimed restaurants and cafes, as well as its vibrant music and nightlife culture. The two major draw-cards are the weekly market in Salamanca Place, and the Museum of Old and New Art. The city is also used as a base from which to explore the rest of Tasmania.

The city also supports many other industries. Major local employers include catamaran builder Incat, zinc refinery Nyrstar Hobart, Cascade Brewery and Cadbury&#x27;s Chocolate Factory, Norske Skog Boyer and Wrest Point Casino. The city also supports a host of light industry manufacturers, as well as a range of redevelopment projects, including the $689 million Royal Hobart Hospital Redevelopment – standing as the states largest ever Health Infrastructure project.

The last 15–20 years have seen Hobart&#x27;s wine industry thrive as many vineyards have developed in countryside areas outside of the city in the Coal River Wine Region and D&#x27;Entrecasteaux Channel, including Moorilla Estate at Berriedale one of the most awarded vineyards in Australia.

===Antarctic gateway===

Hobart is an Antarctic gateway city, with geographical proximity to East Antarctica and the Southern Ocean. Infrastructure is provided by the port of Hobart for scientific research and cruise ships, and Hobart Airport supports an Antarctic Airlink to Wilkins Runway at Casey Station. Hobart is a logistics point for the Australian vessel &quot;Nuyina&quot; and French icebreaker &quot;L&#x27;Astrolabe&quot;.

Hobart is the home port for the Australian and French Antarctic programs, and provides port services for other visiting Antarctic nations and Antarctic cruise ships. Antarctic and Southern Ocean expeditions are supported by a specialist cluster offering cold climate products, services and scientific expertise. The majority of these businesses and organisations are members of the Tasmanian polar network, supported in part by the Tasmanian State Government.

Tasmania has a high concentration of Antarctic and Southern Ocean scientists. Hobart is home to the following Antarctic and Southern Ocean scientific institutions:

* Australian Antarctic Division
* Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR)
* Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP)
* The University of Tasmania (UTAS) – expertise in Antarctic and Southern Ocean science and research
* Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies (IMAS) (established by UTAS)
*Integrated Marine Observing System (IMOS)
*Antarctic Climate and Ecosystems Cooperative Research Centre (ACE-CRC)
*International Antarctic Institute (IAI) (hosted by UTAS)
*Southern Ocean Observing System (hosted by UTAS/ IMAS)
* CSIRO Marine and Atmospheric Research

===Tourism===

Hobart serves as a focal point and mecca for tourism in the state of Tasmania. Hobart has been a significant tourist destination for many years, however tourism has evolved to a core industry in the last decade. This process has been termed the &quot;MONA Effect&quot; - referring to the significant influence of the Museum of New and Old Art (MONA), the Southern Hemisphere&#x27;s largest private museum, on the local tourist economy - compared to the effect of the Guggenheim on Bilbao. Since opening in 2011, MONA had received 2.5 million visitors by 2022 and has helped establish a number of art and food venues and events, including MONA FOMA, and the winter festivals of Mid-Winter Fest and Dark Mofo. 27% of visitors to Tasmania visit the museum.

In 2016, Hobart received 1.8 million visitors, surpassing both Perth and Canberra, tying equally with Brisbane. Visitor numbers reached a low of 744,200 in 2021, primarily as a result of the Covid-19 Pandemic, with expectations that numbers would return to normal by 2023.

Many local tourist attractions focuses on the convict history of Hobart, the city&#x27;s historic architecture, art experiences, and food and alcohol experiences. Hobart is home to a significant number of nationally known restaurants, boutique alcohol producers, including Sullivans Cove Whiskey, which won world&#x27;s best single malt in 2014, boutique hotels, and art experiences. Other significant tourist attractions include Australia&#x27;s second oldest botanic gardens, the Royal Tasmanian Botanical Gardens, which holds extensive significant plant collections, a range of public and private museums including the Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery and Maritime Museum Tasmania, and kunanyi / Mount Wellington, one of the dominant features of Hobart&#x27;s skyline. At , the mountain has its own ecosystems, is rich in biodiversity and plays a large part in determining the local weather.

Hobart is used as a staging ground to visit many of the region&#x27;s surrounding attractions, including the historic sights of Richmond (where a model of Old Hobart Town is located) and Oatlands, Seven Mile Beach and Turrakana / Tasman Peninsula, the Huon Valley, and the waterfalls of Mount Field National Park via the Derwent Valley.

==Government==
===Local===
Greater Hobart as of the 2021 Census is divided into seven local government areas - three of which are designated as cities, City of Hobart, City of Glenorchy and City of Clarence. The remaining metropolitan area is within the Municipality of Kingborough, the Municipality of Brighton, the Municipality of Sorell and the Municipality of Derwent Valley. Each local government area has an elected council which manages functions delegated by the Tasmanian state government such as roads, planning, animal control and parks. Mains water and sewerage processing are serviced by TasWater, which is a state-wide authority part owned by the state government and local government areas.

===State===
Hobart is the seat of the Parliament of Tasmania, located at Parliament House, Salamanca Place, and the location of the official residence of the Governor of Tasmania, Government House.

The senior sitting of the Supreme Court of Tasmania, and only sitting of the Court&#x27;s appeal division, as well as the Magistrates&#x27; Court and Tasmanian Civil and Administrative Tribunal (TASCAT), sit in Hobart. The Risdon Prison Complex (which includes the Mary Hutchinson Women&#x27;s Prison and Barwick Minimum Security Prison) and Hobart Reception Centre are in the region.

Hobart was made the seat of government for the southern district of Tasmania (then called Van Diemen&#x27;s Land), Buckingham County in 1804, with the northern half of the state separately governed from Port Dalrymple, now George Town. At the time, Van Diemen&#x27;s Land remained part of the Colony of New South Wales. In 1812, the northern lieutenant governorship ceased and Hobart become de facto seat of government for the entire island. Hobart officially became capital of an independent colony of Van Diemen&#x27;s Land in 1825, and the seat of responsible self government in 1850 with the Australian Constitutions Act 1850.

==Transport==
===Bus===

The main public transportation within the city of Hobart is via a network of Metro Tasmania buses operated by
the Tasmanian Government. The main hub is at the centrally located Hobart City Interchange on Elizabeth Street. The GreenCard fare ticketing system is held by about 100 thousand customers.

There are also a small number of private bus services, departing from Murray Street and the Brooke Street Pier. These include the airport SkyBus, and charters and coaches by Tassielink Transit and Redline Coaches (now KINETIC, including the O&#x27;Driscoll Coaches Derwent Valley Link).

Tasmania spends the least per capita on public transport in Australia, which is partly responsible for a weekday usage decline of 80.8% between 1964 and 2021. However, the State Government has indicated a consolidation of routes into three main BRT spokes.

===Road===

Hobart&#x27;s transport is centred around roads. The main arterial routes within the urban area are the Brooker Highway to Glenorchy and the northern suburbs, the Tasman Bridge and Bowen Bridge across the river to Rosny and the Eastern Shore. The East Derwent Highway to Lindisfarne, Geilston Bay, and Northwards to Brighton, the South Arm Highway leading to Howrah, Rokeby, Lauderdale and Opossum Bay and the Southern Outlet south to Kingston and the D&#x27;Entrecasteaux Channel. Leaving the city, motorists can travel the Lyell Highway to the west coast, Midland Highway to Launceston and the north, Tasman Highway to the east coast, or the Huon Highway to the far south.

Many of these highways were built after Australia&#x27;s first motor vehicle transportation study by US consultants in the 1960s, with an apparent urgency to cater to growing road traffic volumes. However, most of the targets were not achieved in the years after 1985 despite the scale of these projects, with the large amount of public funds required curbing feasibility. Another side-effect of this transition in investment away from public transport is that Hobart has limited mode redundancy compared to larger Australian capitals and a higher proportion of vehicle traffic, meaning that individual incidents can shut the entire network down.

As part of the Southern Transport Investment Program, Tasmania&#x27;s largest transport project, the $786 million (as of 2023) New Bridgewater Bridge, is expected to finish by 2025. Unlike the Tasman Bridge, it will be accessible to pedestrians upon opening.

===Ferry===
There is a ferry service by Derwent Ferries which operates a single line (F2) between Brooke Street Pier and Bellerive Quay that operates six days a week. It was initiated as a trial in 2021 servicing the Hobart City Centre and Bellerive on the eastern shore, garnering 110 thousand passengers by the end of the year.
The ferry provides a convenient alternative to crossing the Tasman Bridge choke point, with its purpose being to reduce congestion. It is seen as a first step in diversifying Hobart&#x27;s transport options to reduce traffic problems by taking the number of cars off the road rather than inducing more traffic. More ferry terminal sites were revealed in 2023 to Regatta Point, Wrest Point, Wilkinsons Point, Howrah Point, Lindisfarne and Kingston Beach.

There are also private tourist ferries like the Spirit of Hobart, and two MONA Roma catamarans which take 25 minutes to the Museum of Old and New Art.

Ferry services from Hobart&#x27;s Eastern Shore into the city were once a common form of public transportation, but with lack of government funding, as well as a lack of interest from the private sector, the commuter ferry service was closed for many decades – leaving Hobart&#x27;s commuters relying solely on travel by automobiles and buses. There was however a water taxi service operating from the Eastern Shore into Hobart which provides an alternative to the Tasman Bridge (ferries were temporarily loaned from Sydney following the Tasman Bridge disaster). The MV Cartela was one of Australia&#x27;s oldest still operating since 1912.

===Air===

Hobart is served by Hobart Airport with flights to/from Adelaide, Auckland, Brisbane, Canberra, Gold Coast, Melbourne, Perth, Sydney, and regional destinations including the Bass Strait islands. The smaller Cambridge Aerodrome mainly serves small charter airlines offering local tourist flights. In the past decade, Hobart International Airport received a huge upgrade, with the airport now being a first class airport facility.

In 2009, it was announced that Hobart Airport would receive more upgrades, including a first floor, aerobridges (currently, passengers must walk on the tarmac) and shopping facilities. Possible new international flights to Asia and New Zealand, and possible new domestic flights to Darwin and Cairns have been proposed. A second runway, possibly to be constructed in the next 15 years, would assist with growing passenger numbers to Hobart. Hobart Control Tower may be renovated and fitted with new radar equipment, and the airport&#x27;s carpark may be extended further. Also, new facilities will be built just outside the airport. A new service station, hotel and day care centre have already been built and the road leading to the airport has been maintained and re-sealed. In 2016, work began on a 500-metre extension of the existing runway in addition to a $100 million upgrade of the airport. The runway extension is expected to allow international flights to land and increase air-traffic with Antarctica. This upgrade was, in part, funded under a promise made during the 2013 federal election by the Abbott government.

===Seaport===
Hobart&#x27;s main port is managed by TasPorts and has a variety of uses. In Sullivans Cove, the two Princes Wharves are used for Antarctic restocking operations, while there are many piers and pontoons for berthing sailing boats, fishing vessels and yachts (at Victoria and Constitution Docks, especially following the Sydney to Hobart) and a seaplane. At Macquarie Point, the six Macquarie wharves are used for cruise ships (with a terminal onto Hunter Street by the port tower building) and defence vessels. Previously, shipping and services to ferry people between Sydney and Hobart such as Tasmanian Steamers and the Australian National Line, and shipbuilding occurred nearby.

===Rail===

While freight rail no longer operates within Hobart (since 2014), TasRail still operates the Brighton Transport Hub which connects to the main line to the north of Tasmania. Locomotives can be seen in Bridgewater as they make their way from the Boyer Mill near New Norfolk on the operational part of the Derwent Valley railway.

Like many large Australian cities, Hobart once operated high-quality passenger rail services. This included a tram network which was closed in the early 1960s. The tracks are still visible in the older streets of Hobart. It was replaced by a short-lived trolleybus network consisting of six routes which operated until 1968. Suburban passenger trains, run by the Tasmanian Government Railways, were closed in 1974 and the intrastate passenger service, the Tasman Limited, ceased running in 1978. The Tasmanian Transport Museum in Glenorchy has a restored section of track for visitors.

There has been a push from public transport advocates and the two local councils to establish a light rail network, intended to be fast, efficient, and eco-friendly, along existing tracks on the Northern Suburbs Transit Corridor to solve the frequent jamming of traffic in Hobart CBD. This has grown amidst the need for higher-capacity mass transit and an alternative State Government bus proposal. However The State Government haven&#x27;t ruled out Light Rail but they&#x27;re are very conscious of how expensive it is. The earlier Riverline proposal, which reached a business case (at $100 million, demonstrating benefits for socioeconomically disadvantaged areas of the city), was scrapped in the 2014 Australian federal budget.

==Infrastructure==
===Education===
The Greater Hobart area contains 122 primary, secondary and pretertiary (College) schools distributed throughout Clarence, Glenorchy and Hobart City Councils and Kingborough and Brighton Municipalities. These schools are made up of a mix of public, catholic, private and independent run, with the heaviest distribution lying in the more densely populated West around the Hobart city core. The Department for Education, Children and Young People is responsible for government schools and Libraries Tasmania, which operates literacy services and libraries across the region, including the State Library of Tasmania where it is headquartered.

Hobart is home to the main campus of the University of Tasmania, a sandstone university located in Sandy Bay. On-site accommodation colleges include Christ College (founded in 1846, making it Australia&#x27;s oldest tertiary institution), Jane Franklin Hall and St John Fisher College. UTAS also has many sites within the Hobart City Centre, where it hosts the Medical Science Precinct, the College of Arts, Law and Education&#x27;s Hunter Street campus (which also has a TasTAFE training facility), and the Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies (IMAS) nearby the CSIRO Marine Laboratories, as well as the Hytten Hall and Hobart Apartments accommodation in Midtown. It also operates the Canopus Hill Observatory in Mount Rumney and the Mount Pleasant Radio Observatory in Cambridge.

TasTAFE operates a total of seven polytechnic campuses within the Greater Hobart area that provide vocational education and training. These include the Campbell Street campus in the city, the Clarence campus in Warrane, and Drysdale (at Claremont College and on Collins Street).

===Health===

The Royal Hobart Hospital (RHH) is the pre-eminent public hospital in Tasmania, located in central Hobart with 501 beds for emergency presentations and elective surgeries. It also serves as the Hobart Clinical School teaching hospital for the University of Tasmania. There are also 9 ambulance stations in the Hobart region, and the SES Southern Regional Headquarters is on Bathurst Street (along with the Tasmania Fire Service Head Office on Melville/Argyle and Tasmania Police Headquarters on Liverpool).

A private hospital, Hobart Private Hospital is located adjacent to the RHH and operated by Australian healthcare provider Healthscope. The company also owned another hospital in the city, the St Helen&#x27;s Private Hospital, which featured a mother-baby unit but it was closed in 2023. A new Tasman private hospital in New Town was proposed on a former WIN News site, but abandoned in 2023.

The Calvary Hospital is operated by Little Company of Mary Health Care at its main campus the Calvary-St John&#x27;s Private Hospital in Lenah Valley, and has an older location in South Hobart (the former Homoeopathic Hospital). It has a Private Rehabilitation Unit.

The Hobart Clinic (formerly St Michael&#x27;s Priory) is a not-for-profit operating a 27-bed psychiatric hospital in Rokeby and Mind Hub on Collins Street, with a focus on therapies.

===Utilities===
Drinking water and sewerage in the city is managed by TasWater, but many organisations and levels of government are involved at different stages. The first dams in Tasmania were built along the Hobart Rivulet and now there are many reservoirs in the region to safeguard the supply of water (as while kunanyi / Mt Wellington receives high rainfall, the city itself is dry), such as the Waterworks reservoirs via the Sandy Bay Rivulet, the Tolosa dam (disused in 2018) and Lime Kiln Gully dam in Glenorchy, and the Flagstaff Gully dam and Risdon Brook dam (which stores treated water from the New Norfolk Bryn Estyn plant) in Clarence.

TasNetworks is responsible for electricity and telecommunications provision.

== Notable people ==

* Alanna Smith, WNBA power forward for the Minnesota Lynx
* Nyadiew Puoch, WNBA forward for the Atlanta Dream
* Errol Flynn (1909–1959), Hollywood film actor
* Regina Bird, reality television personality; two-time winner of Big Brother Australia (2003, 2022) and contestant on I&#x27;m A Celebrity, Get Me Out Of Here
* Queen Mary of Denmark (1972–)

==Sister cities==

* Yaizu, Shizuoka Prefecture, Japan (1977)
* L&#x27;Aquila, Abruzzo, Italy (1980)
* Valdivia, Los Ríos, Chile (1998)
* Xi&#x27;an, Shaanxi, China (2015)
* Fuzhou, Fujian, China (2017)
* Barile, Basilicata, Italy (2009)

==See also==

* Hobart City Centre
* 2018 Hobart floods

== Explanatory notes ==
==References==
==Further reading==
*

==External links==

* Hobart City Council</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q40191" start="0" end="6" title="Hobart" label="Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994461" start="18" end="25" title="List of Australian capital cities" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="72" end="80" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q583565" start="153" end="166" title="River Derwent (Tasmania)" label="River Derwent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11568" start="390" end="396" title="Darwin, Northern Territory" label="Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q204552" start="468" end="494" title="Mount Wellington (Tasmania)" label="kunanyi / Mount Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q21018612" start="545" end="549" title="Port of Hobart" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q40191" start="680" end="694" title="Hobart" label="Greater Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621560" start="725" end="739" title="City of Hobart" label="City of Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="816" end="832" title="oceanic climate" label="maritime climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q265730" start="889" end="897" title="Muwinina" label="Muwinina"/>
<link wikidata="Q40191" start="908" end="916" title="Hobart" label="nipaluna"/>
<link wikidata="Q265730" start="1133" end="1154" title="Aboriginal Tasmanians" label="Aboriginal Tasmanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140316" start="1186" end="1198" title="penal colony" label="penal colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="1260" end="1266" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990565" start="1285" end="1292" title="Whaling in Australia" label="Whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354" start="1378" end="1392" title="Southern Ocean" label="Southern Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770529" start="1419" end="1439" title="Penal transportation" label="Penal transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q103495" start="1671" end="1680" title="world war" label="world war"/>
<link wikidata="Q388101" start="1861" end="1873" title="Anglo-Celtic Australian" label="Anglo-Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="2097" end="2106" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403540" start="2214" end="2230" title="Salamanca Market" label="Salamanca Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353030" start="2239" end="2264" title="Museum of Old and New Art" label="Museum of Old and New Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q931448" start="2445" end="2458" title="David Collins (lieutenant governor)" label="David Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q14214" start="2470" end="2496" title="British Secretary of State" label="British Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q333417" start="2522" end="2533" title="Robert Hobart, 4th Earl of Buckinghamshire" label="Lord Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797622" start="2621" end="2635" title="Sullivans Cove" label="Sullivans Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q523658" start="2688" end="2699" title="Risdon Cove" label="Risdon Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238388" start="2791" end="2801" title="John Hayes (explorer)" label="John Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q583565" start="2811" end="2816" title="River Derwent (Tasmania)" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q506996" start="2827" end="2849" title="River Derwent, Cumbria" label="River Derwent, Cumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q550615" start="2873" end="2899" title="D&amp;#x27;Entrecasteaux" label="Bruni D&amp;#x27;Entrecasteaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310220" start="3086" end="3096" title="dual-named" label="dual-named"/>
<link wikidata="Q863112" start="3187" end="3198" title="Palawa kani" label="Palawa kani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506896" start="3279" end="3303" title="George Augustus Robinson" label="George Augustus Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q128452675" start="3385" end="3393" title="Woureddy" label="Woureddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979601" start="3397" end="3403" title="Bruny Island Tasmanian language" label="Nununi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25605" start="3415" end="3427" title="Bruny Island" label="Bruny Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330517" start="3524" end="3530" title="Eastern Tasmanian languages" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068421" start="3538" end="3569" title="Southeastern Tasmanian language" label="Southeastern Tasmanian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q265730" start="3586" end="3594" title="Mouheneener" label="Muwinina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7136678" start="3638" end="3648" title="Paredarerme language" label="Oyster Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q21539197" start="3682" end="3689" title="William Bedford (chaplain)" label="Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q21922212" start="3758" end="3763" title="Long Beach, Tasmania" label="kriwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922380" start="3796" end="3806" title="Mount Nelson, Tasmania" label="kriwalayti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199171" start="3926" end="3932" title="Lake St Clair (Tasmania)" label="centre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3972" end="3981" title="Aboriginal Tasmanians#Big River" label="Big River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095386" start="4040" end="4055" title="Clarence Plains" label="Clarence Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833436" start="4160" end="4174" title="Tranmere, Tasmania" label="Droughty Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304228" start="4263" end="4272" title="South Arm, Tasmania" label="South Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395097" start="4318" end="4321" title="Tasmanian Aboriginal Centre" label="TAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q25566930" start="4364" end="4375" title="Tasmanian nativehen" label="native hens"/>
<link wikidata="Q21960630" start="4380" end="4391" title="Shag Bay" label="Risdon Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q523658" start="4559" end="4570" title="Risdon Cove" label="Risdon Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q583565" start="4600" end="4613" title="River Derwent (Tasmania)" label="River Derwent"/>
<link wikidata="Q176653" start="4658" end="4674" title="Baudin expedition to Australia" label="French explorers"/>
<link wikidata="Q123691658" start="4699" end="4724" title="1804 Risdon Cove massacre" label="1804 Risdon Cove massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324526" start="4809" end="4821" title="Port Phillip" label="Port Phillip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797622" start="4947" end="4961" title="Sullivans Cove" label="Sullivans Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q265730" start="4980" end="5002" title="Aboriginal Tasmanian" label="Indigenous inhabitants"/>
<link wikidata="Q989174" start="5257" end="5264" title="convict" label="convict"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5303" end="5314" title="Black War#Martial law, November 1828" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q124250682" start="5355" end="5369" title="Tongerlongeter" label="Tongerlongeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q124288703" start="5389" end="5402" title="Montpelliatta" label="Montpelliatta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5441" end="5450" title="Aboriginal Tasmanians#Big River" label="Big River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5467" end="5477" title="Aboriginal Tasmanians#Oyster Bay (Paredarerme)" label="Oyster Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506896" start="5508" end="5522" title="G. A. Robinson" label="G. A. Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q826766" start="5623" end="5636" title="George Arthur" label="George Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q126325713" start="5682" end="5697" title="Wybalenna Aboriginal Establishment" label="Flinders Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="5699" end="5713" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35926" start="5766" end="5784" title="HMS Beagle" label="&amp;quot;Beagle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="5815" end="5821" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5848" end="5860" title="kunanyi#European history" label="noble forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768515" start="5921" end="5945" title="The Voyage of the Beagle" label="The Voyage of the Beagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q42767" start="6426" end="6433" title="whaling" label="whaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502014" start="6438" end="6445" title="seal hunting" label="sealing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6646" end="6665" title="Convicts in Australia#Cessation of transportation" label="post-transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q962011" start="7270" end="7296" title="UTAS" label="The University of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q16892358" start="7313" end="7322" title="Hobart Town Hall" label="Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874783" start="7497" end="7520" title="Hobart coastal defences" label="Hobart coastal defences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="7522" end="7532" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q123102" start="7761" end="7770" title="thylacine" label="thylacine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4271849" start="7784" end="7797" title="Beaumaris Zoo" label="Beaumaris Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7816" end="7819" title="WW2" label="WW2"/>
<link wikidata="Q105963044" start="8017" end="8042" title="Risdon Zinc Works" label="Electrolytic Zinc Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q15498" start="8256" end="8270" title="Hobart Airport" label="Hobart Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037767" start="8321" end="8345" title="Wrest Point Hotel Casino" label="Wrest Point Hotel Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395133" start="8463" end="8483" title="1967 Tasmanian fires" label="1967 Tasmanian fires"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687390" start="8569" end="8591" title="Tasman Bridge disaster" label="Tasman Bridge disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q583565" start="9143" end="9156" title="River Derwent (Tasmania)" label="River Derwent"/>
<link wikidata="Q753016" start="9227" end="9235" title="dolerite" label="dolerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q565731" start="9301" end="9310" title="siltstone" label="siltstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642424" start="9323" end="9331" title="mudstone" label="mudstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q583565" start="9348" end="9361" title="River Derwent (Tasmania)" label="River Derwent"/>
<link wikidata="Q124655642" start="9399" end="9413" title="Derwent Valley, Tasmania" label="Derwent Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435919" start="9464" end="9473" title="City of Glenorchy" label="Glenorchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q204552" start="9560" end="9586" title="kunanyi / Mount Wellington" label="kunanyi / Mount Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q21914265" start="9613" end="9625" title="Dromedary, Tasmania" label="Mt Dromedary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874777" start="9794" end="9798" title="Hobart City Centre" label="City"/>
<link wikidata="Q942696" start="9803" end="9811" title="Kingston, Tasmania" label="Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814444" start="9829" end="9834" title="Tolmans Hill, Tasmania" label="hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686553" start="9839" end="9846" title="Taroona" label="Taroona"/>
<link wikidata="Q113696518" start="9854" end="9865" title="Alum Cliffs" label="Alum Cliffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q21973082" start="9923" end="9942" title="South Arm Peninsula" label="South Arm Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072778" start="9944" end="9952" title="Iron Pot" label="Iron Pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593018" start="9957" end="9970" title="Betsey Island" label="Betsey Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417350" start="9977" end="10005" title="Turrakana" label="Turrakana / Tasman Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q25605" start="10010" end="10022" title="Bruny Island" label="Bruny Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807506" start="10121" end="10133" title="Meehan Range" label="Meehan Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q21914035" start="10188" end="10203" title="Mount Direction" label="Mount Direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q21911117" start="10205" end="10219" title="Flagstaff Hill, Tasmania" label="Flagstaff Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q21938814" start="10224" end="10237" title="Gunners Quoin" label="Gunners Quoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q740644" start="10271" end="10279" title="Brighton Council (Tasmania)" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359975" start="10565" end="10571" title="Rokeby, Tasmania" label="Rokeby"/>
<link wikidata="Q673919" start="10621" end="10631" title="Lauderdale, Tasmania" label="Lauderdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288348" start="10641" end="10651" title="Ralphs Bay" label="Ralphs Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497998" start="10656" end="10675" title="Frederick Henry Bay" label="Frederick Henry Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q21922212" start="10771" end="10781" title="Long Beach, Tasmania" label="Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q21922232" start="10783" end="10797" title="Nutgrove Beach, Tasmania" label="Nutgrove Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q21922235" start="10799" end="10814" title="Bellerive Beach, Tasmania" label="Bellerive Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497998" start="10885" end="10904" title="Frederick Henry Bay" label="Frederick Henry Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q21923426" start="10913" end="10923" title="Seven Mile Beach, Tasmania" label="Seven Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q19879232" start="11023" end="11043" title="Tasmanian South East" label="Tasmanian South East"/>
<link wikidata="Q19879277" start="11048" end="11073" title="Tasmanian Southern Ranges" label="Tasmanian Southern Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572569" start="11074" end="11078" title="IBRA" label="IBRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565306" start="11134" end="11173" title="South-east Tasmania Important Bird Area" label="South-east Tasmania Important Bird Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q6807506" start="11187" end="11193" title="Meehan Range" label="Meehan"/>
<link wikidata="Q967984" start="11198" end="11214" title="Wellington Range" label="Wellington Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607813" start="11253" end="11268" title="List of birds of Tasmania" label="Tasmanian birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q60754344" start="11274" end="11299" title="East Risdon State Reserve" label="East Risdon State Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q15289498" start="11321" end="11336" title="Acacia derwentiana" label="Derwent cascade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670999" start="11347" end="11361" title="Acacia riceana" label="Acacia riceana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654153" start="11403" end="11420" title="Eucalyptus risdonii" label="Risdon peppermint"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405635" start="11431" end="11451" title="Eucalyptus morrisbyi" label="Eucalyptus morrisbyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070092" start="11490" end="11510" title="Eucalyptus cordata" label="heartleaf silver gum"/>
<link wikidata="Q24877900" start="11528" end="11536" title="Eucalyptus globulus subsp. globulus" label="blue gum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405517" start="11674" end="11690" title="Eucalyptus amygdalina" label="Black peppermint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654015" start="11692" end="11709" title="Eucalyptus tenuiramis" label="silver peppermint"/>
<link wikidata="Q757123" start="11711" end="11722" title="Acacia dealbata" label="blue wattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q386585" start="11724" end="11733" title="Acacia melanoxylon" label="blackwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732995" start="11735" end="11750" title="Allocasuarina verticillata" label="drooping sheoak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062004" start="11755" end="11769" title="Exocarpos cupressiformis" label="cherry ballart"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197023" start="11812" end="11830" title="Threatened species" label="Threatened species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260561" start="11871" end="11883" title="swift parrot" label="swift parrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q938996" start="11885" end="11897" title="grey goshawk" label="grey goshawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395130" start="11899" end="11919" title="Tasmanian masked owl" label="Tasmanian masked owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q856593" start="11921" end="11945" title="eastern barred bandicoot" label="eastern barred bandicoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q194516" start="11950" end="11963" title="eastern quoll" label="eastern quoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="12076" end="12083" title="endemic" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q209291" start="12130" end="12140" title="Tasmanian pademelon" label="pademelons"/>
<link wikidata="Q249024" start="12145" end="12154" title="Notamacropus rufogriseus" label="wallabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228539" start="12164" end="12178" title="Hobart Rivulet" label="Hobart Rivulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15343" start="12190" end="12200" title="platypuses" label="platypuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q204552" start="12352" end="12375" title="kunanyi" label="kunanyi / Mt Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4484237" start="12424" end="12439" title="celery top pine" label="celery top pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q100894668" start="12475" end="12485" title="Tasmanian temperate forests" label="old-growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137116" start="12486" end="12496" title="Eucalyptus viminalis" label="white gums"/>
<link wikidata="Q602226" start="12518" end="12530" title="Eucalyptus obliqua" label="stringybarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687372" start="12544" end="12556" title="Eucalyptus delegatensis" label="Octopus tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q766271" start="12592" end="12603" title="sclerophyll" label="sclerophyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687538" start="12604" end="12624" title="Tasmanian rainforest" label="Tasmanian rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604825" start="12638" end="12650" title="Nothofagus cunninghamii" label="myrtle beech"/>
<link wikidata="Q14831655" start="12655" end="12675" title="Atherosperma" label="blackheart sassafras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109824" start="12692" end="12703" title="Collinsvale, Tasmania" label="Collinsvale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874777" start="12730" end="12744" title="Hobart City Centre" label="city of Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763383" start="12752" end="12769" title="Anglesea Barracks" label="Anglesea Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000611" start="12821" end="12833" title="History of Hobart" label="colonial era"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="12877" end="12892" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="12894" end="12900" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17174435" start="12919" end="12928" title="Trewartha climate classification" label="Trewartha"/>
<link wikidata="Q16961583" start="12989" end="13003" title="Angry Summer" label="4 January 2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353879" start="13428" end="13440" title="Strathgordon, Tasmania" label="Strathgordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590598" start="13760" end="13765" title="frost" label="frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q108000" start="13792" end="13802" title="freezes" label="air frosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252897" start="13878" end="13883" title="Dover, Tasmania" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q108919970" start="13991" end="14003" title="southeast Australian foehn" label="foehn effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114397" start="14019" end="14036" title="Central Highlands (Tasmania)" label="Central Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q126708375" start="14090" end="14094" title="snow in Australia" label="snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q204552" start="14133" end="14159" title="Mount Wellington (Tasmania)" label="kunanyi / Mount Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="14564" end="14572" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577859" start="14581" end="14596" title="Snowy Mountains" label="Snowy Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="14633" end="14648" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q852799" start="14715" end="14720" title="Rain and snow mixed" label="sleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344518" start="14999" end="15014" title="the bush" label="native bushland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21937461" start="15069" end="15084" title="Wellington Park" label="Wellington Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q204552" start="15118" end="15141" title="kunanyi" label="kunanyi / Mt Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228539" start="15411" end="15429" title="Hobart Rivulet" label="Hobart Linear Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048113" start="15431" end="15446" title="Cascade Brewery" label="Cascade Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741168" start="15449" end="15461" title="Hutchins School" label="Lambert Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259411" start="15463" end="15479" title="New Town Rivulet" label="New Town Rivulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q111940885" start="15481" end="15494" title="Lady Franklin Gallery" label="Ancanthe Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q21937469" start="15500" end="15511" title="Tolosa Park" label="Tolosa Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15564" end="15591" title="Mount Nelson, Tasmania#Truganini Conservation Area" label="Truganini Conservation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q630002" start="15651" end="15671" title="Dicksonia antarctica" label="Dicksonia antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270760" start="15811" end="15824" title="Queens Domain" label="Queens Domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171140" start="15844" end="15877" title="Royal Tasmanian Botanical Gardens" label="Royal Tasmanian Botanical Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875255" start="15923" end="15934" title="Limited-access road" label="expressways"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874672" start="16008" end="16023" title="Hobart Cenotaph" label="Hobart Cenotaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374286" start="16068" end="16082" title="Hobart Regatta" label="Hobart Regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567827" start="16109" end="16127" title="South Line, Tasmania" label="Intercity Cycleway"/>
<link wikidata="Q23073810" start="16134" end="16157" title="Railway Roundabout, Hobart" label="University Rose Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289799" start="16201" end="16223" title="Domain Athletic Centre" label="Domain Athletic Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874651" start="16228" end="16263" title="Doone Kennedy Hobart Aquatic Centre" label="Doone Kennedy Hobart Aquatic Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4271849" start="16283" end="16293" title="Hobart Zoo" label="Hobart Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q119475135" start="16318" end="16345" title="Bonorong Wildlife Sanctuary" label="Bonorong Wildlife Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756444" start="16349" end="16357" title="Brighton, Tasmania" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q21922235" start="16458" end="16472" title="Bellerive Beach, Tasmania" label="Kangaroo Bluff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874783" start="16493" end="16516" title="Hobart coastal defences" label="Hobart coastal defences"/>
<link wikidata="Q16004039" start="16574" end="16586" title="Charles Hand" label="Charles Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3941559" start="16600" end="16610" title="Rosny Park" label="Rosny Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q815911" start="16620" end="16629" title="Bellerive, Tasmania" label="Bellerive"/>
<link wikidata="Q124370" start="16662" end="16673" title="Lindisfarne, Tasmania" label="Lindisfarne"/>
<link wikidata="Q21956155" start="16693" end="16705" title="Howrah Beach" label="Howrah Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367642" start="16754" end="16766" title="Rose Bay, Tasmania" label="Gordons Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530141" start="16768" end="16779" title="Geilston Bay, Tasmania" label="Natone Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833436" start="16781" end="16793" title="Tranmere, Tasmania" label="Rokeby Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913014" start="16795" end="16813" title="Mornington, Tasmania" label="Waverly Flora Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369093" start="16843" end="16853" title="Rosny, Tasmania" label="Rosny Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q21937476" start="16934" end="16954" title="St David&amp;#x27;s Park" label="St David&amp;#x27;s Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q16891425" start="16956" end="16971" title="Franklin Square (Hobart)" label="Franklin Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015935" start="16991" end="17000" title="Salamanca Place" label="Salamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869876" start="17021" end="17033" title="Battery Point, Tasmania" label="Princes Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319222" start="17036" end="17051" title="Dynnyrne, Tasmania" label="Fitzroy Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190288" start="17056" end="17071" title="Holy Trinity Church, North Hobart" label="St Andrews Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363570" start="17134" end="17150" title="Elizabeth Street, Hobart" label="Elizabeth Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567497" start="17196" end="17208" title="South Hobart, Tasmania" label="South Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985404" start="17242" end="17253" title="West Hobart, Tasmania" label="West Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362614" start="17263" end="17281" title="Elizabeth College (Hobart)" label="Cultural Skatepark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055645" start="17301" end="17313" title="North Hobart, Tasmania" label="North Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5596661" start="17431" end="17444" title="Granton, Tasmania" label="Goulds Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083446" start="17446" end="17455" title="Old Beach, Tasmania" label="Old Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q19569696" start="17469" end="17481" title="Fairy door" label="little doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439907" start="17493" end="17502" title="Claremont, Tasmania" label="Claremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908403" start="17533" end="17548" title="Moorilla Estate" label="Moorilla Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q114120150" start="17557" end="17589" title="Glenorchy Art and Sculpture Park" label="Glenorchy Art and Sculpture Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906454" start="17606" end="17614" title="Montrose, Tasmania" label="Montrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263341" start="17626" end="17641" title="Derwent Park, Tasmania" label="Giblins Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q41305443" start="17646" end="17659" title="Cornelian Bay Cemetery" label="Cornelian Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q93188" start="17713" end="17724" title="Errol Flynn" label="Errol Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q21922212" start="17734" end="17752" title="Long Beach, Tasmania" label="Long Beach Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q21922232" start="17756" end="17770" title="Nutgrove Beach" label="Nutgrove Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413464" start="17802" end="17810" title="Kingston Beach, Tasmania" label="Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125300" start="17995" end="18003" title="Georgian architecture" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q565165" start="18008" end="18021" title="Victorian architecture" label="Victorian-era"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="18064" end="18073" title="old world" label="old world"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874394" start="18289" end="18311" title="Hope and Anchor Tavern" label="Hope and Anchor Tavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q24089964" start="18323" end="18333" title="Ingle Hall" label="Ingle Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048113" start="18349" end="18364" title="Cascade Brewery" label="Cascade Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046891" start="18460" end="18483" title="Cascades Female Factory" label="Cascades Female Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523488" start="18631" end="18644" title="Theatre Royal, Hobart" label="Theatre Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513688" start="18712" end="18725" title="Greek Revival architecture" label="Greek revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q111940885" start="18726" end="18747" title="Lady Franklin Gallery" label="Lady Franklin Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874758" start="18803" end="18819" title="Hobart Synagogue" label="Hobart Synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085593" start="18854" end="18870" title="Oldest synagogues in the world" label="oldest synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q384177" start="18896" end="18912" title="Egyptian revival" label="Egyptian revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015935" start="18924" end="18939" title="Salamanca Place" label="Salamanca Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008900" start="18989" end="19007" title="Kelly&amp;#x27;s Steps" label="Kelly&amp;#x27;s Steps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869876" start="19060" end="19073" title="Battery Point" label="Battery Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q15460349" start="19189" end="19204" title="John Lee Archer" label="John Lee Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3931689" start="19218" end="19225" title="Regency architecture" label="Regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138912" start="19232" end="19245" title="Parliament House, Hobart" label="Customs House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797622" start="19261" end="19275" title="Sullivans Cove" label="Sullivans Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="19331" end="19345" title="Gothic revival" label="Gothic revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687472" start="19390" end="19417" title="Tasmanian Main Line Company" label="Tasmanian Main Line Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108842" start="19494" end="19521" title="Christ College (University of Tasmania)" label="oldest tertiary institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540450" start="19618" end="19634" title="Government House, Hobart" label="Government House"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934412" start="19673" end="19688" title="Old Government House, Hobart" label="third iteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062296" start="19690" end="19702" title="Henry Hunter (architect)" label="Henry Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q20642155" start="19747" end="19771" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Hobart" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q16892358" start="19801" end="19817" title="Hobart Town Hall" label="Hobart Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687474" start="19880" end="19884" title="TMAG" label="TMAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q174419" start="19918" end="19937" title="Second Empire style" label="Second Empire style"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164095" start="19968" end="19985" title="Constitution Dock" label="Constitution Dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228539" start="20109" end="20123" title="Hobart Rivulet" label="Hobart Rivulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220017" start="20361" end="20376" title="Bathurst Street, Hobart" label="Bathurst Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q29300454" start="20504" end="20518" title="St John&amp;#x27;s Anglican Church, New Town" label="St John&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q56279281" start="20522" end="20530" title="St Johns Park, Tasmania" label="New Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080047" start="20632" end="20655" title="Hobart City High School" label="Hobart City High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q17052359" start="20686" end="20718" title="St George&amp;#x27;s Anglican Church, Battery Point" label="St George&amp;#x27;s Anglican Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129835" start="20793" end="20808" title="James Blackburn (architect)" label="James Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q24190288" start="20832" end="20851" title="Holy Trinity Church, Hobart" label="Holy Trinity Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q118875377" start="20915" end="20949" title="Davey Street Congregational Church" label="Davey Street Congregational Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592928" start="20959" end="20984" title="St David&amp;#x27;s Cathedral, Hobart" label="St David&amp;#x27;s Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q529819" start="21042" end="21058" title="Queen Anne style architecture" label="Queen Anne style"/>
<link wikidata="Q6923388" start="21059" end="21077" title="Mount Saint Canice" label="Mount Saint Canice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346070" start="21111" end="21128" title="Edwardian Baroque" label="Edwardian Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q19866433" start="21129" end="21132" title="General Post Office, Hobart" label="GPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q18165759" start="21160" end="21176" title="Hobart City Hall" label="Hobart City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q567789" start="21200" end="21226" title="Federation architecture" label="Federation warehouse style"/>
<link wikidata="Q38167637" start="21263" end="21287" title="North Hobart Post Office" label="North Hobart Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258400" start="21300" end="21318" title="John Smith Murdoch" label="John Smith Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346070" start="21344" end="21359" title="Edwardian architecture" label="Edwardian style"/>
<link wikidata="Q6562311" start="21396" end="21404" title="List of Art Deco buildings in Tasmania" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672621" start="21430" end="21437" title="T &amp;amp; G Mutual Life Assurance Society" label="T&amp;amp;G"/>
<link wikidata="Q24997964" start="21457" end="21470" title="Murray Street, Hobart" label="Murray Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521843" start="21480" end="21487" title="The Mercury (Hobart)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882992" start="21500" end="21516" title="Macquarie Street, Hobart" label="Macquarie Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640187" start="21536" end="21550" title="Hydro Tasmania" label="Hydro Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148348" start="21566" end="21586" title="Colonial Mutual" label="Colonial Mutual Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363570" start="21607" end="21623" title="Elizabeth Street, Hobart" label="Elizabeth Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q928960" start="21634" end="21652" title="Streamline Moderne" label="Streamline Moderne"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037767" start="21731" end="21749" title="Wrest Point Casino" label="Wrest Point Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372867" start="21769" end="21780" title="Roy Grounds" label="Roy Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q48976503" start="21784" end="21791" title="Moderne architecture" label="Moderne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642237" start="21808" end="21835" title="List of tallest buildings in Hobart" label="tallest buildings in Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q162324" start="21872" end="21891" title="International Style" label="International Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q6716572" start="21892" end="21895" title="MLC Limited" label="MLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q994776" start="21947" end="21956" title="Brutalist" label="Brutalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935635" start="21957" end="21966" title="NAB House" label="NAB House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506724" start="21985" end="21997" title="Reserve Bank of Australia" label="Reserve Bank"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22038" end="22047" title="Modern architecture#Asia and Australia" label="Modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398562" start="22104" end="22116" title="Esmond Dorney" label="Dorney House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922380" start="22138" end="22149" title="Mount Nelson, Tasmania" label="Fort Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060551" start="22206" end="22228" title="Hotel Grand Chancellor, Hobart" label="Hotel Grand Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q186018" start="22322" end="22347" title="contemporary architecture" label="contemporary architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q112872098" start="22394" end="22405" title="The Hedberg" label="The Hedberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825467" start="22431" end="22444" title="Conceptual architecture" label="Conceptualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171042" start="22510" end="22531" title="Royal Hobart Hospital" label="Royal Hobart Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q31891289" start="22578" end="22589" title="Rajah Quilt" label="Rajah Quilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817726" start="22605" end="22622" title="Menzies Institute for Medical Research" label="Menzies Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753329" start="22627" end="22631" title="College of Health and Medicine (University of Tasmania)" label="UTAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421149" start="22694" end="22705" title="experimental architecture" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110323" start="22897" end="22901" title="Myer" label="Myer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007473" start="22909" end="22921" title="Icon Complex" label="Icon Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927297" start="22974" end="22990" title="Liverpool Street, Hobart" label="Liverpool Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q691162" start="23121" end="23136" title="Mövenpick Hotel" label="Mövenpick Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834997" start="23485" end="23501" title="Transport in Hobart" label="public transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311450" start="23513" end="23520" title="Rail transport in Tasmania" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833227" start="23556" end="23583" title="Trams in Hobart" label="fully-electric tram network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834364" start="23601" end="23625" title="Transit metropolis" label="growth of the urban area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623078" start="23639" end="23652" title="Streetcar suburb" label="Inner suburbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755539" start="23779" end="23802" title="City Beautiful movement" label="City Beautiful movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q109535972" start="23825" end="23843" title="Hill Street Grocer" label="Hill Street Grocer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202402" start="23965" end="23975" title="townhouses" label="townhouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257894" start="24008" end="24022" title="Public housing in Australia" label="Social housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q19975856" start="24414" end="24430" title="Margaret Findlay" label="Margaret Findlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q850107" start="24477" end="24486" title="Bungalows" label="Bungalows"/>
<link wikidata="Q382362" start="24509" end="24521" title="weatherboard" label="weatherboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4071186" start="24531" end="24536" title="fibro" label="fibro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24557" end="24586" title="Town and Country Planning Act (Australia) 1944" label="Town and Country Planning Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826725" start="24769" end="24784" title="automotive city" label="automotive city"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874660" start="24798" end="24830" title="Hobart Area Transportation Study" label="Hobart Area Transportation Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967458" start="24861" end="24868" title="Planned obsolescence" label="cuts to"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215004" start="24935" end="24942" title="Societal impacts of cars" label="parking"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="24966" end="24975" title="Urban sprawl" label="sprawling"/>
<link wikidata="Q702232" start="24982" end="24988" title="Zoning" label="Zoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q374221" start="25084" end="25117" title="Transit-oriented development" label="northern suburbs transit corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220027" start="25313" end="25328" title="Goulburn Street, Hobart" label="Goulburn Street"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25485" end="25491" title="Sydney#Housing" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q786773" start="25509" end="25522" title="car dependent" label="car-ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058971" start="25844" end="25848" title="Australia census" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426910" start="26107" end="26118" title="Bridgewater, Tasmania" label="Bridgewater"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26553" end="26567" title="eviction#No-fault evictions" label="less protected"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342287" start="26753" end="26769" title="parking mandates" label="parking mandates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569631" start="26808" end="26823" title="green lifestyle" label="green lifestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353030" start="27057" end="27082" title="Museum of Old and New Art" label="Museum of Old and New Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015935" start="27271" end="27286" title="Salamanca Place" label="Salamanca Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363570" start="27323" end="27339" title="Elizabeth Street, Hobart" label="Elizabeth Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q20861538" start="27375" end="27396" title="Elizabeth Street Mall" label="Elizabeth Street Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q111973068" start="27548" end="27564" title="List of theatres in Hobart" label="several theatres"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930631" start="27642" end="27657" title="Village Cinemas" label="Village Cinemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523488" start="27664" end="27677" title="Theatre Royal, Hobart" label="Theatre Royal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15460349" start="27789" end="27804" title="John Lee Archer" label="John Lee Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5727292" start="27916" end="27928" title="Henry Bastow" label="Henry Bastow"/>
<link wikidata="Q111949030" start="28034" end="28046" title="State Cinema, North Hobart" label="State Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055645" start="28050" end="28062" title="North Hobart" label="North Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q43898773" start="28147" end="28162" title="Reading Cinemas" label="Reading Cinemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935638" start="28189" end="28197" title="New Town, Tasmania" label="New Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q98099381" start="28417" end="28426" title="Dark Mofo" label="Dark Mofo"/>
<link wikidata="Q111940885" start="28547" end="28568" title="Lady Franklin Gallery" label="Lady Franklin Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q467646" start="28605" end="28623" title="Lady Jane Franklin" label="Lady Jane Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q111937184" start="28650" end="28677" title="The Art Society of Tasmania" label="The Art Society of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374857" start="28702" end="28727" title="Royal Society of Tasmania" label="Royal Society of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="28740" end="28753" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687474" start="28783" end="28815" title="Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery" label="Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765823" start="29109" end="29133" title="Maritime Museum of Tasmania" label="Maritime Museum Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353030" start="29216" end="29241" title="Museum of Old and New Art" label="Museum of Old and New Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908403" start="29337" end="29345" title="Moorilla Estate" label="Moorilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894694" start="29360" end="29380" title="Berriedale, Tasmania" label="Berriedale peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240807" start="29437" end="29448" title="David Walsh (art collector)" label="David Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756331" start="29720" end="29731" title="Andrew Bent" label="Andrew Bent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831265" start="29764" end="29776" title="Michael Howe (bushranger)" label="Michael Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627286" start="29782" end="29792" title="bushranger" label="bushranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006790" start="29847" end="29866" title="Hobart Town Gazette" label="Hobart Town Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5728030" start="29955" end="29972" title="Quintus Servinton" label="Quintus Servinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5728030" start="30011" end="30023" title="Henry Savery" label="Henry Savery"/>
<link wikidata="Q19324872" start="30172" end="30192" title="Mary Leman Grimstone" label="Mary Leman Grimstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603407" start="30409" end="30434" title="State Library of Tasmania" label="State Library of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q61099760" start="30483" end="30522" title="Allport Library and Museum of Fine Arts" label="Allport Library and Museum of Fine Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467764" start="30626" end="30644" title="City of Literature" label="City of Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263987" start="30664" end="30692" title="Tasmanian Symphony Orchestra" label="Tasmanian Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30709" end="30732" title="Hotel Grand Chancellor, Hobart#Federation Concert Hall" label="Federation Concert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q45308439" start="31023" end="31036" title="Odeon Theatre, Hobart" label="Odeon Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q113758189" start="31038" end="31052" title="Avalon Theatre, Hobart" label="Avalon Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q18165759" start="31057" end="31073" title="Hobart City Hall" label="Hobart City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263329" start="31141" end="31159" title="MyState Bank Arena" label="MyState Bank Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037767" start="31183" end="31207" title="Wrest Point Hotel Casino" label="Wrest Point Hotel Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623570" start="31329" end="31337" title="Striborg" label="Striborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259710" start="31342" end="31352" title="Psycroptic" label="Psycroptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756058" start="31362" end="31380" title="The Paradise Motel" label="The Paradise Motel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439991" start="31396" end="31406" title="Sea Scouts (band)" label="Sea Scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204586" start="31425" end="31439" title="Monique Brumby" label="Monique Brumby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287909" start="31580" end="31603" title="The Morning After Girls" label="The Morning After Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q128339" start="31626" end="31636" title="The Drones (Australian band)" label="The Drones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900180" start="31665" end="31679" title="Monika Fikerle" label="Monika Fikerle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691928" start="31684" end="31700" title="Love of Diagrams" label="Love of Diagrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q24703088" start="31719" end="31730" title="Miles Brown (musician)" label="Miles Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182147" start="31748" end="31760" title="Phil Manning (musician)" label="Phil Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5067855" start="31781" end="31786" title="Chain (band)" label="Chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q48938223" start="31793" end="31799" title="TikTok" label="TikTok"/>
<link wikidata="Q106369185" start="31807" end="31818" title="Kim Dracula" label="Kim Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134615" start="31877" end="31891" title="Violent Femmes" label="Violent Femmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255815" start="31893" end="31906" title="Brian Ritchie" label="Brian Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953121" start="31982" end="31991" title="MONA FOMA" label="MONA FOMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q130265318" start="31993" end="32012" title="Chloe Alison Escott" label="Chloe Alison Escott"/>
<link wikidata="Q130390649" start="32041" end="32056" title="The Native Cats" label="The Native Cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403540" start="32163" end="32179" title="Salamanca Market" label="Salamanca Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687670" start="32221" end="32238" title="Taste of Tasmania" label="Taste of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q98099381" start="32288" end="32297" title="Dark Mofo" label="Dark Mofo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546864" start="32458" end="32480" title="Ten Days On The Island" label="Ten Days On The Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570446" start="32513" end="32536" title="Southern Roots Festival" label="Southern Roots Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432480" start="32545" end="32559" title="Falls Festival" label="Falls Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765083" start="32563" end="32573" title="Marion Bay, Tasmania" label="Marion Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824816" start="32635" end="32666" title="Australian Wooden Boat Festival" label="Australian Wooden Boat Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374286" start="32761" end="32781" title="Royal Hobart Regatta" label="Royal Hobart Regatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417154" start="32873" end="32882" title="Sandy Bay, Tasmania" label="Sandy Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374287" start="32920" end="32935" title="Royal Hobart Show" label="Hobart Show Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374288" start="32974" end="32991" title="Hobart Showground" label="Hobart Showground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531147" start="32995" end="33004" title="Glenorchy, Tasmania" label="Glenorchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q838761" start="33011" end="33031" title="Hobart International" label="Hobart International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685826" start="33119" end="33133" title="Targa Tasmania" label="Targa Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="33324" end="33331" title="Cricket" label="Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133545" start="33366" end="33382" title="Tasmanian Tigers" label="Tasmanian Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134044" start="33420" end="33434" title="Bellerive Oval" label="Bellerive Oval"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874717" start="33465" end="33482" title="Hobart Hurricanes" label="Hobart Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905035" start="33498" end="33513" title="Big Bash League" label="Big Bash League"/>
<link wikidata="Q50776" start="33516" end="33541" title="Australian rules football" label="Australian rules football"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687449" start="33693" end="33718" title="Tasmanian Football League" label="Tasmanian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126525" start="33753" end="33761" title="Clarence Football Club" label="Clarence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569256" start="33763" end="33772" title="Glenorchy Football Club" label="Glenorchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497861" start="33774" end="33784" title="Lauderdale Football Club" label="Lauderdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055648" start="33789" end="33801" title="North Hobart Football Club" label="North Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569923" start="33839" end="33863" title="Southern Football League (Tasmania)" label="Southern Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q50783" start="33883" end="33909" title="Australian Football League" label="Australian Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q118899390" start="34019" end="34032" title="Tasmania Football Club" label="19th AFL team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140630" start="34297" end="34318" title="National Rugby League" label="National Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q855988" start="34328" end="34339" title="Super Rugby" label="Super Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249565" start="34355" end="34371" title="ANZ Championship" label="ANZ Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q219586" start="34386" end="34394" title="A-League" label="A-League"/>
<link wikidata="Q104860401" start="34431" end="34451" title="Tasmania JackJumpers" label="Tasmania JackJumpers"/>
<link wikidata="Q427823" start="34464" end="34490" title="National Basketball League (Australia)" label="National Basketball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q24090112" start="34504" end="34519" title="Hobart Chargers" label="Hobart Chargers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567100" start="34561" end="34600" title="South East Australian Basketball League" label="South East Australian Basketball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890261" start="34686" end="34713" title="Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race" label="Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687670" start="34807" end="34829" title="Hobart Summer Festival" label="Hobart Summer Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q24090093" start="34919" end="34932" title="Tassie Tigers" label="Tassie Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q63192887" start="34991" end="35001" title="Hockey One" label="Hockey One"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824251" start="35022" end="35046" title="Australian Hockey League" label="Australian Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q113841177" start="35092" end="35115" title="Tasmanian Hockey Centre" label="Tasmanian Hockey Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q100989224" start="35186" end="35211" title="Men&amp;#x27;s FIH Pro League" label="Men&amp;#x27;s FIH Pro League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445012" start="35248" end="35278" title="FIBA Oceania Championship 1975" label="FIBA Oceania Championship 1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q782856" start="35290" end="35325" title="Australian national basketball team" label="Australian national basketball team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650427" start="35414" end="35426" title="ABC Tasmania" label="ABC Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650427" start="35428" end="35431" title="ABT (TV station)" label="ABT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075994" start="35449" end="35452" title="Special Broadcasting Service" label="SBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569847" start="35456" end="35476" title="Southern Cross Seven" label="Southern Cross Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7670914" start="35487" end="35490" title="TNT (Australian TV station)" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q908659" start="35494" end="35507" title="Seven Network" label="Seven Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564691" start="35520" end="35524" title="WIN Television" label="Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672251" start="35535" end="35538" title="TVT (TV station)" label="TVT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432195" start="35542" end="35554" title="Nine Network" label="Nine Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669881" start="35567" end="35595" title="Tasmanian Digital Television" label="Tasmanian Digital Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669881" start="35597" end="35600" title="TDT (TV station)" label="TDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q767920" start="35604" end="35614" title="Network 10" label="Network 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q848981" start="35735" end="35746" title="free-to-air" label="free-to-air"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650427" start="35771" end="35774" title="ABT (TV station)" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3600480" start="35777" end="35783" title="ABC HD (Australia)" label="ABC HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="35802" end="35804" title="High-definition television" label="HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650041" start="35808" end="35824" title="ABC TV Plus" label="ABC TV Plus/KIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650042" start="35827" end="35833" title="ABC ME" label="ABC ME"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650197" start="35836" end="35844" title="ABC News (Australia)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668212" start="35847" end="35850" title="SBS (Australian TV channel)" label="SBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668212" start="35853" end="35859" title="SBS HD" label="SBS HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="35878" end="35880" title="High-definition television" label="HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389006" start="35884" end="35896" title="SBS Viceland" label="SBS Viceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389006" start="35899" end="35914" title="SBS Viceland HD" label="SBS Viceland HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="35942" end="35944" title="High-definition television" label="HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079626" start="35948" end="35960" title="Food Network (Australia)" label="Food Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314912" start="35963" end="35967" title="National Indigenous Television" label="NITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7670914" start="35970" end="35980" title="TNT (Australian TV station)" label="7 Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q908659" start="36009" end="36012" title="7HD" label="7HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643793" start="36039" end="36043" title="7two" label="7two"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643923" start="36046" end="36051" title="7mate" label="7mate"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079629" start="36054" end="36064" title="Racing.com" label="Racing.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672251" start="36067" end="36071" title="TVT (TV station)" label="Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432195" start="36100" end="36103" title="9HD" label="9HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513159" start="36129" end="36133" title="9Gem" label="9Gem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574515" start="36136" end="36140" title="9Go!" label="9Go!"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079623" start="36143" end="36148" title="9Life" label="9Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672232" start="36151" end="36155" title="TVSN" label="TVSN"/>
<link wikidata="Q17005443" start="36158" end="36162" title="Gold (Australian TV channel)" label="Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092490" start="36165" end="36180" title="Sky News Australia" label="Sky News on WIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669881" start="36183" end="36185" title="TDT (TV station)" label="10"/>
<link wikidata="Q767920" start="36214" end="36219" title="10 HD" label="10 HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092404" start="36244" end="36251" title="10 Bold" label="10 Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359746" start="36254" end="36262" title="10 Peach" label="10 Peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q97453050" start="36265" end="36273" title="10 Shake" label="10 Shake"/>
<link wikidata="Q721830" start="36290" end="36304" title="pay television" label="pay television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976628" start="36330" end="36336" title="Foxtel" label="Foxtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691874" start="36490" end="36505" title="Triple M Hobart" label="Triple M Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439886" start="36507" end="36522" title="HIT 100.9" label="hit100.9 Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643780" start="36527" end="36533" title="7HO FM" label="7HO FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q65064255" start="36598" end="36610" title="Ultra106five" label="Ultra106five"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337677" start="36612" end="36622" title="Edge Radio" label="Edge Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006777" start="36627" end="36636" title="Hobart FM" label="Hobart FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645884" start="36777" end="36791" title="936 ABC Hobart" label="936 ABC Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280922" start="36793" end="36807" title="Radio National" label="Radio National"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522899" start="36809" end="36817" title="Triple J" label="Triple J"/>
<link wikidata="Q427583" start="36819" end="36828" title="NewsRadio" label="NewsRadio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818999" start="36833" end="36847" title="ABC Classic FM" label="ABC Classic FM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36899" end="36907" title="Biteable" label="Biteable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521843" start="36949" end="36960" title="The Mercury (Hobart)" label="The Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6228761" start="36989" end="37000" title="John Davies (publisher)" label="John Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q53944" start="37091" end="37105" title="Rupert Murdoch" label="Rupert Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339152" start="37113" end="37125" title="News Limited" label="News Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641516" start="37127" end="37141" title="Pulse Tasmania" label="Pulse Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153191" start="37236" end="37261" title="Online newspaper" label="news media on its website"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621560" start="37354" end="37368" title="City of Hobart" label="City of Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916255" start="37785" end="37799" title="housing stress" label="housing stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="38175" end="38197" title="Indigenous Australians" label="Indigenous Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="38199" end="38221" title="Aboriginal Australians" label="Aboriginal Australians"/>
<link wikidata="Q379636" start="38226" end="38249" title="Torres Strait Islanders" label="Torres Strait Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="38439" end="38446" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="38455" end="38469" title="Mainland China" label="Mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="38478" end="38483" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="38492" end="38497" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="38509" end="38520" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q44679" start="38600" end="38607" title="Australian English" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="38671" end="38679" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33823" start="38688" end="38694" title="Nepali language" label="Nepali"/>
<link wikidata="Q58635" start="38703" end="38710" title="Punjabi language" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="38719" end="38728" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="38740" end="38750" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q58721" start="38842" end="38853" title="Irreligion" label="no religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="39174" end="39221" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531147" start="39245" end="39254" title="Glenorchy, Tasmania" label="Glenorchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369093" start="39256" end="39261" title="Rosny, Tasmania" label="Rosny"/>
<link wikidata="Q679881" start="39267" end="39276" title="Huonville, Tasmania" label="Glen Huon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874758" start="39294" end="39303" title="Hobart Synagogue" label="synagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="39357" end="39363" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145348" start="39443" end="39458" title="Hillsong Church" label="Hillsong Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621560" start="40285" end="40299" title="City of Hobart" label="City of Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435919" start="40346" end="40360" title="Glenorchy City" label="Glenorchy City"/>
<link wikidata="Q20861538" start="40396" end="40417" title="Elizabeth Street Mall" label="Elizabeth Street Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927297" start="40536" end="40552" title="Liverpool Street, Hobart" label="Liverpool Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221438" start="40591" end="40605" title="Sandy Bay Road" label="Sandy Bay Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935638" start="40607" end="40615" title="New Town, Tasmania" label="New Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q6907636" start="40623" end="40629" title="Moonah, Tasmania" label="Moonah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059467" start="40659" end="40684" title="Northgate Shopping Centre" label="Northgate Shopping Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439907" start="40710" end="40719" title="Claremont, Tasmania" label="Claremont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330741" start="40727" end="40752" title="Eastlands Shopping Centre" label="Eastlands Shopping Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q124370" start="40794" end="40805" title="Lindisfarne, Tasmania" label="Lindisfarne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359975" start="40842" end="40852" title="Rokeby, Tasmania" label="Glebe Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028267" start="40878" end="40887" title="Cambridge, Tasmania" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603077" start="40921" end="40932" title="Green Point, Tasmania" label="Green Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982848" start="40989" end="41000" title="New Norfolk" label="New Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072387" start="41006" end="41035" title="Channel Court Shopping Centre" label="Channel Court Shopping Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015935" start="41641" end="41656" title="Salamanca Place" label="Salamanca Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353030" start="41666" end="41691" title="Museum of Old and New Art" label="Museum of Old and New Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q190403" start="41846" end="41855" title="catamaran" label="catamaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q913741" start="41864" end="41869" title="Incat" label="Incat"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="41871" end="41875" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q105963044" start="41885" end="41899" title="Nyrstar Hobart" label="Nyrstar Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048113" start="41901" end="41916" title="Cascade Brewery" label="Cascade Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016254" start="41921" end="41953" title="Cadbury&amp;#x27;s Chocolate Factory, Tasmania" label="Cadbury&amp;#x27;s Chocolate Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q120549388" start="41955" end="41972" title="Norske Skog Boyer" label="Norske Skog Boyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037767" start="41977" end="41995" title="Wrest Point Casino" label="Wrest Point Casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q25480" start="42413" end="42441" title="D&amp;#x27;Entrecasteaux Channel" label="D&amp;#x27;Entrecasteaux Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908403" start="42453" end="42468" title="Moorilla Estate" label="Moorilla Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894694" start="42472" end="42482" title="Berriedale, Tasmania" label="Berriedale"/>
<link wikidata="Q111235034" start="42570" end="42592" title="Antarctic Gateway Cities" label="Antarctic gateway city"/>
<link wikidata="Q15498" start="42760" end="42774" title="Hobart Airport" label="Hobart Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047169" start="42826" end="42839" title="Casey Station" label="Casey Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q42891707" start="42895" end="42913" title="RSV Nuyina" label="&amp;quot;Nuyina&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670074" start="42936" end="42964" title="L&amp;#x27;Astrolabe (2016 icebreaker)" label="&amp;quot;L&amp;#x27;Astrolabe&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687503" start="43349" end="43372" title="Tasmanian polar network" label="Tasmanian polar network"/>
<link wikidata="Q781331" start="43595" end="43624" title="Australian Antarctic Division" label="Australian Antarctic Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352119" start="43627" end="43695" title="Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources" label="Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q331541" start="43707" end="43763" title="Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels" label="Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels"/>
<link wikidata="Q962011" start="43777" end="43799" title="University of Tasmania" label="University of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039487" start="43874" end="43916" title="Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies" label="Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220502" start="44177" end="44214" title="CSIRO Marine and Atmospheric Research" label="CSIRO Marine and Atmospheric Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q8692" start="44712" end="44718" title="Bilbao" label="Bilbao"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953121" start="44869" end="44878" title="MONA FOMA" label="MONA FOMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q98099381" start="44928" end="44937" title="Dark Mofo" label="Dark Mofo"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="45177" end="45194" title="Covid-19 Pandemic" label="Covid-19 Pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171140" start="45742" end="45775" title="Royal Tasmanian Botanical Gardens" label="Royal Tasmanian Botanical Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687474" start="45882" end="45914" title="Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery" label="Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765823" start="45919" end="45943" title="Maritime Museum of Tasmania" label="Maritime Museum Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q204552" start="45949" end="45975" title="Mount Wellington (Tasmania)" label="kunanyi / Mount Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407391" start="46284" end="46292" title="Richmond, Tasmania" label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q986573" start="46343" end="46351" title="Oatlands, Tasmania" label="Oatlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q21923426" start="46353" end="46369" title="Seven Mile Beach, Tasmania" label="Seven Mile Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417350" start="46374" end="46402" title="Turrakana / Tasman Peninsula" label="Turrakana / Tasman Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874516" start="46408" end="46419" title="Huon Valley" label="Huon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905973" start="46443" end="46468" title="Mount Field National Park" label="Mount Field National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q124655642" start="46477" end="46491" title="Derwent Valley, Tasmania" label="Derwent Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621560" start="46646" end="46660" title="City of Hobart" label="City of Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435919" start="46662" end="46679" title="City of Glenorchy" label="City of Glenorchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095386" start="46684" end="46700" title="City of Clarence" label="City of Clarence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742110" start="46748" end="46775" title="Municipality of Kingborough" label="Municipality of Kingborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q740644" start="46781" end="46805" title="Brighton Council (Tasmania)" label="Municipality of Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848526" start="46811" end="46833" title="Sorell Council" label="Municipality of Sorell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200416" start="46842" end="46872" title="Derwent Valley Council" label="Municipality of Derwent Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q19879818" start="47095" end="47103" title="TasWater" label="TasWater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365524" start="47239" end="47261" title="Parliament of Tasmania" label="Parliament of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138912" start="47274" end="47290" title="Parliament House, Hobart" label="Parliament House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779581" start="47359" end="47379" title="Governor of Tasmania" label="Governor of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540450" start="47381" end="47397" title="Government House, Hobart" label="Government House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644985" start="47426" end="47451" title="Supreme Court of Tasmania" label="Supreme Court of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335853" start="47623" end="47644" title="Risdon Prison Complex" label="Risdon Prison Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779813" start="47665" end="47700" title="Mary Hutchinson Women&amp;#x27;s Prison" label="Mary Hutchinson Women&amp;#x27;s Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874749" start="47742" end="47765" title="Hobart Reception Centre" label="Hobart Reception Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780114" start="47876" end="47898" title="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land" label="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983223" start="47901" end="47918" title="Buckingham Land District" label="Buckingham County"/>
<link wikidata="Q382100" start="47989" end="48003" title="Port Dalrymple" label="Port Dalrymple"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348382" start="48079" end="48104" title="Colony of New South Wales" label="Colony of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630010" start="48382" end="48415" title="Australian Constitutions Act 1850" label="Australian Constitutions Act 1850"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="48452" end="48473" title="public transportation" label="public transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824728" start="48520" end="48534" title="Metro Tasmania" label="Metro Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874670" start="48620" end="48643" title="Hobart City Interchange" label="Hobart City Interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q18890224" start="48835" end="48853" title="Brooke Street Pier" label="Brooke Street Pier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537617" start="48881" end="48887" title="SkyBus (airport bus)" label="SkyBus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801551" start="48917" end="48935" title="Tassielink Transit" label="Tassielink Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306064" start="48940" end="48955" title="Redline Coaches" label="Redline Coaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q85774435" start="48961" end="48968" title="Kinetic Group" label="KINETIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878855" start="49276" end="49279" title="Bus rapid transit" label="BRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q928943" start="49405" end="49420" title="Brooker Highway" label="Brooker Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531147" start="49424" end="49433" title="Glenorchy, Tasmania" label="Glenorchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302289" start="49464" end="49477" title="Tasman Bridge" label="Tasman Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q895406" start="49482" end="49494" title="Bowen Bridge" label="Bowen Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369093" start="49515" end="49520" title="Rosny, Tasmania" label="Rosny"/>
<link wikidata="Q980916" start="49711" end="49726" title="Southern Outlet, Hobart" label="Southern Outlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q942696" start="49736" end="49744" title="Kingston, Tasmania" label="Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q25480" start="49753" end="49781" title="D&amp;#x27;Entrecasteaux Channel" label="D&amp;#x27;Entrecasteaux Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878658" start="49826" end="49839" title="Lyell Highway" label="Lyell Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984754" start="49847" end="49857" title="West Coast, Tasmania" label="west coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931978" start="49859" end="49874" title="Midland Highway (Tasmania)" label="Midland Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q339527" start="49878" end="49888" title="Launceston, Tasmania" label="Launceston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063350" start="49904" end="49918" title="Tasman Highway" label="Tasman Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638316" start="49945" end="49957" title="Huon Highway" label="Huon Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874660" start="50054" end="50074" title="Hobart Area Transportation Study" label="transportation study"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570559" start="50640" end="50677" title="Southern Transport Investment Program" label="Southern Transport Investment Program"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50752" end="50774" title="Bridgewater Bridge (Tasmania)#Replacement bridge" label="New Bridgewater Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q18890224" start="50983" end="51001" title="Brooke Street Pier" label="Brooke Street Pier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874777" start="51102" end="51120" title="Hobart City Centre" label="Hobart City Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q815911" start="51125" end="51134" title="Bellerive, Tasmania" label="Bellerive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302289" start="51275" end="51288" title="Tasman Bridge" label="Tasman Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111645" start="51289" end="51300" title="Traffic bottleneck" label="choke point"/>
<link wikidata="Q244156" start="51335" end="51345" title="traffic congestion" label="congestion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11658044" start="51404" end="51421" title="Intermodal passenger transport" label="transport options"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51503" end="51524" title="Induced demand#In transportation systems" label="inducing more traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263329" start="51605" end="51621" title="MyState Bank Arena" label="Wilkinsons Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413464" start="51653" end="51667" title="Kingston Beach, Tasmania" label="Kingston Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353030" start="51794" end="51819" title="Museum of Old and New Art" label="Museum of Old and New Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302289" start="52287" end="52300" title="Tasman Bridge" label="Tasman Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q106076861" start="52302" end="52309" title="Kosciusko (ferry)" label="ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687390" start="52360" end="52382" title="Tasman Bridge disaster" label="Tasman Bridge disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6719363" start="52389" end="52399" title="MV Cartela" label="MV Cartela"/>
<link wikidata="Q15498" start="52495" end="52509" title="Hobart Airport" label="Hobart Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q15501" start="52682" end="52701" title="Cambridge Aerodrome" label="Cambridge Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="53906" end="53916" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915375" start="53984" end="54005" title="2013 Australian federal election" label="2013 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687476" start="54085" end="54093" title="TasPorts" label="TasPorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797622" start="54124" end="54138" title="Sullivans Cove" label="Sullivans Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q111235034" start="54177" end="54186" title="Antarctic gateway cities" label="Antarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926690" start="54309" end="54317" title="Victoria Dock (Hobart)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164095" start="54322" end="54339" title="Constitution Dock" label="Constitution Dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890261" start="54367" end="54383" title="Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race" label="Sydney to Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927487" start="54642" end="54660" title="Tasmanian Steamers" label="Tasmanian Steamers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824468" start="54669" end="54693" title="Australian National Line" label="Australian National Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687072" start="54808" end="54815" title="TasRail" label="TasRail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967737" start="54835" end="54857" title="Brighton Transport Hub" label="Brighton Transport Hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567827" start="54880" end="54889" title="Main Line, Tasmania" label="main line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426910" start="54943" end="54954" title="Bridgewater, Tasmania" label="Bridgewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q120549388" start="54987" end="54997" title="Boyer Mill" label="Boyer Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982848" start="55003" end="55014" title="New Norfolk" label="New Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263355" start="55046" end="55068" title="Derwent Valley Railway (Tasmania)" label="Derwent Valley railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639" start="55325" end="55335" title="trolleybus" label="trolleybus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687456" start="55434" end="55463" title="Tasmanian Government Railways" label="Tasmanian Government Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395066" start="55527" end="55541" title="Tasman Limited" label="Tasman Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687490" start="55571" end="55597" title="Tasmanian Transport Museum" label="Tasmanian Transport Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531147" start="55601" end="55610" title="Glenorchy, Tasmania" label="Glenorchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="55754" end="55764" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567827" start="55853" end="55886" title="South Line, Tasmania" label="Northern Suburbs Transit Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878855" start="56043" end="56046" title="Bus rapid transit" label="bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7059005" start="56192" end="56210" title="Riverline (Hobart)" label="Riverline proposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16991492" start="56359" end="56389" title="2014 Australian federal budget" label="2014 Australian federal budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260266" start="56820" end="56871" title="Department for Education, Children and Young People" label="Department for Education, Children and Young People"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458744" start="56914" end="56932" title="Libraries Tasmania" label="Libraries Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603407" start="57014" end="57039" title="State Library of Tasmania" label="State Library of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q962011" start="57109" end="57131" title="University of Tasmania" label="University of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396028" start="57135" end="57155" title="sandstone university" label="sandstone university"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417154" start="57167" end="57176" title="Sandy Bay, Tasmania" label="Sandy Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108842" start="57217" end="57231" title="Christ College (University of Tasmania)" label="Christ College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152232" start="57307" end="57325" title="Jane Franklin Hall" label="Jane Franklin Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588903" start="57330" end="57352" title="St. John Fisher College (University of Tasmania)" label="St John Fisher College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874777" start="57390" end="57408" title="Hobart City Centre" label="Hobart City Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753329" start="57429" end="57453" title="College of Health and Medicine (University of Tasmania)" label="Medical Science Precinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880169" start="57459" end="57493" title="College of Arts, Law and Education (University of Tasmania)" label="College of Arts, Law and Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039487" start="57576" end="57618" title="Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies" label="Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220502" start="57637" end="57662" title="CSIRO Oceans and Atmosphere" label="CSIRO Marine Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348359" start="57760" end="57784" title="Canopus Hill Observatory" label="Canopus Hill Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6923352" start="57788" end="57800" title="Mount Rumney, Tasmania" label="Mount Rumney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819126" start="57809" end="57841" title="Mount Pleasant Radio Observatory" label="Mount Pleasant Radio Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028267" start="57845" end="57854" title="Cambridge, Tasmania" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7669252" start="57857" end="57864" title="TasTAFE" label="TasTAFE"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220023" start="58009" end="58024" title="Campbell Street, Hobart" label="Campbell Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095386" start="58049" end="58057" title="Clarence City" label="Clarence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969935" start="58068" end="58075" title="Warrane, Tasmania" label="Warrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126304" start="58094" end="58111" title="Claremont College (Tasmania)" label="Claremont College"/>
<link wikidata="Q24997554" start="58119" end="58133" title="Collins Street, Hobart" label="Collins Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171042" start="58155" end="58176" title="Royal Hobart Hospital" label="Royal Hobart Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257872" start="58202" end="58217" title="public hospital" label="public hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813474" start="58368" end="58385" title="teaching hospital" label="teaching hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753329" start="58394" end="58416" title="College of Health and Medicine (University of Tasmania)" label="University of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687434" start="58435" end="58453" title="Ambulance Tasmania" label="ambulance stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603194" start="58484" end="58487" title="State Emergency Service" label="SES"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220017" start="58525" end="58540" title="Bathurst Street, Hobart" label="Bathurst Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687412" start="58557" end="58578" title="Tasmania Fire Service" label="Tasmania Fire Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q24997961" start="58594" end="58609" title="Argyle Street, Hobart" label="Melville/Argyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313240" start="58614" end="58629" title="Tasmania Police" label="Tasmania Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927297" start="58646" end="58655" title="Liverpool Street, Hobart" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874737" start="58679" end="58702" title="Hobart Private Hospital" label="Hobart Private Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691366" start="58781" end="58792" title="Healthscope" label="Healthscope"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58851" end="58883" title="St Helen&amp;#x27;s Private Hospital" label="St Helen&amp;#x27;s Private Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950814" start="59013" end="59021" title="WIN News" label="WIN News"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024195" start="59056" end="59072" title="Calvary Hospital, Hobart" label="Calvary Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q27151327" start="59088" end="59122" title="Little Company of Mary Health Care (Australia)" label="Little Company of Mary Health Care"/>
<link wikidata="Q6522224" start="59189" end="59201" title="Lenah Valley, Tasmania" label="Lenah Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567497" start="59232" end="59244" title="South Hobart, Tasmania" label="South Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359975" start="59437" end="59443" title="Rokeby, Tasmania" label="Rokeby"/>
<link wikidata="Q19879818" start="59574" end="59582" title="TasWater" label="TasWater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228539" start="59714" end="59728" title="Hobart Rivulet" label="Hobart Rivulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q204552" start="59820" end="59843" title="kunanyi" label="kunanyi / Mt Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417154" start="59935" end="59944" title="Sandy Bay, Tasmania" label="Sandy Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q21937469" start="59958" end="59968" title="Tolosa Park" label="Tolosa dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531147" start="60014" end="60023" title="Glenorchy, Tasmania" label="Glenorchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457017" start="60033" end="60048" title="Flagstaff Gully, Tasmania" label="Flagstaff Gully"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335855" start="60057" end="60069" title="Risdon Vale, Tasmania" label="Risdon Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982848" start="60111" end="60122" title="New Norfolk" label="New Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60144" end="60152" title="Clarence City#Utilities" label="Clarence"/>
<link wikidata="Q18166493" start="60155" end="60166" title="TasNetworks" label="TasNetworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q27922414" start="60257" end="60269" title="Alanna Smith" label="Alanna Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593221" start="60271" end="60275" title="Women&amp;#x27;s National Basketball Association" label="WNBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474850" start="60298" end="60312" title="Minnesota Lynx" label="Minnesota Lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q125498790" start="60315" end="60328" title="Nyadiew Puoch" label="Nyadiew Puoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q756160" start="60351" end="60364" title="Atlanta Dream" label="Atlanta Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q93188" start="60367" end="60378" title="Errol Flynn" label="Errol Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308436" start="60415" end="60426" title="Regina Bird" label="Regina Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351904" start="60479" end="60500" title="Big Brother Australia" label="Big Brother Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18702226" start="60532" end="60572" title="I&amp;#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here! (Australian TV series)" label="I&amp;#x27;m A Celebrity, Get Me Out Of Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q208615" start="60575" end="60596" title="Queen Mary of Denmark" label="Queen Mary of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q696783" start="60627" end="60632" title="Yaizu, Shizuoka" label="Yaizu"/>
<link wikidata="Q131320" start="60634" end="60653" title="Shizuoka Prefecture" label="Shizuoka Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476" start="60670" end="60683" title="L&amp;#x27;Aquila" label="L&amp;#x27;Aquila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284" start="60685" end="60692" title="Abruzzo" label="Abruzzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q160687" start="60709" end="60717" title="Valdivia" label="Valdivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177" start="60719" end="60727" title="Los Ríos Region" label="Los Ríos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5826" start="60744" end="60754" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="60756" end="60763" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q68481" start="60780" end="60786" title="Fuzhou" label="Fuzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="60788" end="60794" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q52530" start="60811" end="60817" title="Barile" label="Barile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452" start="60819" end="60829" title="Basilicata" label="Basilicata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874777" start="60861" end="60879" title="Hobart City Centre" label="Hobart City Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q55602307" start="60882" end="60900" title="2018 Hobart floods" label="2018 Hobart floods"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13700" wikidata="Q44233" url="?curid=13700" title="Hesiod">
<text>Hesiod ( or ; &quot;Hēsíodos&quot;; ) was an ancient Greek poet generally thought to have been active between 750 and 650 BC, around the same time as Homer.

Several of Hesiod&#x27;s works have survived in their entirety. Among these are &quot;Theogony&quot;, which tells the origins of the gods, their lineages, and the events that led to Zeus&#x27;s rise to power, and &quot;Works and Days&quot;, a poem that describes the five Ages of Man, offers advice and wisdom, and includes myths such as Pandora&#x27;s box.

Hesiod is generally regarded by Western authors as &#x27;the first written poet in the Western tradition to regard himself as an individual persona with an active role to play in his subject.&#x27; Ancient authors credited Hesiod and Homer with establishing Greek religious customs. Modern scholars refer to him as a major source on Greek mythology, farming techniques, early economic thought, Archaic Greek astronomy, cosmology, and ancient time-keeping.

==Life==
The dating of Hesiod&#x27;s life is a contested issue in scholarly circles (&quot;see § Dating below&quot;). Epic narrative allowed poets such as Homer no opportunity for personal revelations. However Hesiod&#x27;s extant work comprises several didactic poems in which he went out of his way to let his audience in on a few details of his life. There are three explicit references in &quot;Works and Days&quot;, as well as some passages in his &quot;Theogony&quot;, that support inferences made by scholars. The former poem says that his father came from Cyme in Aeolis (on the coast of Anatolia, a little south of the island of Lesbos) and crossed the sea to settle at a hamlet near Thespiae in Boeotia named Ascra, &quot;a cursed place, cruel in winter, hard in summer, never pleasant&quot; (&quot;Works&quot; 640). Hesiod&#x27;s patrimony in Ascra, a small piece of ground at the foot of Mount Helicon, occasioned lawsuits with his brother Perses, who at first seems to have cheated him of his rightful share thanks to corrupt authorities or ‘kings’ but later became impoverished and ended up scrounging from the thrifty poet (&quot;Works&quot; 35, 396).

Unlike his father Hesiod was averse to sea travel, but he once crossed the narrow strait between the Greek mainland and Euboea to participate in funeral celebrations for one Amphidamas of Chalcis and there won a tripod in a singing competition. He also describes meeting the Muses on Mount Helicon, where he had been pasturing sheep, when the goddesses presented him with a laurel staff, a symbol of poetic authority (&quot;Theogony&quot; 22–35). Fanciful though the story might seem, the account has led ancient and modern scholars to infer that he was not a professionally trained rhapsode or he would have been presented with a lyre instead.

Some scholars have seen Perses as a literary creation, a foil for the moralizing that Hesiod develops in &quot;Works and Days&quot;, but there are also arguments against that theory. For example, it is quite common for works of moral instruction to have an imaginative setting as a means of getting the audience&#x27;s attention, but it could be difficult to see how Hesiod could have traveled around the countryside entertaining people with a narrative about himself if the account was known to be fictitious. Gregory Nagy, on the other hand, sees both &quot;Pérsēs&quot; (&quot;the destroyer&quot; from , &quot;pérthō&quot;) and &quot;Hēsíodos&quot; (&quot;he who emits the voice&quot; from , &quot;híēmi&quot; and , &quot;audḗ&quot;) as fictitious names for poetical personae.

It might seem unusual that Hesiod&#x27;s father migrated from Anatolia westwards to mainland Greece, the opposite direction to most colonial movements at the time, and Hesiod himself gives no explanation for it. However, around 750 BC or a little later, there was a migration of seagoing merchants from his original home in Cyme in Anatolia to Cumae in Campania (a colony they shared with the Euboeans), and possibly his move west had something to do with that, since Euboea is not far from Boeotia, where he eventually established himself and his family. The family association with Aeolian Cyme might explain his familiarity with Eastern myths, evident in his poems, though the Greek world might have already developed its own versions of them.

In spite of Hesiod&#x27;s complaints about poverty, life on his father&#x27;s farm could not have been too uncomfortable if &quot;Works and Days&quot; is anything to judge by, since he describes the routines of prosperous yeomanry rather than peasants. His farmer employs a friend (&quot;Works and Days&quot; 370) as well as servants (502, 573, 597, 608, 766), an energetic and responsible ploughman of mature years (469 ff.), a slave boy to cover the seed (441–6), a female servant to keep house (405, 602) and working teams of oxen and mules (405, 607f.). One modern scholar surmises that Hesiod may have learned about world geography, especially the catalogue of rivers in &quot;Theogony&quot; (337–45), listening to his father&#x27;s accounts of his own sea voyages as a merchant. The father probably spoke in the Aeolian dialect of Cyme but Hesiod probably grew up speaking the local Boeotian, belonging to the same dialect group. However whilst his poetry features some Aeolisms there are no words that are certainly Boeotian. His basic language was the main literary dialect of the time, Homer&#x27;s Ionian.

It is probable that Hesiod wrote his poems down, or dictated them, rather than passing them on orally, as rhapsodes did—otherwise: the pronounced personality that now emerges from the poems would surely have been diluted through oral transmission from one rhapsode to another. Pausanias asserted that Boeotians showed him an old tablet made of lead on which the &quot;Works&quot; were engraved. If he did write or dictate, it was perhaps as an aid to memory or because he lacked confidence in his ability to produce poems extempore, as trained rhapsodes could do. It certainly was not in a quest for immortal fame since poets in his era had probably no such notions for themselves. However some scholars suspect the presence of large-scale changes in the text and attribute it to oral transmission. Possibly he composed his verses during idle times on the farm, in the spring before the May harvest or the dead of winter.

The personality behind the poems is unsuited to the kind of &quot;aristocratic withdrawal&quot; typical of a rhapsode but is instead &quot;argumentative, suspicious, ironically humorous, frugal, fond of proverbs, wary of women.&quot; He was in fact a &quot;misogynist&quot; of the same calibre as the later poet Semonides. He resembles Solon in his preoccupation with issues of good versus evil and &quot;how a just and all-powerful god can allow the unjust to flourish in this life&quot;. He recalls Aristophanes in his rejection of the idealised hero of epic literature in favour of an idealized view of the farmer. Yet the fact that he could eulogize kings in &quot;Theogony&quot; (80 ff., 430, 434) and denounce them as corrupt in &quot;Works and Days&quot; suggests that he could resemble whichever audience he composed for.

Various legends accumulated about Hesiod and they are recorded in several sources: 
*the story about the &quot;Contest of Homer and Hesiod&quot;;
*a &quot;vita&quot; of Hesiod by the Byzantine grammarian John Tzetzes;
*the entry for Hesiod in the &quot;Suda&quot;;
*two passages and some scattered remarks in Pausanias (IX, 31.3–6 and 38.3 f.);
*a passage in Plutarch &quot;Moralia&quot; (162b).

===Death===

Two different—yet early—traditions record the site of Hesiod&#x27;s grave. One, as early as Thucydides, reported in Plutarch, the &quot;Suda&quot; and John Tzetzes, states that the Delphic oracle warned Hesiod that he would die in Nemea, and so he fled to Locris, where he was killed at the local temple to Nemean Zeus, and buried there. This tradition follows a familiar ironic convention: the oracle predicts accurately after all. The other tradition, first mentioned in an epigram by Chersias of Orchomenus written in the 7th century BC (within a century or so of Hesiod&#x27;s death), claims that Hesiod lies buried at Orchomenus, a town in Boeotia. According to Aristotle&#x27;s &quot;Constitution of Orchomenus,&quot; when the Thespians ravaged Ascra the villagers sought refuge at Orchomenus, where, following the advice of an oracle, they collected the ashes of Hesiod and set them in a place of honour in their &quot;agora&quot;, next to the tomb of Minyas, their eponymous founder. Eventually they came to regard Hesiod too as their &quot;hearth-founder&quot; (, &quot;oikistēs&quot;). Later writers attempted to harmonize these two accounts. Yet another account taken from classical sources, cited by author Charles Abraham Elton in his &quot;Remains of Hesiod the Ascræan, Including the Shield of Hercules by Hesiod&quot;, depicts Hesiod as being falsely accused of rape by a girl&#x27;s brothers and murdered in reprisal despite his advanced age while the true culprit (his Milesian fellow-traveler) managed to escape.

=== Dating ===
Greeks in the late 5th and early 4th centuries BC considered their oldest poets to be Orpheus, Musaeus, Hesiod and Homer—in that order. But thereafter, Greek writers began to consider Homer earlier than Hesiod. Devotees of Orpheus and Musaeus were probably responsible for precedence being given to their two cult heroes and maybe the Homeridae were responsible in later antiquity for promoting Homer at Hesiod&#x27;s expense.

The first known writers to locate Homer earlier than Hesiod were Xenophanes and Heraclides Ponticus, though Aristarchus of Samothrace was the first actually to argue the case. Ephorus made Homer a younger cousin of Hesiod, the 5th century BC historian Herodotus (&quot;Histories&quot; II, 53) evidently considered them near-contemporaries, and the 4th century BC sophist Alcidamas in his work &quot;Mouseion&quot; even brought them together for an imagined poetic &quot;ágōn&quot; (), which survives today as the &quot;Contest of Homer and Hesiod&quot;. Most scholars today agree with Homer&#x27;s priority but there are good arguments on either side.

Hesiod certainly predates the lyric and elegiac poets whose work has come down to the modern era. Imitations of his work have been observed in Alcaeus, Epimenides, Mimnermus, Semonides, Tyrtaeus and Archilochus, from which it has been inferred that the latest possible date for him is about 650 BC.

An upper limit of 750 BC is indicated by a number of considerations, such as the probability that his work was written down, the fact that he mentions a sanctuary at Delphi that was of little national significance before c. 750 BC (&quot;Theogony&quot; 499), and he lists rivers that flow into the Euxine, a region explored and developed by Greek colonists beginning in the 8th century BC. (&quot;Theogony&quot; 337–45).

Hesiod mentions a poetry contest at Chalcis in Euboea where the sons of one Amphidamas awarded him a tripod (&quot;Works and Days&quot; 654–662). Plutarch identified this Amphidamas with the hero of the Lelantine War between Chalcis and Eretria and he concluded that the passage must be an interpolation into Hesiod&#x27;s original work, assuming that the Lelantine War was too late for Hesiod. Modern scholars have accepted his identification of Amphidamas but disagreed with his conclusion. The date of the war is not known precisely but estimates placing it around 730–705 BC fit the estimated chronology for Hesiod. In that case, the tripod that Hesiod won might have been awarded for his rendition of &quot;Theogony&quot;, a poem that seems to presuppose the kind of aristocratic audience he would have met at Chalcis.

==Works==
Three works have survived which were attributed to Hesiod by ancient commentators: &quot;Works and Days&quot;, &quot;Theogony&quot;, and &quot;Shield of Heracles&quot;. Only fragments exist of other works attributed to him. The surviving works and fragments were all written in the conventional metre and language of epic. However, the &quot;Shield of Heracles&quot; is now known to be spurious and probably was written in the sixth century BC. Many ancient critics also rejected &quot;Theogony&quot; (e.g., Pausanias 9.31.3), even though Hesiod mentions himself by name in that poem. &quot;Theogony&quot; and &quot;Works and Days&quot; might be very different in subject matter, but they share a distinctive language, metre, and prosody that subtly distinguish them from Homer&#x27;s work and from the &quot;Shield of Heracles&quot; (see Hesiod&#x27;s Greek below). Moreover, they both refer to the same version of the Prometheus myth. Yet even these authentic poems may include interpolations. For example, the first ten verses of the &quot;Works and Days&quot; may have been borrowed from an Orphic hymn to Zeus (they were recognised as not the work of Hesiod by critics as ancient as Pausanias).
Some scholars have detected a proto-historical perspective in Hesiod, a view rejected by Paul Cartledge, for example, on the grounds that Hesiod advocates a not-forgetting without any attempt at verification. Hesiod has also been considered the father of gnomic verse. He had &quot;a passion for systematizing and explaining things&quot;. Ancient Greek poetry in general had strong philosophical tendencies and Hesiod, like Homer, demonstrates a deep interest in a wide range of &#x27;philosophical&#x27; issues, from the nature of divine justice to the beginnings of human society. Aristotle (&quot;Metaphysics&quot; 983b–987a) believed that the question of first causes may even have started with Hesiod (&quot;Theogony&quot; 116–53) and Homer (&quot;Iliad&quot; 14.201, 246).

He viewed the world from outside the charmed circle of aristocratic rulers, protesting against their injustices in a tone of voice that has been described as having a &quot;grumpy quality redeemed by a gaunt dignity&quot; but, as stated in the biography section, he could also change to suit the audience. This ambivalence appears to underlie his presentation of human history in &quot;Works and Days&quot;, where he depicts a golden period when life was easy and good, followed by a steady decline in behaviour and happiness through the silver, bronze, and Iron Ages – except that he inserts a heroic age between the last two, representing its warlike men as better than their bronze predecessors. He seems in this case to be catering to two different world-views, one epic and aristocratic, the other unsympathetic to the heroic traditions of the aristocracy.

===&quot;Theogony&quot;===

The &quot;Theogony&quot; is commonly considered Hesiod&#x27;s earliest work. Despite the different subject matter between this poem and the &quot;Works and Days&quot;, most scholars, with some notable exceptions, believe that the two works were written by the same man. As M. L. West writes, &quot;Both bear the marks of a distinct personality: a surly, conservative countryman, given to reflection, no lover of women or life, who felt the gods&#x27; presence heavy about him.&quot; An example:

&lt;poem&gt;Hateful strife bore painful Toil,
Neglect, Starvation, and tearful Pain,
Battles, Combats...&lt;/poem&gt;

The &quot;Theogony&quot; concerns the origins of the world (cosmogony) and of the gods (theogony), beginning with Chaos, Gaia, Tartarus and Eros, and shows a special interest in genealogy. Embedded in Greek myth, there remain fragments of quite variant tales, hinting at the rich variety of myth that once existed, city by city; but Hesiod&#x27;s retelling of the old stories became, according to Herodotus, the accepted version that linked all Hellenes. It&#x27;s the earliest known source for the myths of Pandora, Prometheus and the Golden Age.

The creation myth in Hesiod has long been held to have Eastern influences, such as the Hittite Song of Kumarbi and the Babylonian Enuma Elis. This cultural crossover may have occurred in the eighth- and ninth-century Greek trading colonies such as Al Mina in North Syria. (For more discussion, read Robin Lane Fox&#x27;s &quot;Travelling Heroes&quot; and Peter Walcot&#x27;s &quot;Hesiod and the Near East&quot;.)

===&quot;Works and Days&quot;===
&quot;Works and Days&quot; is a poem of over 800 lines which revolves around two general truths: labour is the universal lot of Man, but he who is willing to work will get by. Scholars have interpreted this work against a background of agrarian crisis in mainland Greece, which inspired a wave of documented colonisations in search of new land.

&quot;Works and Days&quot; may have been influenced by an established tradition of didactic poetry based on Sumerian, Hebrew, Babylonian and Egyptian wisdom literature.

This work lays out the five Ages of Man, as well as containing advice and wisdom, prescribing a life of honest labour and attacking idleness and unjust judges (like those who decided in favour of Perses) as well as the practice of usury. It describes immortals who roam the earth watching over justice and injustice. The poem regards labor as the source of all good, in that both gods and men hate the idle, who resemble drones in a hive. In the horror of the triumph of violence over hard work and honor, verses describing the &quot;Golden Age&quot; present the social character and practice of nonviolent diet through agriculture and fruit-culture as a higher path of living sufficiently.

===Hesiodic corpus===
In addition to the &quot;Theogony&quot; and &quot;Works and Days&quot;, numerous other poems were ascribed to Hesiod during antiquity. Modern scholarship has doubted their authenticity, and these works are generally referred to as forming part of the &quot;Hesiodic corpus&quot; whether or not their authorship is accepted. The situation is summed up in this formulation by Glenn Most:

Of these works forming the extended Hesiodic corpus, only the &quot;Shield of Heracles&quot; (, &quot;Aspis Hērakleous&quot;) is transmitted intact via a medieval manuscript tradition.

Classical authors also attributed to Hesiod a lengthy genealogical poem known as &quot;Catalogue of Women&quot; or &quot;Ehoiai&quot; (because sections began with the Greek words &quot;ē hoiē,&quot; &quot;Or like the one who ...&quot;). It was a mythological catalogue of the mortal women who had mated with gods, and of the offspring and descendants of these unions.

Several additional hexameter poems were ascribed to Hesiod:
* &quot;Megalai Ehoiai&quot;, a poem similar to the &quot;Catalogue of Women&quot;, but presumably longer.
* &quot;Wedding of Ceyx&quot;, a poem concerning Heracles&#x27; attendance at the wedding of a certain Ceyx—noted for its riddles.
* &quot;Melampodia&quot;, a genealogical poem that treats of the families of, and myths associated with, the great seers of mythology.
* &quot;Idaean Dactyls&quot;, a work concerning mythological smelters, the Idaean Dactyls.
* &quot;Descent of Perithous&quot;, about Theseus and Perithous&#x27; trip to Hades.
* &quot;Precepts of Chiron&quot;, a didactic work that presented the teaching of Chiron as delivered to the young Achilles.
* &quot;Megala Erga&quot; or &quot;Great Works&quot;, a poem similar to the &quot;Works and Days&quot;, but presumably longer
* &quot;Astronomia&quot;, an astronomical poem to which Callimachus (&quot;Ep&quot;. 27) apparently compared Aratus&#x27; &quot;Phaenomena&quot;.
* &quot;Aegimius&quot;, a heroic epic concerning the Dorian Aegimius (variously attributed to Hesiod or Cercops of Miletus).
* &quot;Kiln&quot; or &quot;Potters&quot;, a brief poem asking Athena to aid potters if they pay the poet. Also attributed to Homer.
* &quot;Ornithomantia&quot;, a work on bird omens that followed the &quot;Works and Days&quot;.

In addition to these works, the &quot;Suda&quot; lists an otherwise unknown &quot;dirge for Batrachus, [Hesiod&#x27;s] beloved&quot;.

==Reception==
*Sappho&#x27;s countryman and contemporary, the lyric poet Alcaeus, paraphrased a section of &quot;Works and Days&quot; (582–88), recasting it in lyric meter and Lesbian dialect. The paraphrase survives only as a fragment.

*The lyric poet Bacchylides quoted or paraphrased Hesiod in a victory ode addressed to Hieron of Syracuse, commemorating the tyrant&#x27;s victory in the chariot race at the Pythian Games 470 BC, the attribution made with these words: &quot;A man of Boeotia, Hesiod, minister of the [sweet] Muses, spoke thus: &#x27;He whom the immortals honour is attended also by the good report of men.&#x27;&quot; However, the quoted words are not found in Hesiod&#x27;s extant work.
*Hesiod&#x27;s &quot;Catalogue of Women&quot; created a vogue for catalogue poems in the Hellenistic period. Thus for example Theocritus presents catalogues of heroines in two of his bucolic poems (3.40–51 and 20.34–41), where both passages are recited in character by lovelorn rustics.

== Depictions ==

=== Monnus mosaic ===

Portrait of Hesiod from Augusta Treverorum (Trier), from the end of the 3rd century AD. The mosaic is signed in its central field by the maker, &#x27;MONNUS FECIT&#x27; (&#x27;Monnus made this&#x27;). The figure is identified by name: &#x27;ESIO-DVS&#x27; (&#x27;Hesiod&#x27;). It is the only known authenticated portrait of Hesiod.

===Portrait bust===
The Roman bronze bust, the so-called &quot;Pseudo-Seneca,&quot; of the late first century BC found at Herculaneum is now thought not to be of Seneca the Younger. It has been identified by Gisela Richter as an imagined portrait of Hesiod. In fact, it has been recognized since 1813 that the bust was not of Seneca when an inscribed herma portrait of Seneca with quite different features was discovered. Most scholars now follow Richter&#x27;s identification.

==Hesiod&#x27;s Greek==
Hesiod employed the conventional dialect of epic verse, which was Ionian. Comparisons with Homer, a native Ionian, can be unflattering. Hesiod&#x27;s handling of the dactylic hexameter was not as masterful or fluent as Homer&#x27;s and one modern scholar refers to his &quot;hobnailed hexameters&quot;. His use of language and meter in &quot;Works and Days&quot; and &quot;Theogony&quot; distinguishes him also from the author of the &quot;Shield of Heracles&quot;. All three poets, for example, employed digamma inconsistently, sometimes allowing it to affect syllable length and meter, sometimes not. The ratio of observance/neglect of digamma varies between them. The extent of variation depends on how the evidence is collected and interpreted but there is a clear trend, revealed for example in the following set of statistics.

Hesiod does not observe digamma as often as the others do. That result is a bit counter-intuitive since digamma was still a feature of the Boeotian dialect that Hesiod probably spoke, whereas it had already vanished from the Ionic vernacular of Homer. This anomaly can be explained by the fact that Hesiod made a conscious effort to compose like an Ionian epic poet at a time when digamma was not heard in Ionian speech, while Homer tried to compose like an older generation of Ionian bards, when it was heard in Ionian speech. There is also a significant difference in the results for &quot;Theogony&quot; and &quot;Works and Days&quot;, but that is merely due to the fact that the former includes a catalog of divinities and therefore it makes frequent use of the definite article associated with digamma, oἱ.

Though typical of epic, his vocabulary features some significant differences from Homer&#x27;s. One scholar has counted 278 un-Homeric words in &quot;Works and Days&quot;, 151 in &quot;Theogony&quot; and 95 in &quot;Shield of Heracles&quot;. The disproportionate number of un-Homeric words in &quot;W &amp; D&quot; is due to its un-Homeric subject matter. Hesiod&#x27;s vocabulary also includes quite a lot of formulaic phrases that are not found in Homer, which indicates that he may have been writing within a different tradition.

==Notes==
==Citations==
==References==
* Allen, T. W. and Arthur A. Rambaut, &quot;The Date of Hesiod&quot;, &quot;The Journal of Hellenic Studies&quot;, 35 (1915), pp. 85–99.
* .
* Barron, J. P. and Easterling, P. E. (1985), &quot;Hesiod&quot;, &quot;The Cambridge History of Classical Literature: Greek Literature&quot;, Cambridge University Press.
* Buckham, Philip Wentworth (1827), &quot;Theatre of the Greeks&quot;.
* .
* Evelyn-White, Hugh G. (1964), &quot;Hesiod, the Homeric Hymns and Homerica&quot; (= Loeb Classical Library, vol. 57), Harvard University Press, pp. xliii–xlvii.
* Lamberton, Robert (1988), &quot;Hesiod&quot;, New Haven: Yale University Press. .
* .
* Murray, Gilbert (1897), &quot;A History of Ancient Greek Literature&quot;, New York: D. Appleton and Company, pp. 53 ff.
* Peabody, Berkley (1975), &quot;The Winged Word: A Study in the Technique of Ancient Greek Oral Composition as Seen Principally Through Hesiod&#x27;s Works and Days&quot;, State University of New York Press. .
* Pucci, Pietro (1977), &quot;Hesiod and the Language of Poetry&quot;, Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University Press. .
* Rohde, Erwin (1925), &quot;Psyche. The cult of the souls and belief in immortality among the Greeks&quot;, London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner &amp; Co.
* Symonds, John Addington (1873), &quot;Studies of the Greek Poets&quot;, London: Smyth, Elder &amp; Co.
* Taylor, Thomas (1891), &quot;A Dissertation on the Eleusinian and Bacchic Mysteries&quot;, New York: J. W. Bouton.

==Further reading==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*Zeitlin, Froma (1996). &#x27;Signifying difference: the case of Hesiod&#x27;s Pandora&#x27;, in Froma Zeitlin, &quot;Playing the Other: Gender and Society in Classical Greek Literature&quot;. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp. 53–86.

=== Selected translations ===
* George Chapman, &quot;The Works of Hesiod&quot;, London, 1618, dedicated to Sir Francis Bacon.
* Cooke, Hesiod, &quot;Works and Days&quot;, Translated from the Greek, London, 1728
* Sinclair, Thomas Alan (translator), &quot;Hesiodou Erga kai hemerai&quot;, London, Macmillan and co., 1932.
* West, Martin Litchfield (translator), &quot;Hesiod Works &amp; Days&quot;, Oxford University Press, 1978, . Edited with Prolegomena and Commentary.
* Athanassakis, Apostolos N., &quot;Theogony; Works and days; Shield / Hesiod; introduction, translation, and notes&quot;, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1983. 
* Frazer, R.M. (Richard McIlwaine), &quot;The Poems of Hesiod&quot;, Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1983. 
* Tandy, David W., and Neale, Walter C. [translators], &quot;Works and Days: a translation and commentary for the social sciences&quot;, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1996. 
* Schlegel, Catherine M., and Henry Weinfield, translators, &quot;Theogony and Works and Days&quot;, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 2006
* .

==External links==

* 
* Hesiod, &quot;Works and Days Book 1&quot; &quot;Works and Days Book 2&quot; &quot;Works and Days Book 3&quot; Translated from the Greek by Mr. Cooke (London, 1728). A youthful exercise in Augustan heroic couplets by Thomas Cooke (1703–1756), employing the Roman names for all the gods.
* Web texts taken from &quot;Hesiod, the Homeric Hymns and Homerica&quot;, edited and translated by Hugh G. Evelyn-White, published as Loeb Classical Library No. 57, 1914, :
**Scanned text at the Internet Archive, in PDF and DjVu format
** Perseus Classics Collection: Greek and Roman Materials: Text: Hesiod (Greek texts and English translations for &quot;Works and Days&quot;, &quot;Theogony&quot;, and &quot;Shield of Heracles&quot; with additional notes and cross links.)
** Versions of the electronic edition of Evelyn-White&#x27;s English translation edited by Douglas B. Killings, June 1995:
*** Project Gutenberg plain text.
*** The Medieval and Classical Literature Library: Hesiod
*** Sacred Texts: Classics: The Works of Hesiod (&quot;Theogony&quot; and &quot;Works and Days&quot; only)
** Hesiod Poems and Fragments including Ps-Hesiod works &quot;Astronomy&quot; and &quot;Catalogue of Women&quot; at demonax.info</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="0" end="6" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="53" end="58" title="Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="59" end="63" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="150" end="155" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q156498" start="244" end="252" title="Theogony" label="Theogony"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="340" end="344" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q667285" start="377" end="391" title="Works and Days" label="Works and Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525748" start="430" end="441" title="Ages of Man" label="Ages of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q937164" start="496" end="514" title="Pandora&amp;#x27;s box" label="Pandora&amp;#x27;s box"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="850" end="865" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="925" end="934" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q125784610" start="936" end="945" title="Early Greek cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="951" end="971" title="History of timekeeping devices#Continuous timekeeping devices" label="ancient time-keeping"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1069" end="1077" title="#Dating" label="§ Dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="1092" end="1106" title="Epic poetry" label="Epic narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="1129" end="1134" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502127" start="1228" end="1241" title="didactic poem" label="didactic poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q667285" start="1373" end="1387" title="Works and Days" label="Works and Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q156498" start="1433" end="1441" title="Theogony" label="Theogony"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1538" end="1542" title="Cyme (Aeolus)" label="Cyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q255325" start="1546" end="1552" title="Aeolis" label="Aeolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="1570" end="1578" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q128087" start="1612" end="1618" title="Lesbos" label="Lesbos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141295" start="1667" end="1675" title="Thespiae" label="Thespiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q8257871" start="1679" end="1686" title="Boeotia" label="Boeotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q936920" start="1693" end="1698" title="Ascra" label="Ascra"/>
<link wikidata="Q215516" start="1874" end="1887" title="Mount Helicon" label="Mount Helicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="1900" end="1908" title="lawsuits" label="lawsuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q667285" start="1926" end="1932" title="Perses (brother of Hesiod)" label="Perses"/>
<link wikidata="Q173096" start="2262" end="2268" title="Euboea" label="Euboea"/>
<link wikidata="Q200133" start="2330" end="2337" title="Chalcis" label="Chalcis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2354" end="2360" title="Sacrificial tripod#Ancient Greece" label="tripod"/>
<link wikidata="Q66016" start="2417" end="2422" title="Muses" label="Muses"/>
<link wikidata="Q215516" start="2426" end="2439" title="Mount Helicon" label="Mount Helicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26006" start="2516" end="2522" title="Laurus nobilis" label="laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q936371" start="2725" end="2733" title="rhapsode" label="rhapsode"/>
<link wikidata="Q201129" start="2773" end="2777" title="lyre" label="lyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634647" start="3299" end="3311" title="Gregory Nagy" label="Gregory Nagy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077857" start="3558" end="3565" title="persona" label="persona"/>
<link wikidata="Q243456" start="3913" end="3918" title="Cumae" label="Cumae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438" start="3922" end="3930" title="Campania" label="Campania"/>
<link wikidata="Q173096" start="4037" end="4043" title="Euboea" label="Euboea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8257871" start="4060" end="4067" title="Boeotia" label="Boeotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q862823" start="4539" end="4545" title="yeoman" label="yeoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q406373" start="5135" end="5150" title="Aeolic Greek" label="Aeolian dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q504165" start="5425" end="5431" title="Ionic Greek" label="Ionian"/>
<link wikidata="Q936371" start="5540" end="5548" title="rhapsode" label="rhapsode"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="5711" end="5720" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q8257871" start="5735" end="5742" title="Boeotia" label="Boeotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="6614" end="6624" title="Misogyny" label="misogynist"/>
<link wikidata="Q381049" start="6669" end="6678" title="Semonides" label="Semonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q133337" start="6693" end="6698" title="Solon" label="Solon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="6858" end="6870" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q918515" start="7299" end="7326" title="Contest of Homer and Hesiod" label="Contest of Homer and Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q36279" start="7343" end="7347" title="Biography" label="vita"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="7371" end="7380" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q530515" start="7392" end="7404" title="John Tzetzes" label="John Tzetzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q216299" start="7441" end="7445" title="Suda" label="Suda"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="7497" end="7506" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="7547" end="7555" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="7690" end="7700" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q220344" start="7779" end="7793" title="Delphic oracle" label="Delphic oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q748108" start="7829" end="7834" title="Nemea" label="Nemea"/>
<link wikidata="Q659791" start="7854" end="7860" title="Locris" label="Locris"/>
<link wikidata="Q131361" start="7970" end="7976" title="Irony" label="ironic"/>
<link wikidata="Q217123" start="7993" end="7999" title="oracle" label="oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193121" start="8074" end="8081" title="epigram" label="epigram"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092559" start="8085" end="8093" title="Chersias" label="Chersias"/>
<link wikidata="Q13574822" start="8097" end="8107" title="Orchomenus (Boeotia)" label="Orchomenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="8265" end="8274" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141295" start="8331" end="8339" title="Thespiae" label="Thespian"/>
<link wikidata="Q187909" start="8524" end="8529" title="agora" label="agora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466343" start="8557" end="8563" title="Minyas (mythology)" label="Minyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074953" start="8817" end="8838" title="Charles Abraham Elton" label="Charles Abraham Elton"/>
<link wikidata="Q169460" start="9085" end="9093" title="Milesians (Greek)" label="Milesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q174353" start="9232" end="9239" title="Orpheus" label="Orpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q728059" start="9241" end="9248" title="Musaeus of Athens" label="Musaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="9261" end="9266" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q738924" start="9481" end="9490" title="Homeridae" label="Homeridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131671" start="9639" end="9649" title="Xenophanes" label="Xenophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q316334" start="9654" end="9673" title="Heraclides Ponticus" label="Heraclides Ponticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q312114" start="9682" end="9707" title="Aristarchus of Samothrace" label="Aristarchus of Samothrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q313791" start="9750" end="9757" title="Ephorus" label="Ephorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="9826" end="9835" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3750514" start="9937" end="9944" title="sophist" label="sophist"/>
<link wikidata="Q444459" start="9945" end="9954" title="Alcidamas" label="Alcidamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q395257" start="10044" end="10048" title="Agon" label="ágōn"/>
<link wikidata="Q918515" start="10093" end="10120" title="Contest of Homer and Hesiod" label="Contest of Homer and Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885775" start="10257" end="10262" title="Greek lyric" label="lyric"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358685" start="10267" end="10274" title="elegiac" label="elegiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q212872" start="10370" end="10377" title="Alcaeus of Mytilene" label="Alcaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q319406" start="10379" end="10389" title="Epimenides" label="Epimenides"/>
<link wikidata="Q316129" start="10391" end="10400" title="Mimnermus" label="Mimnermus"/>
<link wikidata="Q381049" start="10402" end="10411" title="Semonides" label="Semonides"/>
<link wikidata="Q316094" start="10413" end="10421" title="Tyrtaeus" label="Tyrtaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q201323" start="10426" end="10437" title="Archilochus" label="Archilochus"/>
<link wikidata="Q75459" start="10693" end="10699" title="Delphi" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="10825" end="10831" title="Euxine" label="Euxine"/>
<link wikidata="Q200133" start="10985" end="10992" title="Chalcis" label="Chalcis"/>
<link wikidata="Q173096" start="10996" end="11002" title="Euboea" label="Euboea"/>
<link wikidata="Q474819" start="11025" end="11035" title="Amphidamas" label="Amphidamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="11095" end="11103" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q738787" start="11152" end="11165" title="Lelantine War" label="Lelantine War"/>
<link wikidata="Q320367" start="11186" end="11193" title="Eretria" label="Eretria"/>
<link wikidata="Q667285" start="11873" end="11887" title="Works and Days" label="Works and Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q156498" start="11901" end="11909" title="Theogony" label="Theogony"/>
<link wikidata="Q599487" start="11927" end="11945" title="Shield of Heracles" label="Shield of Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254470" start="12066" end="12084" title="Dactylic hexameter" label="conventional metre"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="12292" end="12301" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q10880526" start="12514" end="12521" title="Prosody (linguistics)" label="prosody"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12623" end="12642" title="#Hesiod&amp;#x27;s Greek" label="Hesiod&amp;#x27;s Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q242517" start="12879" end="12885" title="Orphism (religion)" label="Orphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="12894" end="12898" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976948" start="13073" end="13087" title="Paul Cartledge" label="Paul Cartledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393741" start="13239" end="13251" title="gnomic verse" label="gnomic verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q657246" start="13323" end="13343" title="Ancient Greek poetry" label="Ancient Greek poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q661655" start="13584" end="13595" title="Metaphysics (Aristotle)" label="Metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13643" end="13655" title="Unmoved mover#First cause" label="first causes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="13737" end="13742" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q669908" start="14928" end="14938" title="Martin Litchfield West" label="M. L. West"/>
<link wikidata="Q170835" start="15330" end="15339" title="cosmogony" label="cosmogony"/>
<link wikidata="Q156498" start="15358" end="15366" title="theogony" label="theogony"/>
<link wikidata="Q17508277" start="15384" end="15389" title="Chaos (mythology)" label="Chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q93172" start="15391" end="15395" title="Gaia (mythology)" label="Gaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101322" start="15397" end="15405" title="Tartarus" label="Tartarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q121973" start="15410" end="15414" title="Eros (mythology)" label="Eros"/>
<link wikidata="Q47307" start="15448" end="15457" title="genealogy" label="genealogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="15471" end="15481" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="15667" end="15676" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="15715" end="15723" title="Greeks" label="Hellenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131346" start="15778" end="15785" title="Pandora" label="Pandora"/>
<link wikidata="Q83160" start="15787" end="15797" title="Prometheus" label="Prometheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q238526" start="15806" end="15816" title="Golden Age" label="Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="15906" end="15913" title="Hittites" label="Hittite"/>
<link wikidata="Q945508" start="15914" end="15929" title="Song of Kumarbi" label="Song of Kumarbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="15938" end="15945" title="Babylon" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q206063" start="15949" end="15959" title="Enuma Elis" label="Enuma Elis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477524" start="16067" end="16074" title="Al Mina" label="Al Mina"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="16084" end="16089" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225832" start="16118" end="16132" title="Robin Lane Fox" label="Robin Lane Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="16531" end="16537" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q828047" start="16575" end="16587" title="Greek colonies" label="colonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502127" start="16696" end="16704" title="didactic" label="didactic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525748" start="16811" end="16822" title="Ages of Man" label="Ages of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q667285" start="16979" end="16985" title="Perses (brother of Hesiod)" label="Perses"/>
<link wikidata="Q650665" start="17204" end="17210" title="Drone (bee)" label="drones"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="17379" end="17394" title="vegetarianism" label="nonviolent diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q328969" start="17871" end="17881" title="Glenn W. Most" label="Glenn Most"/>
<link wikidata="Q599487" start="17952" end="17970" title="Shield of Heracles" label="Shield of Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233074" start="18157" end="18175" title="Catalogue of Women" label="Catalogue of Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808400" start="18507" end="18521" title="Megalai Ehoiai" label="Megalai Ehoiai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979106" start="18614" end="18629" title="Wedding of Ceyx" label="Wedding of Ceyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811144" start="18745" end="18755" title="Melampodia" label="Melampodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987257" start="18880" end="18894" title="Idaean Dactyls (poem)" label="Idaean Dactyls"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18947" end="18961" title="Dactyl (mythology)#Idaean Dactyls" label="Idaean Dactyls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263744" start="18971" end="18991" title="Descent of Perithous" label="Descent of Perithous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320718" start="19005" end="19012" title="Theseus" label="Theseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q502156" start="19017" end="19026" title="Perithous" label="Perithous"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239409" start="19056" end="19074" title="Precepts of Chiron" label="Precepts of Chiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q183417" start="19129" end="19135" title="Chiron" label="Chiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="19162" end="19170" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808388" start="19180" end="19191" title="Megala Erga" label="Megala Erga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811636" start="19306" end="19316" title="Astronomia (poem)" label="Astronomia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180671" start="19407" end="19413" title="Aratus" label="Aratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4687580" start="19452" end="19460" title="Aegimius (poem)" label="Aegimius"/>
<link wikidata="Q404326" start="19504" end="19512" title="Aegimius" label="Aegimius"/>
<link wikidata="Q404326" start="19548" end="19566" title="Cercops of Miletus" label="Cercops of Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6408073" start="19577" end="19581" title="Kiln (poem)" label="Kiln"/>
<link wikidata="Q17892" start="19949" end="19955" title="Sappho" label="Sappho"/>
<link wikidata="Q212872" start="20007" end="20014" title="Alcaeus of Mytilene" label="Alcaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q310681" start="20188" end="20199" title="Bacchylides" label="Bacchylides"/>
<link wikidata="Q335634" start="20259" end="20277" title="Hieron of Syracuse" label="Hieron of Syracuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q649128" start="20346" end="20359" title="Pythian Games" label="Pythian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q219484" start="20769" end="20779" title="Theocritus" label="Theocritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138" start="21016" end="21021" title="Trier" label="Trier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924860" start="21369" end="21382" title="Pseudo-Seneca" label="Pseudo-Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q178813" start="21428" end="21439" title="Herculaneum" label="Herculaneum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="21468" end="21486" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q97724" start="21514" end="21528" title="Gisela Richter" label="Gisela Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q376693" start="21657" end="21662" title="herma" label="herma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254470" start="21975" end="21993" title="dactylic hexameter" label="dactylic hexameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q129481" start="22314" end="22321" title="digamma" label="digamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797792" start="24048" end="24065" title="Arthur A. Rambaut" label="Arthur A. Rambaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166804" start="24105" end="24136" title="The Journal of Hellenic Studies" label="The Journal of Hellenic Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="24502" end="24524" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319255" start="24581" end="24598" title="Robert D. Lamberton" label="Lamberton, Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q255147" start="24638" end="24659" title="Yale University Press" label="Yale University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q538478" start="24669" end="24684" title="Gilbert Murray" label="Murray, Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3011053" start="24754" end="24777" title="D. Appleton and Company" label="D. Appleton and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q65486" start="25130" end="25142" title="Erwin Rohde" label="Rohde, Erwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q538549" start="25285" end="25308" title="John Addington Symonds" label="Symonds, John Addington"/>
<link wikidata="Q971643" start="25390" end="25404" title="Thomas Taylor (neoplatonist)" label="Taylor, Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q342720" start="25819" end="25833" title="George Chapman" label="George Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q37388" start="25895" end="25912" title="Sir Francis Bacon" label="Sir Francis Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q669908" start="26111" end="26134" title="Martin Litchfield West" label="West, Martin Litchfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="26186" end="26209" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780707" start="26261" end="26287" title="Apostolos Athanassakis" label="Athanassakis, Apostolos N."/>
<link wikidata="Q1645059" start="26393" end="26423" title="Johns Hopkins University Press" label="Johns Hopkins University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896016" start="26509" end="26537" title="University of Oklahoma Press" label="University of Oklahoma Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q27816" start="26693" end="26723" title="University of California Press" label="University of California Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="27310" end="27332" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="27392" end="27395" title="Portable Document Format" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q334677" start="27400" end="27404" title="DjVu" label="DjVu"/>
<link wikidata="Q156498" start="27560" end="27568" title="Theogony" label="Theogony"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13702" wikidata="Q512378" url="?curid=13702" title="Hebrew numerals">
<text>The system of Hebrew numerals is a quasi-decimal alphabetic numeral system using the letters of the Hebrew alphabet.
The system was adapted from that of the Greek numerals sometime between 200 and 78 BCE, the latter being the date of the earliest archeological evidence.

The current numeral system is also known as the &quot;Hebrew alphabetic numerals&quot; to contrast with earlier systems of writing numerals used in classical antiquity. These systems were inherited from usage in the Aramaic and Phoenician scripts, attested from in the Samaria Ostraca.

The Greek system was adopted in Hellenistic Judaism and had been in use in Greece since about the 5th century BCE.

In this system, there is no notation for zero, and the numeric values for individual letters are added together. Each unit (1, 2, ..., 9) is assigned a separate letter, each tens (10, 20, ..., 90) a separate letter, and the first four hundreds (100, 200, 300, 400) a separate letter. The later hundreds (500, 600, 700, 800 and 900) are represented by the sum of two or three letters representing the first four hundreds. To represent numbers from 1,000 to 999,999, the same letters are reused to serve as thousands, tens of thousands, and hundreds of thousands. Gematria (Jewish numerology) uses these transformations extensively.

In Israel today, the decimal system of Hindu–Arabic numeral system (ex. 0, 1, 2, 3, etc.) is used in almost all cases (money, age, date on the civil calendar). The Hebrew numerals are used only in special cases, such as when using the Hebrew calendar, or numbering a list (similar to a, b, c, d, etc.), much as Roman numerals are used in the West.

==Numbers==
The Hebrew language has names for common numbers that range from zero to one million. Letters of the Hebrew alphabet are used to represent numbers in a few traditional contexts, such as in calendars. In other situations, numerals from the Hindu–Arabic numeral system are used. Cardinal and ordinal numbers must agree in gender with the noun they are describing. If there is no such noun (e.g., in telephone numbers), the feminine form is used. For ordinal numbers greater than ten, the cardinal is used. Multiples of ten above the value 20 have no gender (20, 30, 40, ... are genderless), unless the number has the digit 1 in the tens position (110, 210, 310, ...).


===Ordinal values===

Note: For ordinal numbers greater than 10, cardinal numbers are used instead.

===Cardinal values===
Note: Officially, numbers greater than a million were represented by the long scale. However, since January 21, 2013, the modified short scale (under which the long scale milliard is substituted for the strict short scale billion), which was already the colloquial standard, became official.

===Collective numerals===
===Speaking and writing===
Cardinal and ordinal numbers must agree in gender (masculine or feminine; mixed groups are treated as masculine) with the noun they are describing. If there is no such noun (e.g. a telephone number or a house number in a street address), the feminine form is used. Ordinal numbers must also agree in number and definite status like other adjectives. The cardinal number precedes the noun (e.g., &quot;shlosha yeladim&quot;), except for the number one which succeeds it (e.g., &quot;yeled echad&quot;). The number two is special: &quot;shnayim&quot; (m.) and &quot;shtayim&quot; (f.) become &quot;shney&quot; (m.) and &quot;shtey&quot; (f.) when followed by the noun they count. For ordinal numbers (numbers indicating position) greater than ten the cardinal is used.

==Calculations==
The Hebrew numeric system operates on the additive principle in which the numeric values of the letters are added together to form the total. For example, 177 is represented as which (from right to left) corresponds to 100 + 70 + 7 = 177.

Mathematically, this type of system requires 27 letters (1–9, 10–90, 100–900). In practice, the last letter, &quot;tav&quot; (which has the value 400), is used in combination with itself or other letters from &quot;qof&quot; (100) onwards to generate numbers from 500 and above. Alternatively, the 22-letter Hebrew numeral set is sometimes extended to 27 by using 5 &quot;sofit&quot; (final) forms of the Hebrew letters.

===Key exceptions===
By convention, the numbers 15 and 16 are represented as (9 + 6) and (9 + 7), respectively, in order to refrain from using the two-letter combinations (10 + 5) and (10 + 6), which are alternate written forms for the Name of God in everyday writing. In the calendar, this manifests every full moon since all Hebrew months start on a new moon (see for example: Tu BiShvat).

This convention developed sometimes in the Middle Ages, before that it was common to write 15 and 16 as י&quot;ה and י&quot;ו.

Combinations which would spell out words with negative connotations are sometimes avoided by switching the order of the letters. For instance, 744 which should be written as (meaning &quot;you/it will be destroyed&quot;) might instead be written as or (meaning &quot;end to demon&quot;).

===Use of final letters===
The Hebrew numeral system has sometimes been extended to include the five final letter forms— for 500, for 600, for 700, for 800, for 900. Usually though the final letter form are used with the same value as the regular letter form— for 20, for 40, for 50, for 80, for 90.

The ordinary additive forms for 500 to 900 are , , , and .

==Gershayim==

Gershayim (U+05F4 in Unicode, and resembling a double quote mark) (sometimes erroneously referred to as &quot;merkha&#x27;ot&quot;, which is Hebrew for double quote) are inserted before (to the right of) the last (leftmost) letter to indicate that the sequence of letters represents something other than a word. This is used in the case where a number is represented by two or more Hebrew numerals (&quot;e.g.,&quot; 28 → ).

Similarly, a single geresh (U+05F3 in Unicode, and resembling a single quote mark) is appended after (to the left of) a single letter to indicate that the letter represents a number rather than a (one-letter) word. This is used in the case where a number is represented by a single Hebrew numeral (&quot;e.g.&quot; 100 → ).

Note that geresh and gershayim merely indicate &quot;not a (normal) word.&quot; Context usually determines whether they indicate a number or something else (such as an abbreviation).

An alternative method found in old manuscripts and still found on modern-day tombstones is to put a dot above each letter of the number.

==Decimals==
In print, Arabic numerals are employed in Modern Hebrew for most purposes. Hebrew numerals are used nowadays primarily for writing the days and years of the Hebrew calendar; for references to traditional Jewish texts (particularly for Biblical chapter and verse and for Talmudic folios); for bulleted or numbered lists (similar to &quot;A&quot;, &quot;B&quot;, &quot;C&quot;, &quot;etc.&quot;, in English); and in numerology (gematria).

==Thousands and date formats==
Thousands are counted separately, and the thousands count precedes the rest of the number (to the &quot;right&quot;, since Hebrew is read from right to left). There are no special marks to signify that the &quot;count&quot; is starting over with thousands, which can theoretically lead to ambiguity, although a single quote mark is sometimes used after the letter. When specifying years of the Hebrew calendar in the present millennium, writers usually omit the thousands (which is presently 5 []), but if they do not, this is accepted to mean 5,000, with no ambiguity. The current Israeli coinage includes the thousands.

===Date examples===

&quot;Monday, 15 Adar 5764&quot; (where 5764 = 5(×1000) + 400 + 300 + 60 + 4, and 15 = 9 + 6):

: In full (with thousands): &quot;Monday, 15(th) of Adar, 5764&quot;

: Common usage (omitting thousands): &quot;Monday, 15(th) of Adar, (5)764&quot;

&quot;Thursday, 3 Nisan 5767&quot; (where 5767 = 5(×1000) + 400 + 300 + 60 + 7):

: In full (with thousands): &quot;Thursday, 3(rd) of Nisan, 5767&quot;

: Common usage (omitting thousands): &quot;Thursday, 3(rd) of Nisan, (5)767&quot;

To see how &quot;today&#x27;s&quot; date in the Hebrew calendar is written, see, for example, Hebcal date converter.

===Recent years===
5785 (2024–25) = 

5784 (2023–24) = 

5783 (2022–23) = 

5772 (2011–12) = 

5771 (2010–11) = 

5770 (2009–10) = 

5769 (2008–09) = 

5761 (2000–01) = 

5760 (1999–2000) = 

==Similar systems==

The Abjad numerals are equivalent to the Hebrew numerals up to 400. The Greek numerals differ from the Hebrew ones from 90 upwards because in the Greek alphabet there is no equivalent for &quot;tsade&quot; ().

==See also==
* Bible code, a purported set of secret messages encoded within the Torah.
* Gematria, Jewish system of assigning numerical value to a word or phrase.
* Hebrew calendar
* Notarikon, a method of deriving a word by using each of its initial letters.
* Sephirot, the 10 attributes/emanations found in Kabbalah.
* Significance of numbers in Judaism
* Base 32, a system that can be written with both all Arabic numerals and all Hebrew letters, much as how Base 36 is written with all Arabic numerals and roman letters.

==References==
==External links==
* Gematria Chart on inner.org
* Hebrew Number Chart 1 to 1 Million with English Transliteration
* Learn to say any number in English with Transliteration</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q512378" start="14" end="29" title="Hebrew numerals" label="Hebrew numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4063087" start="49" end="74" title="alphabetic numeral system" label="alphabetic numeral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q33513" start="100" end="115" title="Hebrew alphabet" label="Hebrew alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q108645" start="157" end="171" title="Greek numerals" label="Greek numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q26978" start="488" end="495" title="Aramaic alphabet" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26752" start="500" end="510" title="Phoenician alphabet" label="Phoenician"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898874" start="541" end="556" title="Samaria Ostraca" label="Samaria Ostraca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602777" start="591" end="610" title="Hellenistic Judaism" label="Hellenistic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q204" start="716" end="720" title="0 (number)" label="zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q840378" start="1237" end="1245" title="Gematria" label="Gematria"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="1310" end="1316" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059346" start="1346" end="1373" title="Hindu–Arabic numeral system" label="Hindu–Arabic numeral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124644" start="1450" end="1464" title="civil calendar" label="civil calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q44722" start="1542" end="1557" title="Hebrew calendar" label="Hebrew calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q38918" start="1618" end="1632" title="Roman numerals" label="Roman numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q33513" start="1769" end="1784" title="Hebrew alphabet" label="Hebrew alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059346" start="1907" end="1934" title="Hindu–Arabic numeral system" label="Hindu–Arabic numeral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q163875" start="1945" end="1953" title="Cardinal numbers" label="Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q191780" start="1958" end="1973" title="ordinal numbers" label="ordinal numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q725503" start="2532" end="2542" title="long scale" label="long scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q725503" start="2590" end="2601" title="short scale" label="short scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q191780" start="3487" end="3501" title="ordinal number" label="ordinal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q105173" start="4488" end="4499" title="Tetragrammaton" label="Name of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q104641" start="4559" end="4568" title="full moon" label="full moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q108566" start="4604" end="4612" title="new moon" label="new moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q748816" start="4631" end="4641" title="Tu BiShvat" label="Tu BiShvat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5553090" start="5438" end="5447" title="Gershayim" label="Gershayim"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="5459" end="5466" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043" start="5485" end="5497" title="double quote" label="double quote"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907865" start="5884" end="5890" title="geresh" label="geresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043" start="5928" end="5940" title="single quote" label="single quote"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907865" start="6199" end="6205" title="geresh" label="geresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5553090" start="6210" end="6219" title="gershayim" label="gershayim"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148801" start="6357" end="6369" title="Hebrew abbreviations" label="abbreviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44722" start="6681" end="6696" title="Hebrew calendar" label="Hebrew calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q840378" start="6950" end="6958" title="gematria" label="gematria"/>
<link wikidata="Q44722" start="8169" end="8184" title="Hebrew calendar" label="Hebrew calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q308487" start="8456" end="8470" title="Abjad numerals" label="Abjad numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q108645" start="8524" end="8538" title="Greek numerals" label="Greek numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="8598" end="8612" title="Greek alphabet" label="Greek alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q856104" start="8678" end="8688" title="Bible code" label="Bible code"/>
<link wikidata="Q840378" start="8753" end="8761" title="Gematria" label="Gematria"/>
<link wikidata="Q44722" start="8829" end="8844" title="Hebrew calendar" label="Hebrew calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486523" start="8847" end="8856" title="Notarikon" label="Notarikon"/>
<link wikidata="Q660267" start="8926" end="8934" title="Sephirot" label="Sephirot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512954" start="8986" end="9020" title="Significance of numbers in Judaism" label="Significance of numbers in Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q809818" start="9023" end="9030" title="Base 32" label="Base 32"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034350" start="9127" end="9134" title="Base 36" label="Base 36"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13704" wikidata="Q2371074" url="?curid=13704" title="Hydroxy">
<text>Hydroxy can refer to:
* In chemical nomenclature, the prefix &quot;hydroxy-&quot; shows the presence of a hydroxyl functional group (−OH).
* An abbreviation for the medication hydroxyzine, which is commonly sold under the brand names Atarax, Ucerax, Serecid, and Vistaril.
* Hydroxy gas, a nickname for oxyhydrogen, a combination of hydrogen and oxygen gas produced from the electrolysis of water.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q104116" start="106" end="114" title="hydroxyl" label="hydroxyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q421937" start="176" end="187" title="hydroxyzine" label="hydroxyzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q506266" start="303" end="314" title="oxyhydrogen" label="oxyhydrogen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13706" wikidata="Q162244" url="?curid=13706" title="Hero">
<text>A hero (feminine: heroine) is a real person or fictional character who, in the face of danger, combats adversity through feats of ingenuity, courage, or strength. The original hero type of classical epics did such things for the sake of glory and honor. Post-classical and modern heroes, on the other hand, perform great deeds or selfless acts for the common good instead of the classical goal of wealth, pride, and fame. The antonym of &quot;hero&quot; is &quot;villain&quot;. Other terms associated with the concept of &quot;hero&quot; may include &quot;good guy&quot; or &quot;&quot;.

In classical literature, the hero is the main or revered character in heroic epic poetry celebrated through ancient legends of a people, often striving for military conquest and living by a continually flawed personal honor code. The definition of a hero has changed throughout time. Merriam Webster dictionary defines a hero as &quot;a person who is admired for great or brave acts or fine qualities&quot;. Examples of heroes range from mythological figures, such as Gilgamesh, Achilles and Iphigenia, to historical and modern figures, such as Joan of Arc, Giuseppe Garibaldi, Sophie Scholl, Alvin York, Audie Murphy, and Chuck Yeager, and fictional &quot;superheroes&quot;, including Superman, Supergirl, Spider-Man, Batman, and Captain America.

== Etymology ==

The word &quot;hero&quot; comes from the Greek ἥρως (&quot;hērōs&quot;), &quot;hero&quot; (literally &quot;protector&quot; or &quot;defender&quot;), particularly one such as Heracles with divine ancestry or later given divine honors. Before the decipherment of Linear B the original form of the word was assumed to be *, &quot;hērōw-&quot;, but the Mycenaean compound &quot;ti-ri-se-ro-e&quot; demonstrates the absence of -w-. Hero as a name appears in pre-Homeric Greek mythology, wherein Hero was a priestess of the goddess Aphrodite, in a myth that has been referred to often in literature.

According to &quot;The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language&quot;, the Proto-Indo-European root is &quot;*ser&quot; meaning &quot;to protect&quot;. According to Eric Partridge in &quot;Origins&quot;, the Greek word &quot;hērōs&quot; &quot;is akin to&quot; the Latin &quot;seruāre&quot;, meaning &quot;to safeguard&quot;. Partridge concludes, &quot;The basic sense of both Hera and hero would therefore be &#x27;protector&#x27;.&quot; R. S. P. Beekes rejects an Indo-European derivation and asserts that the word has a Pre-Greek origin. Hera was a Greek goddess with many attributes, including protection and her worship appears to have similar proto-Indo-European origins.

The female term &quot;heroine&quot; was taken from the Latin word &quot;heroina&quot;, from Greek &quot;hērōinē&quot;, feminine of &quot;hērōs&quot;. Its first use in the English language, however, was in 1587 to denote of strong and well-abled women of divine origins, as seen in myths and legends.

== Antiquity ==
A classical hero is considered to be a &quot;warrior who lives and dies in the pursuit of honor&quot; and asserts their greatness by &quot;the brilliancy and efficiency with which they kill&quot;. Each classical hero&#x27;s life focuses on fighting, which occurs in war or during an epic quest. Classical heroes are commonly semi-divine and extraordinarily gifted, such as Achilles, evolving into heroic characters through their perilous circumstances. While these heroes are incredibly resourceful and skilled, they are often foolhardy, court disaster, risk their followers&#x27; lives for trivial matters, and behave arrogantly in a childlike manner. During classical times, people regarded heroes with the highest esteem and utmost importance, explaining their prominence within epic literature. The appearance of these mortal figures marks a revolution of audiences and writers turning away from immortal gods to mortal mankind, whose heroic moments of glory survive in the memory of their descendants, extending their legacy.
Hector was a Trojan prince and the greatest fighter for Troy in the Trojan War, which is known primarily through Homer&#x27;s &quot;Iliad&quot;. Hector acted as leader of the Trojans and their allies in the defense of Troy, &quot;killing 31,000 Greek fighters,&quot; offers Hyginus. Hector was known not only for his courage, but also for his noble and courtly nature. Indeed, Homer places Hector as peace-loving, thoughtful, as well as bold, a good son, husband and father, and without darker motives. However, his familial values conflict greatly with his heroic aspirations in the &quot;Iliad,&quot; as he cannot be both the protector of Troy and a father to his child. Hector is ultimately betrayed by the deities when Athena appears disguised as his ally Deiphobus and convinces him to challenge Achilles, leading to his death at the hands of a superior warrior.
Achilles was a Greek hero who was considered the most formidable military fighter in the entire Trojan War and the central character of the &quot;Iliad&quot;. He was the child of Thetis and Peleus, making him a demi-god. He wielded superhuman strength on the battlefield and was blessed with a close relationship to the deities. Achilles famously refused to fight after his dishonoring at the hands of Agamemnon, and only returned to the war due to unadulterated rage after Hector killed his beloved companion Patroclus. Achilles was known for uncontrollable rage that defined many of his bloodthirsty actions, such as defiling Hector&#x27;s corpse by dragging it around the city of Troy. Achilles plays a tragic role in the &quot;Iliad&quot; brought about by constant de-humanization throughout the epic, having his &quot;menis&quot; (wrath) overpower his &quot;philos&quot; (love).

Heroes in myth often had close but conflicted relationships with the deities. Thus, Heracles&#x27;s name means &quot;the glory of Hera&quot;, even though he was tormented all his life by Hera, the Queen of the Greek deities. Perhaps the most striking example is the Athenian king Erechtheus, whom Poseidon killed for choosing Athena rather than him as the city&#x27;s patron deity. When the Athenians worshiped Erechtheus on the Acropolis, they invoked him as &quot;Poseidon Erechtheus&quot;.

Fate, or destiny, plays a massive role in the stories of classical heroes. The classical hero&#x27;s heroic significance stems from battlefield conquests, an inherently dangerous action. The deities in Greek mythology, when interacting with the heroes, often foreshadow the hero&#x27;s eventual death on the battlefield. Countless heroes and deities go to great lengths to alter their pre-destined fates, but with no success, as none, neither human or immortal can change their prescribed outcomes by the three powerful Fates. The most characteristic example of this is found in &quot;Oedipus Rex.&quot; After learning that his son, Oedipus, will end up killing him, the King of Thebes, Laius, takes huge steps to ensure his son&#x27;s death by removing him from the kingdom. When Oedipus encounters his father when his father was unknown to him in a dispute on the road many years later, Oedipus slays him without an afterthought. The lack of recognition enabled Oedipus to slay his father, ironically further binding his father to his fate.

Stories of heroism may serve as moral examples. However, classical heroes often did not embody the Christian notion of an upstanding, perfectly moral hero. For example, Achilles&#x27;s character-issues of hateful rage lead to merciless slaughter and his overwhelming pride lead to him only joining the Trojan War because he did not want his soldiers to win all of the glory. Classical heroes, regardless of their morality, were placed in religion. In classical antiquity, cults that venerated deified heroes such as Heracles, Perseus, and Achilles played an important role in Ancient Greek religion. These ancient Greek hero cults worshipped heroes from oral epic tradition, with these heroes often bestowing blessings, especially healing ones, on individuals.

== Myth and monomyth ==

The concept of the &quot;Mythic Hero Archetype&quot; was first developed by Lord Raglan in his 1936 book, &quot;The Hero, A Study in Tradition, Myth and Drama&quot;. It is a set of 22 common traits that he said were shared by many heroes in various cultures, myths, and religions throughout history and worldwide. Raglan argued that the higher the score, the more likely the figure is mythical.

The concept of a story archetype of the standard monomythical &quot;hero&#x27;s quest&quot; that was reputed to be pervasive across all cultures is somewhat controversial. Expounded mainly by Joseph Campbell in his 1949 work &quot;The Hero with a Thousand Faces&quot;, it illustrates several uniting themes of hero stories that hold similar ideas of what a hero represents despite vastly different cultures and beliefs. The monomyth or Hero&#x27;s Journey consists of three separate stages: the Departure, Initiation, and Return. Within these stages, there are several archetypes that the hero of either gender may follow, including the call to adventure (which they may initially refuse), supernatural aid, proceeding down a road of trials, achieving a realization about themselves (or an apotheosis), and attaining the freedom to live through their quest or journey. Campbell offered examples of stories with similar themes, such as Krishna, Buddha, Apollonius of Tyana, and Jesus. One of the themes he explores is the androgynous hero, who combines male and female traits, such as Bodhisattva: &quot;The first wonder to be noted here is the androgynous character of the Bodhisattva: masculine Avalokiteshvara, feminine Kwan Yin.&quot; In his 1968 book, &quot;The Masks of God: Occidental Mythology&quot;, Campbell writes, &quot;It is clear that, whether accurate or not as to biographical detail, the moving legend of the Crucified and Risen Christ was fit to bring a new warmth, immediacy, and humanity, to the old motifs of the beloved Tammuz, Adonis, and Osiris cycles.&quot;

== Slavic fairy tales ==

Vladimir Propp, in his analysis of Russian fairy tales, concluded that a fairy tale had only eight &quot;dramatis personæ&quot;, of which one was the hero, and his analysis has been widely applied to non-Russian folklore. The actions that fall into such a hero&#x27;s sphere include:
# Departure on a quest
# Reacting to the test of a donor
# Marrying a princess (or similar figure)
Propp distinguished between &quot;seekers&quot; and &quot;victim-heroes&quot;. A villain could initiate the issue by kidnapping the hero or driving him out; these were victim-heroes. On the other hand, an antagonist could rob the hero, or kidnap someone close to him, or, without the villain&#x27;s intervention, the hero could realize that he lacked something and set out to find it; these heroes are seekers. Victims may appear in tales with seeker heroes, but the tale does not follow them both.

== Historical studies ==

The philosopher Hegel gave a central role to the &quot;hero&quot;, personalized by Napoleon, as the incarnation of a particular culture&#x27;s &quot;Volksgeist&quot; and thus of the general &quot;Zeitgeist&quot;. Thomas Carlyle&#x27;s 1841 work, &quot;On Heroes, Hero-Worship, &amp; the Heroic in History&quot;, also accorded an essential function to heroes and great men in history. Carlyle centered history on the biographies of individuals, as in &quot;Oliver Cromwell&#x27;s Letters and Speeches&quot; and &quot;History of Frederick the Great&quot;. His heroes were not only political and military figures, the founders or topplers of states, but also religious figures, poets, authors, and captains of industry.

Explicit defenses of Carlyle&#x27;s position were rare in the second part of the 20th century. Most in the philosophy of history school contend that the motive forces in history may best be described only with a wider lens than the one that Carlyle used for his portraits. For example, Karl Marx argued that history was determined by the massive social forces at play in &quot;class struggles&quot;, not by the individuals by whom these forces are played out. After Marx, Herbert Spencer wrote at the end of the 19th century: &quot;You must admit that the genesis of the great man depends on the long series of complex influences which has produced the race in which he appears, and the social state into which that race has slowly grown...[b]efore he can remake his society, his society must make him.&quot; Michel Foucault argued in his analysis of societal communication and debate that history was mainly the &quot;science of the sovereign&quot;, until its inversion by the &quot;historical and political popular discourse&quot;.

The Annales school, led by Lucien Febvre, Marc Bloch, and Fernand Braudel, would contest the exaggeration of the role of individual subjects in history. Indeed, Braudel distinguished various time scales, one accorded to the life of an individual, another accorded to the life of a few human generations, and the last one to civilizations, in which geography, economics, and demography play a role considerably more decisive than that of individual subjects.

Among noticeable events in the studies of the role of the hero and great man in history one should mention Sidney Hook&#x27;s book (1943) &quot;The Hero in History&quot;. In the second half of the twentieth century such male-focused theory has been contested, among others by feminists writers such as Judith Fetterley in &quot;The Resisting Reader&quot; (1977) and literary theorist Nancy K. Miller, &quot;The Heroine&#x27;s Text: Readings in the French and English Novel, 1722–1782&quot;.

In the epoch of globalization an individual may change the development of the country and of the whole world, so this gives reasons to some scholars to suggest returning to the problem of the role of the hero in history from the viewpoint of modern historical knowledge and using up-to-date methods of historical analysis.

Within the frameworks of developing counterfactual history, attempts are made to examine some hypothetical scenarios of historical development. The hero attracts much attention because most of those scenarios are based on the suppositions: what would have happened if this or that historical individual had or had not been alive.

== Modern fiction ==
The word &quot;hero&quot; (or &quot;heroine&quot; in modern times), is sometimes used to describe the protagonist or the romantic interest of a story, a usage which may conflict with the superhuman expectations of heroism. A good example is Anna Karenina, the lead character in the novel of the same title by Leo Tolstoy. In modern literature the hero is more and more a problematic concept. In 1848, for example, William Makepeace Thackeray gave &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; the subtitle, &quot;A Novel without a Hero&quot;, and imagined a world in which no sympathetic character was to be found. &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; is a satirical representation of the absence of truly moral heroes in the modern world. The story focuses on the characters, Emmy Sedley and Becky Sharpe (the latter as the clearly defined anti-hero), with the plot focused on the eventual marriage of these two characters to rich men, revealing character flaws as the story progresses. Even the most sympathetic characters, such as Captain Dobbin, are susceptible to weakness, as he is often narcissistic and melancholic.

The larger-than-life hero is a more common feature of fantasy (particularly in comic books and epic fantasy) than more realist works. However, these larger-than life figures remain prevalent in society. The superhero genre is a multibillion-dollar industry that includes comic books, movies, toys, and video games. Superheroes usually possess extraordinary talents and powers that no living human could ever possess. The superhero stories often pit a super villain against the hero, with the hero fighting the crime caused by the super villain. Examples of long-running superheroes include Superman, Wonder Woman, Batman, and Spider-Man.

Research indicates that male writers are more likely to make heroines superhuman, whereas female writers tend to make heroines ordinary humans, as well as making their male heroes more powerful than their heroines, possibly due to sex differences in valued traits.

== Psychology ==
Social psychology has begun paying attention to heroes and heroism. Zeno Franco and Philip Zimbardo point out differences between heroism and altruism, and they offer evidence that observer perceptions of unjustified risk play a role above and beyond risk type in determining the ascription of heroic status.

Psychologists have also identified the traits of heroes. Elaine Kinsella and her colleagues have identified 12 central traits of heroism, which consist of brave, moral integrity, conviction, courageous, self-sacrifice, protecting, honest, selfless, determined, saves others, inspiring, and helpful. Scott Allison and George Goethals uncovered evidence for &quot;the great eight traits&quot; of heroes consisting of wise, strong, resilient, reliable, charismatic, caring, selfless, and inspiring. These researchers have also identified four primary functions of heroism. Heroes give us wisdom; they enhance us; they provide moral modeling; and they offer protection.

An evolutionary psychology explanation for heroic risk-taking is that it is a costly signal demonstrating the ability of the hero. It may be seen as one form of altruism for which there are several other evolutionary explanations as well.

Roma Chatterji has suggested that the hero or more generally protagonist is first and foremost a symbolic representation of the person who is experiencing the story while reading, listening, or watching; thus the relevance of the hero to the individual relies a great deal on how much similarity there is between them and the character. Chatterji suggested that one reason for the hero-as-self interpretation of stories and myths is the human inability to view the world from any perspective but a personal one.

In the Pulitzer Prize-winning book, &quot;The Denial of Death&quot;, Ernest Becker argues that human civilization is ultimately an elaborate, symbolic defense mechanism against the knowledge of our mortality, which in turn acts as the emotional and intellectual response to our basic survival mechanism. Becker explains that a basic duality in human life exists between the physical world of objects and a symbolic world of human meaning. Thus, since humanity has a dualistic nature consisting of a physical self and a symbolic self, he asserts that humans are able to transcend the dilemma of mortality through heroism, by focusing attention mainly on the symbolic self. This symbolic self-focus takes the form of an individual&#x27;s &quot;immortality project&quot; (or &quot;&quot;causa sui&quot; project&quot;), which is essentially a symbolic belief-system that ensures that one is believed superior to physical reality. By successfully living under the terms of the immortality project, people feel they can become heroic and, henceforth, part of something eternal; something that will never die as compared to their physical body. This he asserts, in turn, gives people the feeling that their lives have meaning, a purpose, and are significant in the grand scheme of things. Another theme running throughout the book is that humanity&#x27;s traditional &quot;hero-systems&quot;, such as religion, are no longer convincing in the age of reason. Science attempts to serve as an immortality project, something that Becker believes it can never do, because it is unable to provide agreeable, absolute meanings to human life. The book states that we need new convincing &quot;illusions&quot; that enable people to feel heroic in ways that are agreeable. Becker, however, does not provide any definitive answer, mainly because he believes that there is no perfect solution. Instead, he hopes that gradual realization of humanity&#x27;s innate motivations, namely death, may help to bring about a better world. Terror Management Theory (TMT) has generated evidence supporting this perspective.

== Mental and physical integration ==
Examining the success of resistance fighters on Crete during the Nazi occupation in WWII, author and endurance researcher C. McDougall drew connections to the Ancient Greek heroes and a culture of integrated physical self-mastery, training, and mental conditioning that fostered confidence to take action, and made it possible for individuals to accomplish feats of great prowess, even under the harshest of conditions. The skills established an &quot;ability to unleash tremendous resources of strength, endurance, and agility that many people don&#x27;t realize they already have.&quot;
McDougall cites examples of heroic acts, including a &quot;scholium&quot; to Pindar&#x27;s Fifth Nemean Ode: &quot;Much weaker in strength than the Minotaur, Theseus fought with it and won using , as he had no knife.&quot; , a martial art that featured in the ancient Olympic Games, means &quot;total power and knowledge&quot;, one &quot;associated with gods and heroes ... who conquer by tapping every talent&quot;.

== See also ==

* Action hero
* Antihero
* Byronic hero
* Carnegie Hero Fund
* Culture hero
* Folk hero
* Germanic hero
* Helping behavior
* Hero and Leander
* Hero of Socialist Labour
* Heroic fantasy
* List of female action heroes and villains
* List of genres
* Messiah
* Moral development
* Randian hero
* Reluctant hero
* Rescue
* Romantic hero
* Soter
* Space opera
* The common good
* Tragic hero
* Youxia
== References ==
== Further reading ==
*
* 
* 
* Carlyle, Thomas (1840) &quot;On Heroes, Hero Worship and the Heroic in History&quot;
* Craig, David, &quot;Back Home&quot;, Life Magazine-Special Issue, Volume 8, Number 6, 85–94.
* 
* 
* Hook, Sydney (1943) &quot;The Hero in History: A Study in Limitation and Possibility&quot;
*
* Lidell, Henry and Robert Scott. &quot;A Greek–English Lexicon.&quot;   link
*
* (Republished 2003)
* 
== External links ==

*&quot;The British Hero&quot; — online exhibition from screenonline, a website of the British Film Institute, looking at British heroes of film and television.
*Listen to BBC Radio 4&#x27;s &quot;In Our Time&quot; programme on Heroism
*&quot;The Role of Heroes in Children&#x27;s Lives&quot; by Marilyn Price-Mitchell, PhD
*&quot;10% — What Makes A Hero&quot; directed by Yoav Shamir</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q162244" start="2" end="6" title="Hero" label="hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q162244" start="18" end="25" title="Hero" label="heroine"/>
<link wikidata="Q95074" start="47" end="66" title="fictional character" label="fictional character"/>
<link wikidata="Q208160" start="141" end="148" title="courage" label="courage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785966" start="153" end="161" title="Physical strength" label="strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207437" start="237" end="242" title="glory (honor)" label="glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q207333" start="247" end="252" title="honor" label="honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234117" start="254" end="268" title="post-classical history" label="Post-classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281534" start="273" end="279" title="modern history" label="modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071551" start="405" end="410" title="pride" label="pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q290691" start="463" end="470" title="villain" label="villain"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="592" end="612" title="Classics" label="classical literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="659" end="677" title="Epic poetry" label="heroic epic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q44342" start="705" end="711" title="legend" label="legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858336" start="873" end="888" title="Webster&amp;#x27;s Dictionary" label="Merriam Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q159709" start="1057" end="1066" title="Gilgamesh" label="Gilgamesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="1068" end="1076" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q192673" start="1081" end="1090" title="Iphigenia" label="Iphigenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226" start="1134" end="1145" title="Joan of Arc" label="Joan of Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="1147" end="1165" title="Giuseppe Garibaldi" label="Giuseppe Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q76972" start="1167" end="1180" title="Sophie Scholl" label="Sophie Scholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q449068" start="1182" end="1192" title="Alvin York" label="Alvin York"/>
<link wikidata="Q337185" start="1194" end="1206" title="Audie Murphy" label="Audie Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q271939" start="1212" end="1224" title="Chuck Yeager" label="Chuck Yeager"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="1246" end="1255" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="1275" end="1283" title="Superman" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8981293" start="1285" end="1294" title="Supergirl" label="Supergirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q79037" start="1296" end="1306" title="Spider-Man" label="Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="1308" end="1314" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q190679" start="1320" end="1335" title="Captain America" label="Captain America"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="1396" end="1401" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="1529" end="1537" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345443" start="1600" end="1612" title="decipherment" label="decipherment"/>
<link wikidata="Q190102" start="1616" end="1624" title="Linear B" label="Linear B"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742606" start="1782" end="1786" title="Hero (given name)" label="Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="1820" end="1835" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q747392" start="1845" end="1849" title="Hero and Leander" label="Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q35500" start="1873" end="1890" title="Aphrodite" label="goddess Aphrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q464886" start="1969" end="2025" title="The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language" label="The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="2037" end="2056" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q38012" start="2338" end="2342" title="Hera" label="Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508757" start="2400" end="2415" title="Robert S. P. Beekes" label="R. S. P. Beekes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="2427" end="2440" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q965052" start="2484" end="2493" title="Pre-Greek substrate" label="Pre-Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q38012" start="2502" end="2506" title="Hera" label="Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="2513" end="2526" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="2610" end="2629" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2695" end="2700" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250916" start="3002" end="3009" title="warrior" label="warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="3330" end="3338" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q101609" start="3857" end="3870" title="Twelve Olympians" label="immortal gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q159666" start="3988" end="3994" title="Hector" label="Hector"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="4001" end="4007" title="Troy" label="Trojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="4056" end="4066" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="4101" end="4106" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="4120" end="4125" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="4629" end="4633" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="4711" end="4717" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q736813" start="4748" end="4757" title="Deiphobus" label="Deiphobus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="4856" end="4864" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q184437" start="5035" end="5041" title="Thetis" label="Thetis"/>
<link wikidata="Q178641" start="5046" end="5052" title="Peleus" label="Peleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q466470" start="5067" end="5075" title="Demigod" label="demi-god"/>
<link wikidata="Q516588" start="5176" end="5183" title="List of Greek deities" label="deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q186271" start="5366" end="5375" title="Patroclus" label="Patroclus"/>
<link wikidata="Q38012" start="5871" end="5875" title="Hera" label="Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q301219" start="6021" end="6031" title="Erechtheus" label="Erechtheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="6038" end="6046" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="6067" end="6073" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q131013" start="6170" end="6179" title="Acropolis of Athens" label="Acropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q216774" start="6235" end="6239" title="Destiny" label="Fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="6437" end="6452" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2234275" start="6755" end="6760" title="Fates" label="Fates"/>
<link wikidata="Q148643" start="6820" end="6831" title="Oedipus Rex" label="Oedipus Rex"/>
<link wikidata="Q130890" start="6868" end="6875" title="Oedipus" label="Oedipus"/>
<link wikidata="Q463898" start="6922" end="6927" title="Laius" label="Laius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909109" start="7311" end="7324" title="moral example" label="moral example"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="7730" end="7749" title="classical antiquity" label="classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="7795" end="7803" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q130832" start="7805" end="7812" title="Perseus" label="Perseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41746" start="7818" end="7826" title="Achilles" label="Achilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878906" start="7893" end="7908" title="Greek hero cult" label="Greek hero cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q578605" start="7938" end="7952" title="Epic Cycle" label="epic tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314878" start="8142" end="8153" title="FitzRoy Somerset, 4th Baron Raglan" label="Lord Raglan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542815" start="8511" end="8523" title="Hero&amp;#x27;s journey" label="monomythical"/>
<link wikidata="Q735234" start="8542" end="8547" title="quest" label="quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q295516" start="8654" end="8669" title="Joseph Campbell" label="Joseph Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q176734" start="8693" end="8723" title="The Hero with a Thousand Faces" label="The Hero with a Thousand Faces"/>
<link wikidata="Q42891" start="9397" end="9404" title="Krishna" label="Krishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="9406" end="9412" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q297040" start="9414" end="9433" title="Apollonius of Tyana" label="Apollonius of Tyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="9439" end="9444" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q549619" start="10003" end="10009" title="Dumuzid" label="Tammuz"/>
<link wikidata="Q163920" start="10011" end="10017" title="Adonis" label="Adonis"/>
<link wikidata="Q46491" start="10023" end="10029" title="Osiris" label="Osiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q313455" start="10071" end="10085" title="Vladimir Propp" label="Vladimir Propp"/>
<link wikidata="Q699" start="10114" end="10124" title="fairy tale" label="fairy tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234220" start="10176" end="10192" title="dramatis personæ" label="dramatis personæ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036206" start="10406" end="10411" title="Donor (fairy tale)" label="donor"/>
<link wikidata="Q290691" start="10535" end="10542" title="villain" label="villain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="10996" end="11001" title="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel" label="Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="11063" end="11071" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11129" end="11139" title="Geist#Volksgeist" label="Volksgeist"/>
<link wikidata="Q211679" start="11176" end="11185" title="Zeitgeist" label="Zeitgeist"/>
<link wikidata="Q151403" start="11193" end="11207" title="Thomas Carlyle" label="Thomas Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091008" start="11232" end="11284" title="On Heroes, Hero-Worship, &amp;amp; the Heroic in History" label="On Heroes, Hero-Worship, &amp;amp; the Heroic in History"/>
<link wikidata="Q36279" start="11396" end="11407" title="biography" label="biographies"/>
<link wikidata="Q111941548" start="11436" end="11479" title="Oliver Cromwell&amp;#x27;s Letters and Speeches" label="Oliver Cromwell&amp;#x27;s Letters and Speeches"/>
<link wikidata="Q5864624" start="11496" end="11526" title="History of Frederick the Great" label="History of Frederick the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036880" start="11675" end="11695" title="captains of industry" label="captains of industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q190721" start="11805" end="11826" title="philosophy of history" label="philosophy of history"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="11984" end="11993" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744607" start="12075" end="12090" title="Class conflict" label="class struggles"/>
<link wikidata="Q144535" start="12170" end="12185" title="Herbert Spencer" label="Herbert Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q44272" start="12507" end="12522" title="Michel Foucault" label="Michel Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12533" end="12582" title="Philosophy of history#Michel Foucault&amp;#x27;s analysis of historical and political discourse" label="his analysis of societal communication and debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="12632" end="12641" title="Sovereignty" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q336241" start="12737" end="12751" title="Annales school" label="Annales school"/>
<link wikidata="Q156999" start="12760" end="12773" title="Lucien Febvre" label="Lucien Febvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q156585" start="12775" end="12785" title="Marc Bloch" label="Marc Bloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q185105" start="12791" end="12806" title="Fernand Braudel" label="Fernand Braudel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41798914" start="12854" end="12873" title="Subject (philosophy)" label="individual subjects"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="13057" end="13069" title="civilization" label="civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071" start="13081" end="13090" title="geography" label="geography"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="13092" end="13101" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="13107" end="13117" title="demography" label="demography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526892" start="13259" end="13268" title="Great man theory" label="great man"/>
<link wikidata="Q947456" start="13299" end="13310" title="Sidney Hook" label="Sidney Hook"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13336" end="13355" title="Sidney Hook#Hero in History" label="The Hero in History"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303394" start="13494" end="13510" title="Judith Fetterley" label="Judith Fetterley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962765" start="13576" end="13591" title="Nancy K. Miller" label="Nancy K. Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="13700" end="13713" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q935780" start="14044" end="14066" title="counterfactual history" label="counterfactual history"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="14462" end="14473" title="protagonist" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q21213748" start="14481" end="14498" title="List of stock characters" label="romantic interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q147787" start="14601" end="14614" title="Anna Karenina" label="Anna Karenina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="14669" end="14680" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Leo Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q167768" start="14774" end="14801" title="William Makepeace Thackeray" label="William Makepeace Thackeray"/>
<link wikidata="Q612836" start="14813" end="14824" title="Vanity Fair (novel)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="15504" end="15511" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="15529" end="15539" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q326439" start="15545" end="15557" title="High fantasy" label="epic fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498903" start="15901" end="15914" title="Supervillain" label="super villain"/>
<link wikidata="Q79015" start="16040" end="16048" title="Superman" label="Superman"/>
<link wikidata="Q338430" start="16050" end="16062" title="Wonder Woman" label="Wonder Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="16064" end="16070" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q79037" start="16076" end="16086" title="Spider-Man" label="Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q161272" start="16372" end="16389" title="Social psychology" label="Social psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q296042" start="16456" end="16471" title="Philip Zimbardo" label="Philip Zimbardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q115350041" start="16885" end="16899" title="self-sacrifice" label="self-sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q219695" start="17352" end="17375" title="evolutionary psychology" label="evolutionary psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428558" start="17427" end="17440" title="Handicap principle" label="costly signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q167323" start="17510" end="17518" title="altruism" label="altruism"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="18109" end="18123" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841991" start="18144" end="18163" title="The Denial of Death" label="The Denial of Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q938094" start="18171" end="18184" title="Ernest Becker" label="Ernest Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q277614" start="18386" end="18404" title="Anti-predator adaptation" label="survival mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q254128" start="18685" end="18692" title="dilemma" label="dilemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q193942" start="18844" end="18855" title="immortality" label="immortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q684893" start="18886" end="18895" title="causa sui" label="causa sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="19496" end="19504" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="19538" end="19551" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="age of reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474856" start="20113" end="20137" title="Terror management theory" label="Terror Management Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="20283" end="20288" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q703550" start="20300" end="20323" title="Axis occupation of Greece" label="Nazi occupation in WWII"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112847" start="20357" end="20369" title="Christopher McDougall" label="C. McDougall"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="20394" end="20407" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358144" start="20883" end="20891" title="scholium" label="scholium"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="20901" end="20907" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q129866" start="20972" end="20980" title="Minotaur" label="Minotaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320718" start="20982" end="20989" title="Theseus" label="Theseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033357" start="21260" end="21271" title="Action hero" label="Action hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q110910" start="21274" end="21282" title="Antihero" label="Antihero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018644" start="21285" end="21297" title="Byronic hero" label="Byronic hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043951" start="21300" end="21318" title="Carnegie Hero Fund" label="Carnegie Hero Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q977690" start="21321" end="21333" title="Culture hero" label="Culture hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q84164296" start="21336" end="21345" title="Folk hero" label="Folk hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q105763473" start="21348" end="21361" title="Germanic hero" label="Germanic hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710255" start="21364" end="21380" title="Helping behavior" label="Helping behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q747392" start="21383" end="21399" title="Hero and Leander" label="Hero and Leander"/>
<link wikidata="Q208167" start="21402" end="21426" title="Hero of Socialist Labour" label="Hero of Socialist Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999690" start="21429" end="21443" title="Heroic fantasy" label="Heroic fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619392" start="21446" end="21487" title="List of female action heroes and villains" label="List of female action heroes and villains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621591" start="21490" end="21504" title="List of genres" label="List of genres"/>
<link wikidata="Q51626" start="21507" end="21514" title="Messiah" label="Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909101" start="21517" end="21534" title="Moral development" label="Moral development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291725" start="21537" end="21549" title="Randian hero" label="Randian hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311483" start="21552" end="21566" title="Reluctant hero" label="Reluctant hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341429" start="21569" end="21575" title="Rescue" label="Rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4397403" start="21578" end="21591" title="Romantic hero" label="Romantic hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303797" start="21594" end="21599" title="Soter" label="Soter"/>
<link wikidata="Q468478" start="21602" end="21613" title="Space opera" label="Space opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q13534337" start="21616" end="21631" title="Common good" label="The common good"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969230" start="21634" end="21645" title="Tragic hero" label="Tragic hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q740379" start="21648" end="21654" title="Youxia" label="Youxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q649971" start="21987" end="22000" title="Henry Liddell" label="Lidell, Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q747540" start="22005" end="22017" title="Robert Scott (philologist)" label="Robert Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q300426" start="22025" end="22048" title="A Greek–English Lexicon" label="A Greek–English Lexicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439062" start="22166" end="22178" title="screenonline" label="screenonline"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="22197" end="22219" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q16137248" start="22406" end="22428" title="Marilyn Price-Mitchell" label="Marilyn Price-Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054208" start="22483" end="22494" title="Yoav Shamir" label="Yoav Shamir"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13711" wikidata="Q425597" url="?curid=13711" title="Hydroxide">
<text>Hydroxide is a diatomic anion with chemical formula OH−. It consists of an oxygen and hydrogen atom held together by a single covalent bond, and carries a negative electric charge. It is an important but usually minor constituent of water. It functions as a base, a ligand, a nucleophile, and a catalyst. The hydroxide ion forms salts, some of which dissociate in aqueous solution, liberating solvated hydroxide ions. Sodium hydroxide is a multi-million-ton per annum commodity chemical.
The corresponding electrically neutral compound HO• is the hydroxyl radical. The corresponding covalently bound group –OH of atoms is the hydroxy group.
Both the hydroxide ion and hydroxy group are nucleophiles and can act as catalysts in organic chemistry.

Many inorganic substances which bear the word &quot;hydroxide&quot; in their names are not ionic compounds of the hydroxide ion, but covalent compounds which contain hydroxy groups.

==Hydroxide ion==
The hydroxide ion is naturally produced from water by the self-ionization reaction:
:H3O+ + OH− 2H2O
The equilibrium constant for this reaction, defined as
:&quot;K&quot;w = [H+][OH−]
has a value close to 10−14 at 25 °C, so the concentration of hydroxide ions in pure water is close to 10−7 mol∙dm−3, to satisfy the equal charge constraint. The pH of a solution is equal to the decimal cologarithm of the hydrogen cation concentration; the pH of pure water is close to 7 at ambient temperatures. The concentration of hydroxide ions can be expressed in terms of pOH, which is close to (14 − pH), so the pOH of pure water is also close to 7. Addition of a base to water will reduce the hydrogen cation concentration and therefore increase the hydroxide ion concentration (decrease pH, increase pOH) even if the base does not itself contain hydroxide. For example, ammonia solutions have a pH greater than 7 due to the reaction NH3 + H+ , which decreases the hydrogen cation concentration, which increases the hydroxide ion concentration. pOH can be kept at a nearly constant value with various buffer solutions.

In an aqueous solution the hydroxide ion is a base in the Brønsted–Lowry sense as it can accept a proton from a Brønsted–Lowry acid to form a water molecule. It can also act as a Lewis base by donating a pair of electrons to a Lewis acid. In aqueous solution both hydrogen ions and hydroxide ions are strongly solvated, with hydrogen bonds between oxygen and hydrogen atoms. Indeed, the bihydroxide ion has been characterized in the solid state. This compound is centrosymmetric and has a very short hydrogen bond (114.5 pm) that is similar to the length in the bifluoride ion (114 pm). In aqueous solution the hydroxide ion forms strong hydrogen bonds with water molecules. A consequence of this is that concentrated solutions of sodium hydroxide have high viscosity due to the formation of an extended network of hydrogen bonds as in hydrogen fluoride solutions.

In solution, exposed to air, the hydroxide ion reacts rapidly with atmospheric carbon dioxide, acting as an acid, to form, initially, the bicarbonate ion.
:OH− + CO2 
The equilibrium constant for this reaction can be specified either as a reaction with dissolved carbon dioxide or as a reaction with carbon dioxide gas (see Carbonic acid for values and details). At neutral or acid pH, the reaction is slow, but is catalyzed by the enzyme carbonic anhydrase, which effectively creates hydroxide ions at the active site.

Solutions containing the hydroxide ion attack glass. In this case, the silicates in glass are acting as acids. Basic hydroxides, whether solids or in solution, are stored in airtight plastic containers.

The hydroxide ion can function as a typical electron-pair donor ligand, forming such complexes as tetrahydroxoaluminate/tetrahydroxidoaluminate [Al(OH)4]−. It is also often found in mixed-ligand complexes of the type [ML&quot;x&quot;(OH)&quot;y&quot;]&quot;z&quot;+, where L is a ligand. The hydroxide ion often serves as a bridging ligand, donating one pair of electrons to each of the atoms being bridged. As illustrated by [Pb2(OH)]3+, metal hydroxides are often written in a simplified format. It can even act as a 3-electron-pair donor, as in the tetramer [PtMe3(OH)]4.

When bound to a strongly electron-withdrawing metal centre, hydroxide ligands tend to ionise into oxide ligands. For example, the bichromate ion [HCrO4]− dissociates according to
:[O3CrO–H]− [CrO4]2− + H+
with a p&quot;K&quot;a of about 5.9.

===Vibrational spectra===
The infrared spectra of compounds containing the OH functional group have strong absorption bands in the region centered around 3500 cm−1. The high frequency of molecular vibration is a consequence of the small mass of the hydrogen atom as compared to the mass of the oxygen atom, and this makes detection of hydroxyl groups by infrared spectroscopy relatively easy. A band due to an OH group tends to be sharp. However, the band width increases when the OH group is involved in hydrogen bonding. A water molecule has an HOH bending mode at about 1600 cm−1, so the absence of this band can be used to distinguish an OH group from a water molecule.

When the OH group is bound to a metal ion in a coordination complex, an M−OH bending mode can be observed. For example, in [Sn(OH)6]2− it occurs at 1065 cm−1. The bending mode for a bridging hydroxide tends to be at a lower frequency as in [(bipyridine)Cu(OH)2Cu(bipyridine)]2+ (955 cm−1). M−OH stretching vibrations occur below about 600 cm−1. For example, the tetrahedral ion [Zn(OH)4]2− has bands at 470 cm−1 (Raman-active, polarized) and 420 cm−1 (infrared). The same ion has a (HO)–Zn–(OH) bending vibration at 300 cm−1.

==Applications==
Sodium hydroxide solutions, also known as lye and caustic soda, are used in the manufacture of pulp and paper, textiles, drinking water, soaps and detergents, and as a drain cleaner. Worldwide production in 2004 was approximately 60 million tonnes. The principal method of manufacture is the chloralkali process.

Solutions containing the hydroxide ion are generated when a salt of a weak acid is dissolved in water. Sodium carbonate is used as an alkali, for example, by virtue of the hydrolysis reaction
: + H2O + OH− (p&quot;K&quot;a2 = 10.33 at 25 °C and zero ionic strength)
An example of the use of sodium carbonate as an alkali is when washing soda (another name for sodium carbonate) acts on insoluble esters, such as triglycerides, commonly known as fats, to hydrolyze them and make them soluble.

Bauxite, a basic hydroxide of aluminium, is the principal ore from which the metal is manufactured. Similarly, goethite (α-FeO(OH)) and lepidocrocite (γ-FeO(OH)), basic hydroxides of iron, are among the principal ores used for the manufacture of metallic iron.
==Inorganic hydroxides==

===Alkali metals===
Aside from NaOH and KOH, which enjoy very large scale applications, the hydroxides of the other alkali metals also are useful. Lithium hydroxide (LiOH) is used in breathing gas purification systems for spacecraft, submarines, and rebreathers to remove carbon dioxide from exhaled gas.
:2 LiOH + CO2 → Li2CO3 + H2O
The hydroxide of lithium is preferred to that of sodium because of its lower mass. Sodium hydroxide, potassium hydroxide, and the hydroxides of the other alkali metals are also strong bases.

===Alkaline earth metals===
Beryllium hydroxide Be(OH)2 is amphoteric. The hydroxide itself is insoluble in water, with a solubility product log &quot;K&quot;*sp of −11.7. Addition of acid gives soluble hydrolysis products, including the trimeric ion [Be3(OH)3(H2O)6]3+, which has OH groups bridging between pairs of beryllium ions making a 6-membered ring. At very low pH the aqua ion [Be(H2O)4]2+ is formed. Addition of hydroxide to Be(OH)2 gives the soluble tetrahydroxoberyllate or tetrahydroxidoberyllate anion, [Be(OH)4]2−.

The solubility in water of the other hydroxides in this group increases with increasing atomic number. Magnesium hydroxide Mg(OH)2 is a strong base (up to the limit of its solubility, which is very low in pure water), as are the hydroxides of the heavier alkaline earths: calcium hydroxide, strontium hydroxide, and barium hydroxide. A solution or suspension of calcium hydroxide is known as limewater and can be used to test for the weak acid carbon dioxide. The reaction Ca(OH)2 + CO2 Ca2+ + + OH− illustrates the basicity of calcium hydroxide. Soda lime, which is a mixture of the strong bases NaOH and KOH with Ca(OH)2, is used as a CO2 absorbent.

===Boron group elements===

The simplest hydroxide of boron B(OH)3, known as boric acid, is an acid. Unlike the hydroxides of the alkali and alkaline earth hydroxides, it does not dissociate in aqueous solution. Instead, it reacts with water molecules acting as a Lewis acid, releasing protons.
:B(OH)3 + H2O  + H+
A variety of oxyanions of boron are known, which, in the protonated form, contain hydroxide groups.

Aluminium hydroxide Al(OH)3 is amphoteric and dissolves in alkaline solution.
:Al(OH)3 (solid) + OH− (aq)  (aq)
In the Bayer process for the production of pure aluminium oxide from bauxite minerals this equilibrium is manipulated by careful control of temperature and alkali concentration. In the first phase, aluminium dissolves in hot alkaline solution as , but other hydroxides usually present in the mineral, such as iron hydroxides, do not dissolve because they are not amphoteric. After removal of the insolubles, the so-called red mud, pure aluminium hydroxide is made to precipitate by reducing the temperature and adding water to the extract, which, by diluting the alkali, lowers the pH of the solution. Basic aluminium hydroxide AlO(OH), which may be present in bauxite, is also amphoteric.

In mildly acidic solutions, the hydroxo/hydroxido complexes formed by aluminium are somewhat different from those of boron, reflecting the greater size of Al(III) vs. B(III). The concentration of the species [Al13(OH)32]7+ is very dependent on the total aluminium concentration. Various other hydroxo complexes are found in crystalline compounds. Perhaps the most important is the basic hydroxide AlO(OH), a polymeric material known by the names of the mineral forms boehmite or diaspore, depending on crystal structure. Gallium hydroxide, indium hydroxide, and thallium(III) hydroxide are also amphoteric. Thallium(I) hydroxide is a strong base.

===Carbon group elements===
Carbon forms no simple hydroxides. The hypothetical compound C(OH)4 (orthocarbonic acid or methanetetrol) is unstable in aqueous solution:

:C(OH)4 → + H3O+
: + H+ H2CO3
Carbon dioxide is also known as carbonic anhydride, meaning that it forms by dehydration of carbonic acid H2CO3 (OC(OH)2).

Silicic acid is the name given to a variety of compounds with a generic formula [SiO&quot;x&quot;(OH)4−2&quot;x&quot;]&quot;n&quot;. Orthosilicic acid has been identified in very dilute aqueous solution. It is a weak acid with p&quot;K&quot;a1 = 9.84, p&quot;K&quot;a2 = 13.2 at 25 °C. It is usually written as H4SiO4, but the formula Si(OH)4 is generally accepted. Other silicic acids such as metasilicic acid (H2SiO3), disilicic acid (H2Si2O5), and pyrosilicic acid (H6Si2O7) have been characterized. These acids also have hydroxide groups attached to the silicon; the formulas suggest that these acids are protonated forms of polyoxyanions.

Few hydroxo complexes of germanium have been characterized. Tin(II) hydroxide Sn(OH)2 was prepared in anhydrous media. When tin(II) oxide is treated with alkali the pyramidal hydroxo complex is formed. When solutions containing this ion are acidified, the ion [Sn3(OH)4]2+ is formed together with some basic hydroxo complexes. The structure of [Sn3(OH)4]2+ has a triangle of tin atoms connected by bridging hydroxide groups. Tin(IV) hydroxide is unknown but can be regarded as the hypothetical acid from which stannates, with a formula [Sn(OH)6]2−, are derived by reaction with the (Lewis) basic hydroxide ion.

Hydrolysis of Pb2+ in aqueous solution is accompanied by the formation of various hydroxo-containing complexes, some of which are insoluble. The basic hydroxo complex [Pb6O(OH)6]4+ is a cluster of six lead centres with metal–metal bonds surrounding a central oxide ion. The six hydroxide groups lie on the faces of the two external Pb4 tetrahedra. In strongly alkaline solutions soluble plumbate ions are formed, including [Pb(OH)6]2−.

===Other main-group elements===
In the higher oxidation states of the pnictogens, chalcogens, halogens, and noble gases there are oxoacids in which the central atom is attached to oxide ions and hydroxide ions. Examples include phosphoric acid H3PO4, and sulfuric acid H2SO4. In these compounds one or more hydroxide groups can dissociate with the liberation of hydrogen cations as in a standard Brønsted–Lowry acid. Many oxoacids of sulfur are known and all feature OH groups that can dissociate.

Telluric acid is often written with the formula H2TeO4·2H2O but is better described structurally as Te(OH)6.

Orthoperiodic acid can lose all its protons, eventually forming the periodate ion [IO4]−. It can also be protonated in strongly acidic conditions to give the octahedral ion [I(OH)6]+, completing the isoelectronic series, [E(OH)6]&quot;z&quot;, E = Sn, Sb, Te, I; &quot;z&quot; = −2, −1, 0, +1. Other acids of iodine(VII) that contain hydroxide groups are known, in particular in salts such as the mesoperiodate ion that occurs in K4[I2O8(OH)2]·8H2O.

As is common outside of the alkali metals, hydroxides of the elements in lower oxidation states are complicated. For example, phosphorous acid H3PO3 predominantly has the structure OP(H)(OH)2, in equilibrium with a small amount of P(OH)3.

The oxoacids of chlorine, bromine, and iodine have the formula OA(OH), where &quot;n&quot; is the oxidation number: +1, +3, +5, or +7, and A = Cl, Br, or I. The only oxoacid of fluorine is F(OH), hypofluorous acid. When these acids are neutralized the hydrogen atom is removed from the hydroxide group.

===Transition and post-transition metals===
The hydroxides of the transition metals and post-transition metals usually have the metal in the +2 (M = Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn) or +3 (M = Fe, Ru, Rh, Ir) oxidation state. None are soluble in water, and many are poorly defined. One complicating feature of the hydroxides is their tendency to undergo further condensation to the oxides, a process called olation. Hydroxides of metals in the +1 oxidation state are also poorly defined or unstable. For example, silver hydroxide Ag(OH) decomposes spontaneously to the oxide (Ag2O). Copper(I) and gold(I) hydroxides are also unstable, although stable adducts of CuOH and AuOH are known. The polymeric compounds M(OH)2 and M(OH)3 are in general prepared by increasing the pH of an aqueous solution of the corresponding metal cation until the hydroxide precipitates out of solution. On the converse, the hydroxides dissolve in acidic solution. Zinc hydroxide Zn(OH)2 is amphoteric, forming the tetrahydroxidozincate ion in strongly alkaline solution.

Numerous mixed ligand complexes of these metals with the hydroxide ion exist. In fact, these are in general better defined than the simpler derivatives. Many can be made by deprotonation of the corresponding metal aquo complex.
:L&quot;n&quot;M(OH2) + B L&quot;n&quot;M(OH)– + BH+ (L = ligand, B = base)

Vanadic acid H3VO4 shows similarities with phosphoric acid H3PO4 though it has a much more complex vanadate oxoanion chemistry. Chromic acid H2CrO4, has similarities with sulfuric acid H2SO4; for example, both form acid salts A+[HMO4]−. Some metals, e.g. V, Cr, Nb, Ta, Mo, W, tend to exist in high oxidation states. Rather than forming hydroxides in aqueous solution, they convert to oxo clusters by the process of olation, forming polyoxometalates.

==Basic salts containing hydroxide==
In some cases, the products of partial hydrolysis of metal ion, described above, can be found in crystalline compounds. A striking example is found with zirconium(IV). Because of the high oxidation state, salts of Zr4+ are extensively hydrolyzed in water even at low pH. The compound originally formulated as ZrOCl2·8H2O was found to be the chloride salt of a tetrameric cation [Zr4(OH)8(H2O)16]8+ in which there is a square of Zr4+ ions with two hydroxide groups bridging between Zr atoms on each side of the square and with four water molecules attached to each Zr atom.

The mineral malachite is a typical example of a basic carbonate. The formula, Cu2CO3(OH)2 shows that it is halfway between copper carbonate and copper hydroxide. Indeed, in the past the formula was written as CuCO3·Cu(OH)2. The crystal structure is made up of copper, carbonate and hydroxide ions. The mineral atacamite is an example of a basic chloride. It has the formula Cu2Cl(OH)3. In this case the composition is nearer to that of the hydroxide than that of the chloride: CuCl2·3Cu(OH)2. Copper forms hydroxyphosphate (libethenite), arsenate (olivenite), sulfate (brochantite), and nitrate compounds. White lead is a basic lead carbonate, (PbCO3)2·Pb(OH)2, which has been used as a white pigment because of its opaque quality, though its use is now restricted because it can be a source for lead poisoning.

==Structural chemistry==
The hydroxide ion appears to rotate freely in crystals of the heavier alkali metal hydroxides at higher temperatures so as to present itself as a spherical ion, with an effective ionic radius of about 153 pm. Thus, the high-temperature forms of KOH and NaOH have the sodium chloride structure, which gradually freezes in a monoclinically distorted sodium chloride structure at temperatures below about 300 °C. The OH groups still rotate even at room temperature around their symmetry axes and, therefore, cannot be detected by X-ray diffraction. The room-temperature form of NaOH has the thallium iodide structure. LiOH, however, has a layered structure, made up of tetrahedral Li(OH)4 and (OH)Li4 units. This is consistent with the weakly basic character of LiOH in solution, indicating that the Li–OH bond has much covalent character.

The hydroxide ion displays cylindrical symmetry in hydroxides of divalent metals Ca, Cd, Mn, Fe, and Co. For example, magnesium hydroxide Mg(OH)2 (brucite) crystallizes with the cadmium iodide layer structure, with a kind of close-packing of magnesium and hydroxide ions.

The amphoteric hydroxide Al(OH)3 has four major crystalline forms: gibbsite (most stable), bayerite, nordstrandite, and doyleite.
All these polymorphs are built up of double layers of hydroxide ions—the aluminium atoms on two-thirds of the octahedral holes between the two layers—and differ only in the stacking sequence of the layers. The structures are similar to the brucite structure. However, whereas the brucite structure can be described as a close-packed structure, in gibbsite the OH groups on the underside of one layer rest on the groups of the layer below. This arrangement led to the suggestion that there are directional bonds between OH groups in adjacent layers. This is an unusual form of hydrogen bonding since the two hydroxide ions involved would be expected to point away from each other. The hydrogen atoms have been located by neutron diffraction experiments on α-AlO(OH) (diaspore). The O–H–O distance is very short, at 265 pm; the hydrogen is not equidistant between the oxygen atoms and the short OH bond makes an angle of 12° with the O–O line. A similar type of hydrogen bond has been proposed for other amphoteric hydroxides, including Be(OH)2, Zn(OH)2, and Fe(OH)3.

A number of mixed hydroxides are known with stoichiometry A3MIII(OH)6, A2MIV(OH)6, and AMV(OH)6. As the formula suggests these substances contain M(OH)6 octahedral structural units. Layered double hydroxides may be represented by the formula . Most commonly, &quot;z&quot; = 2, and M2+ = Ca2+, Mg2+, Mn2+, Fe2+, Co2+, Ni2+, Cu2+, or Zn2+; hence &quot;q&quot; = &quot;x&quot;.

==Organic reactions==
Potassium hydroxide and sodium hydroxide are two well-known reagents in organic chemistry.

===Base catalysis===
The hydroxide ion may act as a base catalyst. The base abstracts a proton from a weak acid to give an intermediate that goes on to react with another reagent. Common substrates for proton abstraction are alcohols, phenols, amines, and carbon acids. The p&quot;K&quot;a value for dissociation of a C–H bond is extremely high, but the pKa alpha hydrogens of a carbonyl compound are about 3 log units lower. Typical p&quot;K&quot;a values are 16.7 for acetaldehyde and 19 for acetone. Dissociation can occur in the presence of a suitable base.
:RC(O)CH2R&#x27; + B RC(O)CH−R&#x27; + BH+
The base should have a p&quot;K&quot;a value not less than about 4 log units smaller, or the equilibrium will lie almost completely to the left.

The hydroxide ion by itself is not a strong enough base, but it can be converted to one by adding sodium hydroxide to ethanol
:OH− + EtOH EtO− + H2O
to produce the ethoxide ion. The pKa for self-dissociation of ethanol is about 16, so the alkoxide ion is a strong enough base. The addition of an alcohol to an aldehyde to form a hemiacetal is an example of a reaction that can be catalyzed by the presence of hydroxide. Hydroxide can also act as a Lewis-base catalyst.

===As a nucleophilic reagent===

The hydroxide ion is intermediate in nucleophilicity between the fluoride ion F−, and the amide ion . Ester hydrolysis under alkaline conditions (also known as base hydrolysis)
:R1C(O)OR2 + OH− R1CO(O)H + −OR2 R1CO2− + HOR2
is an example of a hydroxide ion serving as a nucleophile. 

Early methods for manufacturing soap treated triglycerides from animal fat (the ester) with lye. 

Other cases where hydroxide can act as a nucleophilic reagent are amide hydrolysis, the Cannizzaro reaction, nucleophilic aliphatic substitution, nucleophilic aromatic substitution, and in elimination reactions. The reaction medium for KOH and NaOH is usually water but with a phase-transfer catalyst the hydroxide anion can be shuttled into an organic solvent as well, for example in the generation of the reactive intermediate dichlorocarbene.

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q425597" start="0" end="9" title="Hydroxide" label="Hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064242" start="15" end="29" title="polyatomic ion" label="diatomic anion"/>
<link wikidata="Q83147" start="35" end="51" title="chemical formula" label="chemical formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="75" end="81" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="86" end="94" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="95" end="99" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q127920" start="126" end="139" title="covalent bond" label="covalent bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111" start="164" end="179" title="electric charge" label="electric charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638091" start="212" end="238" title="Self-ionization of water" label="minor constituent of water"/>
<link wikidata="Q11193" start="258" end="262" title="base (chemistry)" label="base"/>
<link wikidata="Q193161" start="266" end="272" title="ligand" label="ligand"/>
<link wikidata="Q745930" start="276" end="287" title="nucleophile" label="nucleophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="295" end="303" title="catalyst" label="catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="329" end="334" title="salt (chemistry)" label="salts"/>
<link wikidata="Q189673" start="350" end="360" title="dissociation (chemistry)" label="dissociate"/>
<link wikidata="Q102769" start="418" end="434" title="Sodium hydroxide" label="Sodium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550480" start="468" end="486" title="commodity chemicals" label="commodity chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111" start="506" end="526" title="electrically neutral" label="electrically neutral"/>
<link wikidata="Q427071" start="547" end="563" title="hydroxyl radical" label="hydroxyl radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q127920" start="583" end="593" title="covalent bond" label="covalently"/>
<link wikidata="Q170409" start="600" end="605" title="functional group" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q104116" start="626" end="639" title="hydroxy group" label="hydroxy group"/>
<link wikidata="Q745930" start="686" end="697" title="nucleophile" label="nucleophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351" start="727" end="744" title="organic chemistry" label="organic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q190065" start="752" end="761" title="inorganic" label="inorganic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="838" end="852" title="ionic compound" label="ionic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q104116" start="913" end="926" title="hydroxy group" label="hydroxy group"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="993" end="998" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638091" start="1006" end="1021" title="self-ionization of water" label="self-ionization"/>
<link wikidata="Q849881" start="1033" end="1037" title="Hydronium" label="H3O+"/>
<link wikidata="Q857809" start="1053" end="1073" title="equilibrium constant" label="equilibrium constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3686031" start="1176" end="1189" title="concentration" label="concentration"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="1293" end="1295" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197" start="1334" end="1345" title="cologarithm" label="cologarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q506710" start="1353" end="1368" title="hydron (chemistry)" label="hydrogen cation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1509" end="1512" title="pH#pOH" label="pOH"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="1810" end="1817" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208465" start="2040" end="2055" title="buffer solution" label="buffer solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q906356" start="2065" end="2081" title="aqueous solution" label="aqueous solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11193" start="2105" end="2109" title="base (chemistry)" label="base"/>
<link wikidata="Q556036" start="2117" end="2131" title="Brønsted–Lowry acid–base theory" label="Brønsted–Lowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q900337" start="2238" end="2248" title="Lewis base" label="Lewis base"/>
<link wikidata="Q169324" start="2384" end="2397" title="hydrogen bond" label="hydrogen bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q192274" start="2580" end="2582" title="picometre" label="pm"/>
<link wikidata="Q654889" start="2621" end="2631" title="bifluoride" label="bifluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q128709" start="2817" end="2826" title="viscosity" label="viscosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468" start="2895" end="2912" title="hydrogen fluoride" label="hydrogen fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="3004" end="3018" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q409202" start="3063" end="3074" title="bicarbonate" label="bicarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q857809" start="3096" end="3116" title="equilibrium constant" label="equilibrium constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q104334" start="3249" end="3262" title="Carbonic acid" label="Carbonic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="3357" end="3363" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q284089" start="3364" end="3382" title="carbonic anhydrase" label="carbonic anhydrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="3492" end="3497" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130787" start="3517" end="3525" title="silicate" label="silicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475577" start="3620" end="3628" title="airtight" label="airtight"/>
<link wikidata="Q193161" start="3714" end="3720" title="ligand" label="ligand"/>
<link wikidata="Q424081" start="3784" end="3793" title="aluminate" label="aluminate"/>
<link wikidata="Q551821" start="3974" end="3989" title="bridging ligand" label="bridging ligand"/>
<link wikidata="Q189673" start="4312" end="4318" title="dissociation (chemistry)" label="ionise"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="4499" end="4515" title="infrared spectrum" label="infrared spectra"/>
<link wikidata="Q170409" start="4547" end="4563" title="functional group" label="functional group"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="4576" end="4592" title="spectral line" label="absorption bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q900121" start="4656" end="4675" title="molecular vibration" label="molecular vibration"/>
<link wikidata="Q70906" start="4823" end="4844" title="infrared spectroscopy" label="infrared spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="4920" end="4930" title="spectral linewidth" label="band width"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="5191" end="5211" title="coordination complex" label="coordination complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q413658" start="5386" end="5396" title="bipyridine" label="bipyridine"/>
<link wikidata="Q413658" start="5407" end="5417" title="bipyridine" label="bipyridine"/>
<link wikidata="Q160003" start="5506" end="5517" title="tetrahedron" label="tetrahedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q862228" start="5557" end="5562" title="Raman spectroscopy" label="Raman"/>
<link wikidata="Q102769" start="5688" end="5704" title="Sodium hydroxide" label="Sodium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122650" start="5730" end="5733" title="lye" label="lye"/>
<link wikidata="Q672506" start="5783" end="5787" title="wood pulp" label="pulp"/>
<link wikidata="Q11472" start="5792" end="5797" title="paper" label="paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823" start="5799" end="5806" title="textile" label="textile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892" start="5809" end="5823" title="drinking water" label="drinking water"/>
<link wikidata="Q34396" start="5825" end="5829" title="soap" label="soap"/>
<link wikidata="Q334637" start="5835" end="5844" title="detergent" label="detergent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754157" start="5856" end="5869" title="drain cleaner" label="drain cleaner"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="5929" end="5934" title="tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q139863" start="5980" end="5999" title="chloralkali process" label="chloralkali process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634792" start="6072" end="6081" title="weak acid" label="weak acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q190227" start="6105" end="6121" title="Sodium carbonate" label="Sodium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="6174" end="6184" title="hydrolysis" label="hydrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q325519" start="6209" end="6225" title="acid dissociation constant" label="p&amp;quot;K&amp;quot;a2"/>
<link wikidata="Q898396" start="6252" end="6266" title="ionic strength" label="ionic strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q190227" start="6331" end="6343" title="washing soda" label="washing soda"/>
<link wikidata="Q101487" start="6398" end="6403" title="ester" label="ester"/>
<link wikidata="Q186319" start="6414" end="6426" title="triglyceride" label="triglyceride"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078" start="6495" end="6502" title="Bauxite" label="Bauxite"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="6525" end="6534" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q189703" start="6606" end="6614" title="goethite" label="goethite"/>
<link wikidata="Q410583" start="6631" end="6644" title="lepidocrocite" label="lepidocrocite"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="6678" end="6682" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q407613" start="6929" end="6946" title="Lithium hydroxide" label="Lithium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q754256" start="6965" end="6978" title="breathing gas" label="breathing gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="7004" end="7014" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="7016" end="7025" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428339" start="7032" end="7042" title="rebreather" label="rebreather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="7054" end="7068" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q102769" start="7199" end="7215" title="Sodium hydroxide" label="Sodium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q132298" start="7217" end="7236" title="potassium hydroxide" label="potassium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q19557" start="7270" end="7282" title="alkali metal" label="alkali metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11193" start="7293" end="7304" title="strong base" label="strong base"/>
<link wikidata="Q419729" start="7336" end="7355" title="Beryllium hydroxide" label="Beryllium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q182677" start="7367" end="7377" title="amphoteric" label="amphoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q170731" start="7403" end="7412" title="insoluble" label="insoluble"/>
<link wikidata="Q863829" start="7430" end="7448" title="solubility product" label="solubility product"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="7511" end="7521" title="hydrolysis" label="hydrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822745" start="7685" end="7693" title="Metal ions in aqueous solution" label="aqua ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4084881" start="7808" end="7817" title="beryllate" label="beryllate"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="7927" end="7940" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q407548" start="7942" end="7961" title="Magnesium hydroxide" label="Magnesium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q182849" start="8111" end="8128" title="calcium hydroxide" label="calcium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q132428" start="8130" end="8149" title="strontium hydroxide" label="strontium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q407605" start="8155" end="8171" title="barium hydroxide" label="barium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q182849" start="8231" end="8240" title="limewater" label="limewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634792" start="8273" end="8282" title="weak acid" label="weak acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q754282" start="8386" end="8395" title="Soda lime" label="Soda lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q187045" start="8569" end="8579" title="boric acid" label="boric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7706559" start="8801" end="8801" title="tetrahydroxyborate" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q3269344" start="8820" end="8828" title="oxyanion" label="oxyanion"/>
<link wikidata="Q407125" start="8908" end="8927" title="Aluminium hydroxide" label="Aluminium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q424081" start="9014" end="9014" title="aluminate" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q248670" start="9027" end="9040" title="Bayer process" label="Bayer process"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078" start="9089" end="9096" title="bauxite" label="bauxite"/>
<link wikidata="Q747996" start="9442" end="9449" title="red mud" label="red mud"/>
<link wikidata="Q409757" start="10178" end="10186" title="boehmite" label="boehmite"/>
<link wikidata="Q411891" start="10190" end="10198" title="diaspore" label="diaspore"/>
<link wikidata="Q419661" start="10232" end="10249" title="Gallium hydroxide" label="Gallium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025169" start="10251" end="10267" title="indium hydroxide" label="indium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331904" start="10273" end="10296" title="thallium(III) hydroxide" label="thallium(III) hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630415" start="10318" end="10339" title="Thallium(I) hydroxide" label="Thallium(I) hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q50308749" start="10426" end="10447" title="hypothetical compound" label="hypothetical compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2491625" start="10456" end="10474" title="orthocarbonic acid" label="orthocarbonic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="10557" end="10571" title="Carbon dioxide" label="Carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q104334" start="10649" end="10662" title="carbonic acid" label="carbonic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457481" start="10681" end="10693" title="Silicic acid" label="Silicic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269344" start="11314" end="11322" title="oxyanion" label="oxyanion"/>
<link wikidata="Q867" start="11351" end="11360" title="germanium" label="germanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q115740" start="11386" end="11403" title="Tin(II) hydroxide" label="Tin(II) hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q204980" start="11450" end="11463" title="tin(II) oxide" label="tin(II) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600118" start="11836" end="11844" title="stannate" label="stannate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334960" start="12325" end="12333" title="plumbate" label="plumbate"/>
<link wikidata="Q106675" start="12445" end="12454" title="pnictogen" label="pnictogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q104567" start="12457" end="12466" title="chalcogen" label="chalcogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605" start="12469" end="12476" title="halogen" label="halogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19609" start="12483" end="12492" title="noble gas" label="noble gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q184782" start="12603" end="12618" title="phosphoric acid" label="phosphoric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="12630" end="12643" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q189673" start="12703" end="12713" title="dissociation (chemistry)" label="dissociate"/>
<link wikidata="Q556036" start="12771" end="12785" title="Brønsted–Lowry acid–base theory" label="Brønsted–Lowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q425172" start="12874" end="12887" title="Telluric acid" label="Telluric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q899823" start="13183" end="13196" title="isoelectronic" label="isoelectronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q64703485" start="13561" end="13577" title="phosphorous acid" label="phosphorous acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="13691" end="13699" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q879" start="13701" end="13708" title="bromine" label="bromine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103" start="13714" end="13720" title="iodine" label="iodine"/>
<link wikidata="Q484152" start="13773" end="13789" title="oxidation number" label="oxidation number"/>
<link wikidata="Q650" start="13852" end="13860" title="fluorine" label="fluorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q417652" start="13871" end="13888" title="hypofluorous acid" label="hypofluorous acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q19588" start="14045" end="14061" title="transition metal" label="transition metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19591" start="14067" end="14088" title="post-transition metal" label="post-transition metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350156" start="14377" end="14384" title="olation" label="olation"/>
<link wikidata="Q407815" start="14483" end="14499" title="silver hydroxide" label="silver hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q113796" start="14821" end="14832" title="precipitate" label="precipitate"/>
<link wikidata="Q204820" start="14912" end="14926" title="Zinc hydroxide" label="Zinc hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q204649" start="14976" end="14983" title="zincate" label="zincate"/>
<link wikidata="Q623024" start="15228" end="15246" title="metal aquo complex" label="metal aquo complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q426228" start="15325" end="15337" title="Vanadic acid" label="Vanadic acid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15344" end="15362" title="acid dissociation constant#Polyprotic acids" label="shows similarities"/>
<link wikidata="Q426228" start="15424" end="15432" title="vanadate" label="vanadate"/>
<link wikidata="Q422642" start="15453" end="15465" title="Chromic acid" label="Chromic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q622311" start="15540" end="15549" title="acid salt" label="acid salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350156" start="15741" end="15748" title="olation" label="olation"/>
<link wikidata="Q910291" start="15758" end="15773" title="polyoxometalate" label="polyoxometalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038" start="15967" end="15976" title="zirconium" label="zirconium"/>
<link wikidata="Q53832" start="16174" end="16184" title="tetrameric" label="tetrameric"/>
<link wikidata="Q164411" start="16400" end="16409" title="malachite" label="malachite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792005" start="16511" end="16527" title="basic copper carbonate" label="copper carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q186357" start="16532" end="16548" title="copper hydroxide" label="copper hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="16616" end="16633" title="crystal structure" label="crystal structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q409775" start="16698" end="16707" title="atacamite" label="atacamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q420481" start="16912" end="16923" title="libethenite" label="libethenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q415831" start="16936" end="16945" title="olivenite" label="olivenite"/>
<link wikidata="Q411036" start="16957" end="16968" title="brochantite" label="brochantite"/>
<link wikidata="Q656004" start="16994" end="17004" title="White lead" label="White lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="17016" end="17020" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="17081" end="17088" title="pigment" label="pigment"/>
<link wikidata="Q110315" start="17184" end="17198" title="lead poisoning" label="lead poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q908801" start="17405" end="17417" title="ionic radius" label="ionic radius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17493" end="17508" title="sodium chloride#Crystal structure" label="sodium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q12101244" start="17753" end="17770" title="X-ray diffraction" label="X-ray diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q425255" start="17814" end="17829" title="thallium(I) iodide" label="thallium iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q419250" start="18211" end="18218" title="brucite" label="brucite"/>
<link wikidata="Q425252" start="18242" end="18256" title="cadmium iodide" label="cadmium iodide"/>
<link wikidata="Q182677" start="18341" end="18351" title="amphoterism" label="amphoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q408516" start="18404" end="18412" title="gibbsite" label="gibbsite"/>
<link wikidata="Q408516" start="18428" end="18436" title="bayerite" label="bayerite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18438" end="18451" title="nordstrandite" label="nordstrandite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714815" start="18457" end="18465" title="doyleite" label="doyleite"/>
<link wikidata="Q907364" start="18477" end="18487" title="Polymorphism (materials science)" label="polymorphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q169324" start="19043" end="19056" title="hydrogen bond" label="hydrogen bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q910499" start="19187" end="19206" title="neutron diffraction" label="neutron diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q411891" start="19233" end="19241" title="diaspore" label="diaspore"/>
<link wikidata="Q17078098" start="19716" end="19741" title="Layered double hydroxides" label="Layered double hydroxides"/>
<link wikidata="Q132298" start="19933" end="19952" title="Potassium hydroxide" label="Potassium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q102769" start="19957" end="19973" title="sodium hydroxide" label="sodium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356542" start="19993" end="20000" title="reagent" label="reagent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351" start="20005" end="20022" title="organic chemistry" label="organic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4674069" start="20077" end="20090" title="base catalyst" label="base catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q156" start="20250" end="20257" title="Alcohol (chemistry)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q130336" start="20260" end="20266" title="phenol" label="phenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q167198" start="20269" end="20274" title="amine" label="amine"/>
<link wikidata="Q898552" start="20281" end="20292" title="carbon acid" label="carbon acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q325519" start="20299" end="20314" title="acid dissociation constant" label="p&amp;quot;K&amp;quot;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q910020" start="20383" end="20397" title="alpha hydrogen" label="alpha hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q61457" start="20495" end="20507" title="acetaldehyde" label="acetaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q49546" start="20519" end="20526" title="acetone" label="acetone"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="20894" end="20901" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q278540" start="20940" end="20948" title="ethoxide" label="ethoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q325519" start="20958" end="20961" title="acid dissociation constant" label="pKa"/>
<link wikidata="Q101497" start="21086" end="21094" title="aldehyde" label="aldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q414939" start="21105" end="21115" title="hemiacetal" label="hemiacetal"/>
<link wikidata="Q745930" start="21316" end="21331" title="nucleophilicity" label="nucleophilicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q44793182" start="21344" end="21352" title="fluoride" label="fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q4026895" start="21369" end="21374" title="azanide" label="amide"/>
<link wikidata="Q125553371" start="21381" end="21397" title="Ester hydrolysis" label="Ester hydrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="21439" end="21454" title="base hydrolysis" label="base hydrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q335024" start="21582" end="21600" title="saponification" label="manufacturing soap"/>
<link wikidata="Q186319" start="21609" end="21621" title="triglyceride" label="triglyceride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122650" start="21656" end="21659" title="lye" label="lye"/>
<link wikidata="Q188777" start="21729" end="21734" title="amide" label="amide"/>
<link wikidata="Q621539" start="21751" end="21770" title="Cannizzaro reaction" label="Cannizzaro reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q658656" start="21772" end="21807" title="nucleophilic aliphatic substitution" label="nucleophilic aliphatic substitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q901713" start="21809" end="21843" title="nucleophilic aromatic substitution" label="nucleophilic aromatic substitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q725979" start="21852" end="21872" title="elimination reaction" label="elimination reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q11736886" start="21940" end="21963" title="phase-transfer catalyst" label="phase-transfer catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q425210" start="22092" end="22107" title="dichlorocarbene" label="dichlorocarbene"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13713" wikidata="Q312640" url="?curid=13713" title="H. R. Giger">
<text>Hans Ruedi Giger ( ; ; 5 February 1940 – 12 May 2014) was a Swiss artist best known for his airbrushed images that blended human physiques with machines, an art style known as &quot;biomechanical&quot;. He was part of the special effects team that won an Academy Award for the visual design of Ridley Scott&#x27;s 1979 sci-fi horror film &quot;Alien&quot;, and was responsible for creating the xenomorph alien itself. His work is on permanent display at the H.R. Giger Museum in Gruyères, Switzerland. His style has been adapted to many forms of media, including album covers, furniture, tattoos and video games.

==Early life==
Giger was born in 1940 in Chur, the capital city of Graubünden, the largest and easternmost Swiss canton. His father, a pharmacist, viewed art as a &quot;breadless profession&quot; and strongly encouraged him to enter pharmacy. He moved to Zürich in 1962 where he studied architecture and industrial design at the School of Applied Arts until 1970.

==Career==

Giger&#x27;s first success occurred when H. H. Kunz, co-owner of Switzerland&#x27;s first poster publishing company, printed and distributed Giger&#x27;s first posters, beginning in 1969.

Giger&#x27;s style and thematic execution were influential. He was part of the special effects team that won an Academy Award for Best Achievement in Visual Effects for their design work on the film &quot;Alien&quot;. His design for the Alien was inspired by his painting &quot;Necronom IV&quot; and earned him the Oscar in 1980. His books of paintings, particularly &quot;Necronomicon&quot; and &quot;Necronomicon II&quot; (1985) and the frequent appearance of his art in &quot;Omni&quot; magazine contributed to his rise to international prominence. Giger was admitted to the Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame in 2013. He is also well known for artwork on several music recording albums including &quot;Danzig III: How The Gods Kill&quot; by Danzig, &quot;Brain Salad Surgery&quot; by Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer, &quot;Attahk&quot; by Magma, &quot;Heartwork&quot; by Carcass, &quot;To Mega Therion&quot; by Celtic Frost, &quot;Eparistera Daimones&quot; and &quot;Melana Chasmata&quot; by Triptykon, Deborah Harry&#x27;s &quot;KooKoo,&quot; &quot;Atomic Playboys&quot; by Steve Stevens, and &quot;Frankenchrist&quot; by the Dead Kennedys.

In 1998, Giger acquired the Saint-Germain Castle in Gruyères, Switzerland, which now houses the H.R. Giger Museum, a permanent repository of his work.

==Personal life==
Giger had a relationship with Swiss actress Li Tobler until she died by suicide in 1975. Tobler&#x27;s image appears in many of his paintings. He married Mia Bonzanigo in 1979; they divorced a year and a half later.

Giger lived and worked in Zürich with his second wife, Carmen Maria Scheifele Giger, who is the director of the H.R. Giger Museum.

On 12 May 2014, Giger died in a Zürich hospital after suffering injuries from a fall.

==Style==
Giger started with small ink drawings before progressing to oil paintings. For most of his career, he worked predominantly in airbrush, creating monochromatic canvasses depicting surreal, nightmarish dreamscapes. He also worked with pastels, markers and ink.

Giger&#x27;s most distinctive stylistic innovation was that of a representation of human bodies and machines in cold, interconnected relationships, which he described as &quot;biomechanical&quot;. His main influences were painters Dado, Ernst Fuchs, and Salvador Dalí. He was introduced to Dali by painter Robert Venosa. Giger was also influenced by Polish sculptor Stanislaw Szukalski, and by painters Austin Osman Spare and Mati Klarwein, and was a personal friend of Timothy Leary. He studied interior and industrial design at the School of Commercial Art in Zurich from 1962 to 1965, and made his first paintings as art therapy.

==Other works==
Giger directed a number of films, including &quot;Swiss Made&quot; (1968), &quot;Tagtraum&quot; (1973), &quot;Giger&#x27;s Necronomicon&quot; (1975) and &quot;Giger&#x27;s Alien&quot; (1979).

Giger created furniture designs, particularly the Harkonnen Capo Chair for a film of the novel &quot;Dune&quot; that was to be directed by Alejandro Jodorowsky. Many years later, David Lynch directed the film, using only rough concepts by Giger. Giger had wished to work with Lynch, as he stated in one of his books that Lynch&#x27;s film &quot;Eraserhead&quot; was closer than even Giger&#x27;s own films to realizing his vision.

Giger also applied his biomechanical style to interior design. One &quot;Giger Bar&quot; appeared in Tokyo, but the realization of his designs was a great disappointment to him, since the Japanese organization behind the venture did not wait for his final designs, and instead used Giger&#x27;s rough preliminary sketches. For that reason Giger disowned the Tokyo bar. The two Giger Bars in his native Switzerland, in Gruyères and Chur, were built under Giger&#x27;s close supervision and they accurately reflect his original concepts. At The Limelight in Manhattan, Giger&#x27;s artwork was licensed to decorate the VIP room, the uppermost chapel of the landmarked church, but it was never intended to be a permanent installation and bore no similarity to the bars in Switzerland. The arrangement was terminated after two years when the Limelight closed.

Giger&#x27;s art has greatly influenced tattooists and fetishists worldwide. Under a licensing deal Ibanez guitars released an H. R. Giger signature series: the Ibanez ICHRG2, an Ibanez Iceman, features &quot;NY City VI&quot;, the Ibanez RGTHRG1 has &quot;NY City XI&quot; printed on it, the S Series SHRG1Z has a metal-coated engraving of &quot;Biomechanical Matrix&quot; on it, and a 4-string SRX bass, SRXHRG1, has &quot;N.Y. City X&quot; on it.

Giger is often referred to in popular culture, especially in science fiction and cyberpunk. William Gibson (who wrote an early script for &quot;Alien 3&quot;) seems particularly fascinated: A minor character in &quot;Virtual Light&quot;, Lowell, is described as having &quot;New York XXIV&quot; tattooed across his back, and in &quot;Idoru&quot; a secondary character, Yamazaki, describes the buildings of nanotech Japan as Giger-esque.

===Films===
* &quot;Alien&quot; (designed, among other things, the Alien creature, &quot;The Derelict&quot; and the &quot;Space Jockey&quot;)
* &quot;Aliens&quot; (credited for the creation of the creature only)
* &quot;Alien 3&quot; (designed the dog-like Alien bodyshape, plus a number of unused concepts, many mentioned on the special features disc of &quot;Alien 3&quot;, despite not being credited in the theatrical version)
* &quot;Alien Resurrection&quot; (credited for the creation of the creature only)
* &quot;Alien vs. Predator&quot; (credited for the creation of the creature only)
* &quot;Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem&quot; (credited for the creation of the creature only)
* &quot;Poltergeist II: The Other Side&quot;
* &quot;Killer Condom&quot; (creative consultant, set design)
* &quot;Species&quot; (designed Sil, and the Ghost Train in a dream sequence)
* &quot;Species II&quot; (the film includes Eve, based on creature Sil from the first &quot;Species&quot; film)
* &quot;Future-Kill&quot; (designed artwork for the movie poster)
* &quot;&quot; (creature designs)
* &quot;Prometheus&quot; (The 2012 film includes &quot;The Derelict&quot; spacecraft and the &quot;Space Jockey&quot; designs from the first &quot;Alien&quot; film, as well as a &quot;Temple&quot; design from the failed Jodorowsky &quot;Dune&quot; project and original extraterrestrial murals created exclusively for &quot;Prometheus&quot;, based in conceptual art from &quot;Alien&quot;. Unlike &quot;Alien Resurrection&quot;, the &quot;Prometheus&quot; film credited H. R. Giger with the original designs.)
* &quot;&quot; (the 2017 film includes the Alien creature, &quot;The Derelict&quot; spacecraft and the &quot;Space Jockey&quot; designs from the first &quot;Alien&quot; film. It also showcases the Proto Bloodburster / Neomorph in David&#x27;s lab, which was designed but unused for &quot;Prometheus&quot;.)

===Work for recording artists===

* Celtic Frost: &quot;To Mega Therion&quot;
* Magma: &quot;Attahk&quot;
* Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer: &quot;Brain Salad Surgery&quot; 
* Floh de Cologne: &quot;Mumien&quot; 
* Steve Stevens&#x27; &quot;Atomic Playboys&quot;
* Deborah Harry, portraits for &quot;KooKoo&quot; album cover and videos &quot;Backfired&quot; and &quot;Now I Know You Know&quot; 
* hide: &quot;Hide Your Face&quot;
* Carcass: &quot;Heartwork&quot; 
* Danzig: &quot;Danzig III: How the Gods Kill&quot;
* Dead Kennedys&#x27; album &quot;Frankenchrist&quot;, Poster insert of Landscape XX (which led to an obscenity trial)
* Atrocity – &quot;Hallucinations&quot;
* Korn&#x27;s Jonathan Davis commissioned Giger to design and sculpt a microphone stand, with the requirement that it be biomechanical, erotic, and movable. The contract allowed for five aluminium microphone stands to be made, but Davis purchased only two of the three to which he was entitled. The design of the microphone stand was later adapted to Giger&#x27;s &quot;Nubian Queen&quot;, transforming it into a fine art sculpture.
* Helped to design the first professional video clip of &quot;Böhse Onkelz&quot; called &quot;Dunkler Ort&quot; (dark location) from their album &quot;Ein böses Märchen ... aus tausend finsteren Nächten&quot;, which was released in 2000.
* Ibanez Guitars released a series of H. R. Giger Signature Models with artwork on the body.
* Triptykon: &quot;Eparistera Daimones&quot;
* Triptykon: &quot;Melana Chasmata&quot;

===Interior decoration===
* Giger Bars in Switzerland&#x27;s Chur and Gruyères
* Maison d&#x27;Ailleurs (House of Elsewhere) in Yverdon-les-Bains

===Video games===
* &quot;Dark Seed&quot; and its sequel, &quot;Dark Seed II&quot;, both adventure games for the Amiga, Macintosh, and PC, were developed by Cyberdreams and directly based on Giger&#x27;s input.
* Manfred Trenz incorporated Giger inspired graphics in many of his games, most notably the Turrican series and Katakis
* &quot;Scorn&quot;, a survival horror game inspired by Giger art

==Recognition==

Giger was awarded the Inkpot Award in 1979.

In addition to his awards, Giger was recognized by a variety of festivals and institutions. On the one year anniversary of his death, the Museum of Arts and Design in New York City staged the series &quot;The Unseen Cinema of HR Giger&quot; in May 2015.

&quot;Dark Star: H. R. Giger&#x27;s World&quot;, a biographical documentary by Belinda Sallin, debuted 27 September 2014 in Zurich, Switzerland.

In July 2018, the asteroid 109712 Giger was named in his memory.

==References==
==External links==
* Museum HR Giger
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q312640" start="0" end="16" title="H. R. Giger" label="Hans Ruedi Giger"/>
<link wikidata="Q408151" start="92" end="102" title="airbrushed" label="airbrushed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915091" start="182" end="195" title="biomechanical art" label="biomechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q381243" start="222" end="237" title="special effects" label="special effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q393686" start="255" end="268" title="Academy Award for Best Visual Effects" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q56005" start="294" end="306" title="Ridley Scott" label="Ridley Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q103569" start="344" end="349" title="Alien (film)" label="Alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q209758" start="394" end="403" title="xenomorph" label="xenomorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q69600" start="479" end="487" title="Gruyères" label="Gruyères"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="489" end="500" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333350" start="563" end="575" title="album covers" label="album covers"/>
<link wikidata="Q72941682" start="588" end="594" title="tattoo" label="tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q69007" start="655" end="659" title="Chur" label="Chur"/>
<link wikidata="Q11925" start="681" end="691" title="Graubünden" label="Graubünden"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="721" end="733" title="Cantons of Switzerland" label="Swiss canton"/>
<link wikidata="Q614304" start="847" end="855" title="pharmacy" label="pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="869" end="875" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q243606" start="918" end="935" title="industrial design" label="industrial design"/>
<link wikidata="Q393686" start="1292" end="1305" title="Academy Award for Best Visual Effects" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q103569" start="1385" end="1390" title="Alien (film)" label="Alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q209758" start="1417" end="1422" title="Alien (creature in Alien franchise)" label="Alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q209758" start="1458" end="1469" title="Necronom IV" label="Necronom IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="1495" end="1500" title="Academy Awards" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6985678" start="1553" end="1565" title="Necronomicon (H. R. Giger)" label="Necronomicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q663053" start="1659" end="1663" title="Omni (magazine)" label="Omni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384356" start="1758" end="1798" title="Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame" label="Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1892" end="1921" title="Danzig III: How The Gods Kill" label="Danzig III: How The Gods Kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q649175" start="1931" end="1937" title="Danzig (band)" label="Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q572651" start="1945" end="1964" title="Brain Salad Surgery" label="Brain Salad Surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q273171" start="1974" end="2000" title="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer" label="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664917" start="2008" end="2014" title="Attahk" label="Attahk"/>
<link wikidata="Q914489" start="2024" end="2029" title="Magma (band)" label="Magma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592490" start="2037" end="2046" title="Heartwork" label="Heartwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q283835" start="2056" end="2063" title="Carcass (band)" label="Carcass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753985" start="2071" end="2086" title="To Mega Therion (album)" label="To Mega Therion"/>
<link wikidata="Q324645" start="2096" end="2108" title="Celtic Frost" label="Celtic Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441355" start="2116" end="2135" title="Eparistera Daimones" label="Eparistera Daimones"/>
<link wikidata="Q15734090" start="2152" end="2167" title="Melana Chasmata" label="Melana Chasmata"/>
<link wikidata="Q952013" start="2177" end="2186" title="Triptykon" label="Triptykon"/>
<link wikidata="Q215026" start="2188" end="2208" title="Debbie Harry" label="Deborah Harry&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430489" start="2215" end="2221" title="KooKoo" label="KooKoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628996" start="2235" end="2250" title="Atomic Playboys" label="Atomic Playboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q374962" start="2260" end="2273" title="Steve Stevens" label="Steve Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q279843" start="2285" end="2298" title="Frankenchrist" label="Frankenchrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q208211" start="2308" end="2325" title="Dead Kennedys" label="the Dead Kennedys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7400636" start="2356" end="2376" title="Saint-Germain Castle" label="Saint-Germain Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q69600" start="2380" end="2388" title="Gruyères" label="Gruyères"/>
<link wikidata="Q6539123" start="2542" end="2551" title="Li Tobler" label="Li Tobler"/>
<link wikidata="Q408151" start="3070" end="3078" title="airbrush" label="airbrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q192692" start="3132" end="3143" title="nightmare" label="nightmarish"/>
<link wikidata="Q235799" start="3322" end="3350" title="cyborg" label="interconnected relationships"/>
<link wikidata="Q476279" start="3435" end="3439" title="Dado (painter)" label="Dado"/>
<link wikidata="Q112856" start="3441" end="3452" title="Ernst Fuchs (artist)" label="Ernst Fuchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="3458" end="3471" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350598" start="3510" end="3523" title="Robert Venosa" label="Robert Venosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4349507" start="3570" end="3589" title="Stanislaw Szukalski" label="Stanislaw Szukalski"/>
<link wikidata="Q713017" start="3607" end="3625" title="Austin Osman Spare" label="Austin Osman Spare"/>
<link wikidata="Q213890" start="3630" end="3643" title="Mati Klarwein" label="Mati Klarwein"/>
<link wikidata="Q211731" start="3674" end="3687" title="Timothy Leary" label="Timothy Leary"/>
<link wikidata="Q928865" start="3824" end="3835" title="art therapy" label="art therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658241" start="4097" end="4117" title="Harkonnen Capo Chair" label="Harkonnen Capo Chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q190192" start="4148" end="4152" title="Dune (novel)" label="Dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q263730" start="4186" end="4206" title="Alejandro Jodorowsky" label="Alejandro Jodorowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071" start="4226" end="4237" title="David Lynch" label="David Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11618" start="4392" end="4402" title="Eraserhead" label="Eraserhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560268" start="4552" end="4561" title="Giger Bar" label="Giger Bar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5018" end="5031" title="The Limelight#New York City location" label="The Limelight"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619507" start="5391" end="5401" title="List of fetish artists" label="fetishists"/>
<link wikidata="Q320458" start="5436" end="5442" title="Ibanez" label="Ibanez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536620" start="5515" end="5528" title="Ibanez Iceman" label="Ibanez Iceman"/>
<link wikidata="Q174526" start="5867" end="5876" title="cyberpunk" label="cyberpunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q188987" start="5878" end="5892" title="William Gibson" label="William Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q108543" start="5930" end="5937" title="Alien 3" label="Alien 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q897105" start="6003" end="6016" title="Virtual Light" label="Virtual Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q373601" start="6120" end="6125" title="Idoru" label="Idoru"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6155" end="6163" title="Shinya Yamazaki" label="Yamazaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="6192" end="6200" title="Nanotechnology" label="nanotech"/>
<link wikidata="Q103569" start="6244" end="6249" title="Alien (film)" label="Alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q209758" start="6291" end="6296" title="Alien (creature in Alien franchise)" label="Alien"/>
<link wikidata="Q104814" start="6374" end="6380" title="Aliens (film)" label="Aliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q108543" start="6444" end="6451" title="Alien 3" label="Alien 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q458314" start="6662" end="6680" title="Alien Resurrection" label="Alien Resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q155163" start="6744" end="6762" title="Alien vs. Predator (film)" label="Alien vs. Predator"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6826" end="6854" title="Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem" label="Aliens vs. Predator: Requiem"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6918" end="6948" title="Poltergeist II: The Other Side" label="Poltergeist II: The Other Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q473861" start="6963" end="6976" title="Killer Condom" label="Killer Condom"/>
<link wikidata="Q337747" start="7025" end="7032" title="Species (film)" label="Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q602389" start="7103" end="7113" title="Species II" label="Species II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510596" start="7215" end="7226" title="Future-Kill" label="Future-Kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q192686" start="7315" end="7325" title="Prometheus (2012 film)" label="Prometheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q324645" start="8160" end="8172" title="Celtic Frost" label="Celtic Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753985" start="8180" end="8195" title="To Mega Therion (album)" label="To Mega Therion"/>
<link wikidata="Q914489" start="8204" end="8209" title="Magma (band)" label="Magma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664917" start="8217" end="8223" title="Attahk" label="Attahk"/>
<link wikidata="Q273171" start="8232" end="8258" title="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer" label="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q572651" start="8266" end="8285" title="Brain Salad Surgery" label="Brain Salad Surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q314152" start="8295" end="8310" title="Floh de Cologne" label="Floh de Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q374962" start="8334" end="8347" title="Steve Stevens" label="Steve Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3628996" start="8360" end="8375" title="Atomic Playboys" label="Atomic Playboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q215026" start="8384" end="8397" title="Debbie Harry" label="Deborah Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430489" start="8419" end="8425" title="KooKoo" label="KooKoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q44315" start="8516" end="8520" title="Hide (musician)" label="hide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409568" start="8528" end="8542" title="Hide Your Face" label="Hide Your Face"/>
<link wikidata="Q283835" start="8551" end="8558" title="Carcass (band)" label="Carcass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592490" start="8566" end="8575" title="Heartwork" label="Heartwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q649175" start="8585" end="8591" title="Danzig (band)" label="Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8599" end="8628" title="Danzig III: How the Gods Kill" label="Danzig III: How the Gods Kill"/>
<link wikidata="Q208211" start="8637" end="8650" title="Dead Kennedys" label="Dead Kennedys"/>
<link wikidata="Q279843" start="8669" end="8682" title="Frankenchrist" label="Frankenchrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163005" start="8707" end="8719" title="Penis Landscape" label="Landscape XX"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8737" end="8752" title="Dead Kennedys#Frankenchrist and obscenity trial (1985–1986)" label="obscenity trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q708206" start="8756" end="8764" title="Atrocity (band)" label="Atrocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643206" start="8773" end="8787" title="Hallucinations (Atrocity album)" label="Hallucinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q80304" start="8796" end="8800" title="Korn" label="Korn"/>
<link wikidata="Q270692" start="8808" end="8822" title="Jonathan Davis" label="Jonathan Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q163783" start="9289" end="9301" title="Böhse Onkelz" label="Böhse Onkelz"/>
<link wikidata="Q320458" start="9467" end="9481" title="Ibanez" label="Ibanez Guitars"/>
<link wikidata="Q952013" start="9560" end="9569" title="Triptykon" label="Triptykon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441355" start="9577" end="9596" title="Eparistera Daimones" label="Eparistera Daimones"/>
<link wikidata="Q952013" start="9605" end="9614" title="Triptykon" label="Triptykon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15734090" start="9622" end="9637" title="Melana Chasmata" label="Melana Chasmata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560268" start="9673" end="9682" title="Giger Bar" label="Giger Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q69007" start="9706" end="9710" title="Chur" label="Chur"/>
<link wikidata="Q69600" start="9715" end="9723" title="Gruyères" label="Gruyères"/>
<link wikidata="Q27489975" start="9726" end="9748" title="Maison d&amp;#x27;Ailleurs" label="Maison d&amp;#x27;Ailleurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q63946" start="9773" end="9790" title="Yverdon-les-Bains" label="Yverdon-les-Bains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311536" start="9818" end="9827" title="Dark Seed (video game)" label="Dark Seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3508323" start="9856" end="9868" title="Dark Seed II" label="Dark Seed II"/>
<link wikidata="Q23916" start="9881" end="9895" title="adventure game" label="adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="9905" end="9910" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197770" start="9949" end="9960" title="Cyberdreams" label="Cyberdreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q68998" start="10005" end="10018" title="Manfred Trenz" label="Manfred Trenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929662" start="10095" end="10103" title="Turrican" label="Turrican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410852" start="10115" end="10122" title="Katakis" label="Katakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48988603" start="10131" end="10136" title="Scorn (video game)" label="Scorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2687578" start="10229" end="10241" title="Inkpot Award" label="Inkpot Award"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10513" end="10548" title="Dark Star: H. R. Giger&amp;#x27;s World" label="Dark Star: H. R. Giger&amp;#x27;s World"/>
<link wikidata="Q735471" start="10680" end="10692" title="109712 Giger" label="109712 Giger"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13714" wikidata="Q25277" url="?curid=13714" title="Hispaniola">
<text>Hispaniola (, ) is an island between Cuba and Puerto Rico in the Greater Antilles of the Caribbean. Hispaniola is the most populous island in the West Indies, and the second-largest by land area, after Cuba. The island is divided into two separate sovereign countries: the Spanish-speaking Dominican Republic ( to the east and the French and Haitian Creole–speaking Haiti ( to the west. The only other divided island in the Caribbean is Saint Martin, which is shared between France (Saint Martin) and the Netherlands (Sint Maarten).

Hispaniola is the site of one of the first European forts in the Americas, La Navidad (1492–1493), as well as the first settlement La Isabela (1493–1500), and the first permanent settlement, the current capital of the Dominican Republic, Santo Domingo (est. 1498). These settlements were founded successively during each of Christopher Columbus&#x27;s first three voyages.

The Spanish Empire controlled the entire island of Hispaniola from the 1490s until the 17th century, when French pirates began establishing bases on the western side of the island. The official name was &quot;La Española&quot;, meaning &quot;The Spanish (Island)&quot;. It was also called &quot;Santo Domingo&quot;, after Saint Dominic.

==Etymology==
The island was called various names by its native people, the Taíno. The Taino had no written language, hence, historical evidence for these names comes through three European historians: the Italian Peter Martyr d&#x27;Anghiera, and the Spaniards Bartolomé de las Casas and Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo. Based on a comprehensive survey and map prepared by Andrés de Morales in 1508, Martyr reported that the island as a whole was called &quot;Quizquella&quot; (or &quot;Quisqueya&quot;) and &quot;Ayiti&quot; referred to a rugged mountainous region on the western end of the island. Diego Álvarez Chanca, a physician on Columbus&#x27;s second voyage, also noted that &quot;Ayiti&quot; or &quot;Haïti&quot; was the easternmost province of the island, an area in the Dominican Republic called &quot;Los Haitises&quot; national park. On the other hand, Oviedo and Las Casas both recorded that the entire island was called &quot;Ayiti&quot; by the Taíno. 

When Columbus took possession of the island in 1492, he named it &quot;Insula Hispana&quot; in Latin and &quot;La Isla Española&quot; in Spanish, both meaning &quot;the Spanish island&quot;. Las Casas shortened the name to &quot;Española&quot;, and when Peter Martyr detailed his account of the island in Latin, he rendered its name as &quot;Hispaniola&quot;.

Due to Taíno, Spanish and French influences on the island, historically the whole island was often referred to as &quot;Haïti&quot;, &quot;Hayti&quot;, &quot;Santo Domingo&quot;, or &quot;Saint-Domingue&quot;. Martyr&#x27;s literary work was translated into English and French soon after being written, the name Hispaniola became the most frequently used term in English-speaking countries for the island in scientific and cartographic works. In 1918, the United States occupation government, led by Harry Shepard Knapp, obliged the use of the name Hispaniola on the island, and recommended the use of that name to the National Geographic Society.

The name &quot;Haïti&quot; was adopted by Haitian revolutionary Jean-Jacques Dessalines in 1804, as the official name of independent Saint-Domingue, in tribute to the Amerindian predecessors. It was also adopted as the official name of independent Santo Domingo, as the Republic of Spanish Haiti, a state that existed from November 1821 until its annexation by Haiti in February 1822.

==History==
=== Pre-Columbian ===

The Archaic Age people arrived from mainland Central America or northern South America about 6,000 years ago, and are thought to have practised a largely hunter-gatherer lifestyle. During the 1st millennium BC, the Arawakan-speaking ancestors of the Taino people began to migrate into the Caribbean. Unlike the Archaic peoples, they practiced the intensive production of pottery and agriculture. The earliest evidence of the ancestors of the Taino people on Hispaniola is the Ostionoid culture, which dates to around 600 AD. The Taino represented the dominant group on the island during the period of European contact. Each society on the island was a small independent kingdom with a lead known as a cacique. In 1492, which is considered the peak of the Taíno, there were five different kingdoms on the island, the Xaragua, Higuey (Caizcimu), Magua (Huhabo), Ciguayos (Cayabo or Maguana), and Marien (Bainoa). Many distinct Taíno languages also existed in this time period. There is still heated debate over the population of Taíno people on the island of Hispaniola in 1492, but estimates range from no more than a few tens of thousands, according to a 2020 genetic analysis, to upwards of 750,000.

A Taíno home consisted of a circular building with woven straw and palm leaves as covering. Most individuals slept in fashioned hammocks, but grass beds were also used. The cacique lived in a different structure with larger rectangular walls and a porch. The Taíno village also had a flat court used for ball games and festivals. Religiously, the Taíno people were polytheists, and their gods were called Zemí. Religious worship and dancing were common, and medicine men or priests also consulted the Zemí for advice in public ceremonies.

For food, the Taíno relied on meat and fish as a primary source for protein. On the island they hunted small mammals, but also snakes, worms, and birds. In lakes and in the sea they were able to catch ducks and turtles.
The Taíno also relied on agriculture as a primary food source. The indigenous people of Hispaniola raised crops in a conuco, which is a large mound packed with leaves and fixed crops to prevent erosion. Some common agricultural goods were cassava, maize, squash, beans, peppers, peanuts, cotton, and tobacco, which was used as an aspect of social life and religious ceremonies.
The Taíno people traveled often and used hollowed canoes with paddles when on the water for fishing or for migration purposes, and upwards of 100 people could fit into a single canoe. The Taíno came frequently in contact with the Caribs, another indigenous tribe. The Taíno people had to defend themselves using bows and arrows with poisoned tips and some war clubs. When Columbus landed on Hispaniola, many Taíno leaders wanted protection from the Caribs.

===Post-Columbian===

Christopher Columbus first landed at Hispaniola on December 6, 1492, at a small bay he named San Nicolas, now called Môle-Saint-Nicolas on the north coast of present-day Haiti. He was welcomed in a friendly fashion by the indigenous people known as the Taíno. Trading with the natives yielded more gold than they had come across previously on the other Caribbean islands and Columbus was led to believe that much more gold would be found inland. Before he could explore further, his flagship, the &quot;Santa Maria&quot;, ran aground and sank in the bay on December 24. With only two smaller ships remaining for the voyage home, Columbus built a fortified encampment, La Navidad, on the shore and left behind 21 crewman to await his return the following year.

Colonization began in earnest the following year when Columbus brought 1,300 men to Hispaniola in November 1493 with the intention of establishing a permanent settlement. They found the encampment at Navidad had been destroyed and all the crewmen left behind killed by the natives. Columbus decided to sail east in search of a better site to found a new settlement. In January 1494 they established La Isabela in present-day Dominican Republic.

In 1496, the town of Nueva Isabela was founded. After being destroyed by a hurricane, it was rebuilt on the opposite side of the Ozama River and called Santo Domingo. It is the oldest permanent European settlement in the Americas. 
The island had an important role in the establishment of Latin American colonies for decades to come. Due to its strategic location, it was the military stronghold of &quot;conquistadors&quot; of the Spanish Empire, serving as a headquarters for the further colonial expansion into the Americas. The colony was a meeting point of European explorers, soldiers, and settlers who brought with them the culture, architecture, laws, and traditions of the Old World.

Spaniards imposed a harsh regime of forced labor and enslavement of the Taínos, as well as redirection of their food production and labor to Spaniards. This had a devastating impact on both mortality and fertility of the Taíno population over the first quarter century. Colonial administrators and Dominican and Hieronymite friars observed that the search for gold and agrarian enslavement through the &quot;encomienda&quot; system were deciminating the indigenous population. Demographic data from two provinces in 1514 shows a low birth rate, consistent with a 3.5% annual population decline. In 1503, Spaniards began to bring enslaved Africans after a charter was passed in 1501, allowing the import of African slaves by Ferdinand and Isabel. The Spanish believed Africans would be more capable of performing physical labor. From 1519 to 1533, the indigenous uprising known as Enriquillo&#x27;s Revolt, after the Taíno cacique who led them, ensued, resulting from escaped African slaves on the island (maroons) possibly working with the Taíno people.

Precious metals played a large role in the history of the island after Columbus&#x27;s arrival. One of the first inhabitants Columbus came across on this island was &quot;a girl wearing only a gold nose plug&quot;. Soon the Taínos were trading pieces of gold for hawk&#x27;s bells with their cacique declaring the gold came from Cibao. Traveling further east from Navidad, Columbus came across the Yaque del Norte River, which he named Río de Oro (River of Gold) because its &quot;sands abound in gold dust&quot;.

On Columbus&#x27;s return during his second voyage, he learned it was the chief Caonabo who had massacred his settlement at Navidad. While Columbus established a new settlement the village of La Isabela on Jan. 1494, he sent Alonso de Ojeda and 15 men to search for the mines of Cibao. After a six-day journey, Ojeda came across an area containing gold, in which the gold was extracted from streams by the Taíno people. Columbus himself visited the mines of Cibao on 12 March 1494. He constructed the Fort of Santo Tomás, present day Jánico, leaving Captain Pedro Margarit in command of 56 men. On 24 March 1495, Columbus with his ally Guacanagarix, embarked on a war of revenge against Caonabo, capturing him and his family while &quot;killing many Indians and capturing others.&quot; Afterwards, &quot;every person of fourteen years of age or upward was to pay a large &quot;hawk&#x27;s bell&quot; of gold dust&quot;, every three months, as &quot;the Spaniards were sure there was more gold in the island than the natives had yet found, and were determined to make them dig it out.&quot;

===16th century: gold, sugar and pirates===
Gold mining using forced indigenous labor began early on Hispaniola. Miguel Díaz and Francisco de Garay discovered large gold nuggets on the lower Haina River in 1496. These San Cristobal mines were later known as the Minas Viejas mines. Then, in 1499, the first major discovery of gold was made in the cordillera central, which led to a mining boom. By 1501 Columbus&#x27;s cousin, Giovanni Colombo, had discovered gold near Buenaventura. The deposits were later known as Minas Nuevas. Two major mining areas resulted, one along San Cristobal-Buenaventura, and another in Cibao within the La Vega-Cotuy-Bonao triangle, while Santiago de los Caballeros, Concepción, and Bonao became mining towns. The gold rush of 1500–1508 ensued, and Ovando expropriated the gold mines of Miguel Díaz and Francisco de Garay in 1504, as pit mines became royal mines for Ferdinand II of Aragon, who reserved the best mines for himself, though placers were open to private prospectors. King Ferdinand kept 967 natives in the San Cristóbal mining area, supervised by salaried miners.

Under the royal governor Nicolás de Ovando, the indigenous people were forced to work in the gold mines. By 1503, the Spanish Crown legalized the allocation of private grants of indigenous labor to particular Spaniards for mining through the &quot;encomienda&quot; system. Once the indigenous were forced into mining far from their home villages, they suffered hunger and other difficult conditions. By 1508, the Taíno population of about 400,000 was reduced to 60,000, and by 1514, only 26,334 remained. About half resided in the mining towns of Concepción, Santiago, Santo Domingo, and Buenaventura. The repartimiento of 1514 accelerated emigration of the Spanish colonists, coupled with the exhaustion of the mines. The first documented outbreak of smallpox, previously an Eastern hemisphere disease, occurred on Hispaniola in December 1518 among enslaved African miners. Some scholars speculate that European diseases arrived before this date, but there is no compelling evidence for an outbreak. The natives had no acquired immunity to European diseases, including smallpox. By May 1519, as many as one-third of the remaining Taínos had died. In the century following the Spanish arrival on Hispaniola, the Taíno population fell by up to 95% of the population, out of a pre-contact population estimated from tens of thousands to 8,000,000. Many authors have described the treatment of Tainos in Hispaniola under the Spanish Empire as genocide.

Sugar cane was introduced to Hispaniola by settlers from the Canary Islands, and the first sugar mill in the New World was established in 1516, on Hispaniola. The need for a labor force to meet the growing demands of sugar cane cultivation led to an exponential increase in the importation of slaves over the following two decades. The sugar mill owners soon formed a new colonial elite.

The first major slave revolt in the Americas occurred in Santo Domingo during 1521, when enslaved Muslims of the Wolof nation led an uprising in the sugar plantation of admiral Don Diego Colon, son of Christopher Columbus. Many of these insurgents managed to escape where they formed independent maroon communities in the south of the island.

Beginning in the 1520s, the Caribbean Sea was raided by increasingly numerous French pirates. In 1541, Spain authorized the construction of Santo Domingo&#x27;s fortified wall, and in 1560 decided to restrict sea travel to enormous, well-armed convoys. In another move, which would destroy Hispaniola&#x27;s sugar industry, in 1561 Havana, more strategically located in relation to the Gulf Stream, was selected as the designated stopping point for the merchant &quot;flotas,&quot; which had a royal monopoly on commerce with the Americas. In 1564, the island&#x27;s main inland cities Santiago de los Caballeros and Concepción de la Vega were destroyed by an earthquake. In the 1560s, English privateers joined the French in regularly raiding Spanish shipping in the Americas.

===17th century: European skirmishes, division of the island and trade===

By the early 17th century, Hispaniola and its nearby islands (notably Tortuga) became regular stopping points for Caribbean pirates. In 1606, the government of Philip III ordered all inhabitants of Hispaniola to move close to Santo Domingo, to fight against piracy. Rather than secure the island, his action meant that French, English, and Dutch pirates established their own bases on the less populated north and west coasts of the island.

In 1625, French and English pirates arrived on the island of Tortuga, just off the northwest coast of Hispaniola, which was originally settled by a few Spanish colonists. The pirates were attacked in 1629 by Spanish forces commanded by Don Fadrique de Toledo, who fortified the island, and expelled the French and English. As most of the Spanish army left for the main island of Hispaniola to root out French colonists there, the French returned to Tortuga in 1630 and had constant battles for several decades. In 1654, the Spanish re-captured Tortuga for the last time.

In 1655 the island of Tortuga was reoccupied by the English and French. In 1660 the English appointed a Frenchman as Governor who proclaimed the King of France, set up French colours, and defeated several English attempts to reclaim the island. In 1665, French colonization of the island was officially recognized by King Louis XIV. The French colony was given the name Saint-Domingue. By 1670 a Welsh privateer named Henry Morgan invited the pirates on the island of Tortuga to set sail under him. They were hired by the French as a striking force that allowed France to have a much stronger hold on the Caribbean region. Consequently, the pirates never really controlled the island and kept Tortuga as a neutral hideout. The capital of the French Colony of Saint-Domingue was moved from Tortuga to Port-de-Paix on the mainland of Hispaniola in 1676.

In 1680, new Acts of Parliament forbade sailing under foreign flags (in opposition to former practice). This was a major legal blow to the Caribbean pirates. Settlements were made in the Treaty of Ratisbon of 1684, signed by the European powers, that put an end to piracy. Most of the pirates after this time were hired out into the Royal services to suppress their former buccaneer allies. In the 1697 Treaty of Ryswick, Spain formally ceded the western third of the island to France. Saint-Domingue quickly came to overshadow the east in both wealth and population. Nicknamed the &quot;Pearl of the Antilles&quot;, it became the most prosperous colony in the West Indies, with a system of human slavery used to grow and harvest sugar cane during a time when European demand for sugar was high. Slavery kept costs low and profit was maximized. It was an important port in the Americas for goods and products flowing to and from France and Europe.

===18th century to 19th century: Independence ===

European colonists often died young due to tropical fevers, as well as from violent slave resistance in the late eighteenth century. In 1791, during the French Revolution, a major slave revolt broke out on Saint-Domingue. When the French Republic abolished slavery in the colonies on February 4, 1794, it was a European first. The ex-slave army joined forces with France in its war against its European neighbors. In the second 1795 Treaty of Basel (July 22), Spain ceded the eastern two-thirds of the island of Hispaniola, later to become the Dominican Republic. French settlers had begun to colonize some areas in the Spanish side of the territory.

Under Napoleon, France reimposed slavery in most of its Caribbean islands in 1802 and sent an army to bring the island into full control. However, thousands of the French troops succumbed to yellow fever during the summer months, and more than half of the French army died because of disease. After an extremely brutal war with atrocities committed on both sides, the French removed the surviving 7,000 troops in late 1803, and the surviving leaders of the Haitian Revolution declared western Hispaniola the new nation of independent Haiti in early 1804. France continued to rule Spanish Santo Domingo. In 1805, after renewed hostilities with the ruling French government in Santo Domingo, Haitian troops of General Jean Jacques Dessalines tried to conquer all of Hispaniola. He launched an invasion of Santo Domingo and sacked the towns of Santiago de los Caballeros and Moca, killing most of their residents, but news of a French fleet sailing towards Haiti forced the invading army to withdraw from the east, leaving it in French hands.

In 1808, a second revolution against France broke out on the island. Following Napoleon&#x27;s invasion of Spain, the criollos of Santo Domingo revolted against the French regime. With the aid of Great Britain, the French was defeated, and Santo Domingo was returned to Spanish control. France would never regain control of the island, and after some 12 years of Spanish dominion, the leaders in Santo Domingo revolted again, and eastern Hispaniola was declared independent as the Republic of Spanish Haiti in 1821. Fearing the influence of a society of slaves that had successfully revolted against their owners, the United States and European powers refused to recognize Haiti, the second republic in the Western Hemisphere. France demanded a high payment for compensation to slaveholders who lost their property, and Haiti was saddled with unmanageable debt for decades. By this point, the entire island was united under Haitian control. However, suppression of the Dominican culture and the imposition of heavy taxation would lead to the Dominican War of Independence and the establishment of the Dominican Republic in 1844. (This is one of the reasons for the tensions between the two countries today). Years of war, political chaos and economic crisis came to an end with a reintegration of the Dominican Republic to Spanish rule in 1861, at the request of discouraged Dominican political leaders who had hoped that the Spanish would restore order to the country. However, just as in the España Boba period, taxations, corruption, and second class treatment of the Dominicans caused support for the regime to wane, and new independence movements had sparked throughout the country. In August 1863, the Dominican Restoration War erupted on the island, and after suffering heavy defeats, the Spanish Crown capitulated. A royal decree, The Treaty of El Carmelo, recognized the independence of the Dominican Republic, and the Spanish were expelled for good in 1865. Renewed annexation projects, this time to the United States, was defeated in Congress, and the masterminds were ousted in an uprising in 1874. Both states have remained independent states since then. 

=== 20th century to represent: Foreign intervention, dictatorships, aftermath ===
In the 20th century, however, both states have endured similar outcomes. With many ensuing conflicts such as Banana Wars and World War I taking place, political and economic instabilities continued to ravage as constant power struggles and civil wars engulfed among leaders in both states. Such actions triggered renewed external interest in launching military interventions on the island. This would finally come with U.S. forces issuing a military occupation of both states, first with Haiti in 1915, and the Dominican Republic in 1916. In the following decades after American forces departed from the island, both states would be ruled by heavy handed politicians that had risen to prominence during the American occupation. Haiti&#x27;s François Duvalier (Papa Doc) and his son, Jean-Claude Duvalier (Baby Doc) and Dominican Republic&#x27;s Rafael Trujillo would emerge as the leading autocratic rulers at this time. Eventually, the dictatorships of both countries came to a close with the assassination of Trujillo in 1961, (though political chaos ensued triggering a bloody revolution and a second U.S intervention in 1965), and the death of François Duvalier and overthrow of Jean-Claude Duvalier in 1971 and 1986, respectively. Both states would return to a democratic government, as proven with the elections of Jean-Bertrand Aristide in Haiti, and Joaquín Balaguer in the Dominican Republic. While the Dominican Republic was able to stabilize the political crisis that plagued the country since its conception since 1844, Haiti&#x27;s political crisis continued to destabilize. The political chaos that erupted following the overthrow of Aristide in 2004 caused a mass intervention by the U.N., which lasted until 2017. Even by that point, Haiti had already suffered a massive catastrophic earthquake in 2010, cholera outbreaks continued, and gang violence had escalated further, which is still ongoing to this day. 

Haiti would become one of the poorest countries in the Americas, while the Dominican Republic gradually has developed into one of the largest economies of Central America and the Caribbean.

==Geography==

Hispaniola is the second-largest island in the Caribbean (after Cuba), with an area of , of which is under the sovereignty of the Dominican Republic occupying the eastern portion and under the sovereignty of Haiti occupying the western portion.

The island of Cuba lies to the west across the Windward Passage; to the southwest lie Jamaica, separated by the Jamaica Channel, the Cayman Islands and Navassa Island; . Puerto Rico lies east of Hispaniola across the Mona Passage. The Bahamas and Turks and Caicos Islands lie to the north. Its westernmost point is known as Cap Carcasse. Cuba, Cayman Islands, Navassa Island, Hispaniola, Jamaica, and Puerto Rico are collectively known as the Greater Antilles. Hispaniola is also a part of the Antilles and the West Indies.

The island has five major ranges of mountains: The Central Range, known in the Dominican Republic as the Cordillera Central, spans the central part of the island, extending from the south coast of the Dominican Republic into northwestern Haiti, where it is known as the Massif du Nord. This mountain range boasts the highest peak in the Antilles, Pico Duarte at above sea level. The Cordillera Septentrional runs parallel to the Central Range across the northern end of the Dominican Republic, extending into the Atlantic Ocean as the Samaná Peninsula. The Cordillera Central and Cordillera Septentrional are separated by the lowlands of the Cibao Valley and the Atlantic coastal plains, which extend westward into Haiti as the Plaine du Nord (Northern Plain). The lowest of the ranges is the Cordillera Oriental, in the eastern part of the country.

The Sierra de Neiba rises in the southwest of the Dominican Republic, and continues northwest into Haiti, parallel to the Cordillera Central, as the Montagnes Noires, Chaîne des Matheux and the Montagnes du Trou d&#x27;Eau. The Plateau Central lies between the Massif du Nord and the Montagnes Noires, and the Plaine de l&#x27;Artibonite lies between the Montagnes Noires and the Chaîne des Matheux, opening westward toward the Gulf of Gonâve, the largest gulf of the Antilles.

The southern range begins in the southwesternmost Dominican Republic as the Sierra de Bahoruco, and extends west into Haiti as the Massif de la Selle and the Massif de la Hotte, which form the mountainous spine of Haiti&#x27;s southern peninsula. Pic de la Selle is the highest peak in the southern range, the third highest peak in the Antilles and consequently the highest point in Haiti, at above sea level. A depression runs parallel to the southern range, between the southern range and the Chaîne des Matheux-Sierra de Neiba. It is known as the Plaine du Cul-de-Sac in Haiti, and Haiti&#x27;s capital Port-au-Prince lies at its western end. The depression is home to a chain of salt lakes, including Lake Azuei in Haiti and Lake Enriquillo in the Dominican Republic.

The island has four distinct ecoregions. The Hispaniolan moist forests ecoregion covers approximately 50% of the island, especially the northern and eastern portions, predominantly in the lowlands but extending up to elevation. The Hispaniolan dry forests ecoregion occupies approximately 20% of the island, lying in the rain shadow of the mountains in the southern and western portion of the island and in the Cibao valley in the center-north of the island. The Hispaniolan pine forests occupy the mountainous 15% of the island, above elevation. The flooded grasslands and savannas ecoregion in the south central region of the island surrounds a chain of lakes and lagoons in which the most notable include that of Lake Azuei and Trou Caïman in Haiti and the nearby Lake Enriquillo in the Dominican Republic, which is not only the lowest point of the island, but also the lowest point for an island country.

===Climate===

Hispaniola&#x27;s climate shows considerable variation due to its diverse mountainous topography, and is the most varied island of all the Antilles. Except in the Northern Hemisphere summer season, the predominant winds over Hispaniola are the northeast trade winds. As in Jamaica and Cuba, these winds deposit their moisture on the northern mountains, and create a distinct rain shadow on the southern coast, where some areas receive as little as of rainfall, and have semi-arid climates. Annual rainfall under also occurs on the southern coast of Haiti&#x27;s northwest peninsula and in the central Azúa region of the Plaine du Cul-de-Sac. In these regions, moreover, there is generally little rainfall outside hurricane season from August to October, and droughts are by no means uncommon when hurricanes do not come.
On the northern coast, in contrast, rainfall may peak between December and February, though some rain falls in all months of the year. Annual amounts typically range from on the northern coastal lowlands; there is probably much more in the Cordillera Septentrional, though no data exist. The interior of Hispaniola, along with the southeastern coast centered around Santo Domingo, typically receives around per year, with a distinct season from May to October. Usually, this wet season has two peaks: one around May, the other around the hurricane season. In the interior highlands, rainfall is much greater, around per year, but with a similar pattern to that observed in the central lowlands.

The variations of temperature depend on altitude and are much less marked than rainfall variations in the island. Lowland Hispaniola is generally more hot and humid, with temperatures averaging . with high humidity during the daytime, and around at night. At higher altitudes, temperatures fall steadily, so that frosts occur during the dry season on the highest peaks, where maxima are no higher than .

===Fauna===
There are many bird species in Hispaniola, and the island&#x27;s amphibian species are also diverse. There are many species endemic to the island including insects and other invertebrates, reptiles, amphibians, fishs, birds and mammals (originally animals, native animals) and also (imported animals, introduced animals, not native animals or invasive species) just like farm animals, transport animals, house animals, pets and more. The two endemic terrestrial mammals on the island are the Hispaniolan hutia (&quot;Plagiodontia aedium&quot;) and the Hispaniolan solenodon (&quot;Solenodon paradoxus&quot;). There are also many avian species on the island, with six endemic genera (&quot;Calyptophilus&quot;, &quot;Dulus&quot;, &quot;Nesoctites&quot;, &quot;Phaenicophilus&quot;, &quot;Xenoligea&quot; and &quot;Microligea&quot;). More than half of the original distribution of its ecoregions has been lost due to habitat destruction impacting the local fauna and some of the original animals either threat, threatened with extinction or totally extinct, because of climate change or because they have been hunted by humans or their habitats have been felled or changed for some reasons or have become some of the animals have been threatened by (introduced animals, not native animals or invasive species) or there are fighting for space to survive and perhaps some animals that feed on the same plants or animals or just something like that.

===Flora===

The island has four distinct ecoregions. The Hispaniolan moist forests ecoregion covers approximately 50% of the island, especially the northern and eastern portions, predominantly in the lowlands but extending up to elevation. The Hispaniolan dry forests ecoregion occupies approximately 20% of the island, lying in the rain shadow of the mountains in the southern and western portion of the island, and in the Cibao valley in the center-north of the island. The Hispaniolan pine forests occupy the mountainous 15% of the island, above elevation. The flooded grasslands and savannas ecoregion in the south central region of the island surrounds a chain of lakes and lagoons, the most notable of which are Etang Saumatre and Trou Caïman in Haiti and the nearby Lake Enriquillo in the Dominican Republic.

In Haiti, deforestation has long been cited by scientists as a source of ecological crisis; the timber industry dates back to French colonial rule. Haiti has seen a dramatic reduction of forests due to the excessive and increasing use of charcoal as fuel for cooking. Various media outlets have suggested that the country has just 2% forest cover, but this has not been substantiated by research.

Also extremely important are the rarely mentioned species of Pinguicula casabitoana (a carnivorous plant), Gonocalyx tetraptera, Gesneria sylvicola, Lyonia alaini and Myrcia saliana, as well as palo de viento (Didymopanax tremulus), jaiqui (Bumelia salicifolia), pino criciolio) (pino criciol), sangre de pollo (Mecranium amigdalinum) and palo santo (Alpinia speciosa).
According to reports in the Dominican Republic and Haiti, the flora in this naturally protected area consists of 621 species of vascular plants, of which 153 are highly endemic to La Hispaniola. The most prominent endemic species of flora that abound in the area are Ebano Verde (green ebony), Magnolia pallescens, a highly endangered hardwood.

Recent in-depth studies of satellite imagery and environmental analysis regarding forest classification conclude that Haiti actually has approximately 30% tree cover; this is, nevertheless, a stark decrease from the country&#x27;s 60% forest cover in 1925. The country has been significantly deforested over the last 50 years, resulting in the desertification of many portions of Haitian territory. Haiti&#x27;s poor citizens use cooking fires often, and this is a major culprit behind the nation&#x27;s loss of trees. Haitians use trees as fuel either by burning the wood directly, or by first turning it into charcoal in ovens. Seventy-one percent of all fuel consumed in Haiti is wood or charcoal. Haiti&#x27;s government began establishing protected areas across the country in 1968. These 26 areas today represent nearly 7 per cent of the country&#x27;s land and 1.5 per cent of its waters.

In the Dominican Republic, the forest cover has increased. In 2003, the Dominican Republic&#x27;s forest cover had been reduced to 32% of its land area, but by 2011, forest cover had increased to nearly 40%. The success of the Dominican forest growth is due to several Dominican government policies and private organizations for the purpose of reforesting, and a strong educational campaign that has resulted in increased awareness by the Dominican people of the importance of forests for their welfare and other forms of life on the island.

== Demographics ==


Hispaniola is the most populous Caribbean island with a combined population of 23 million inhabitants .

The Dominican Republic is a Hispanophone nation of approximately 11.3 million people. Spanish is spoken by essentially all Dominicans as a primary language. Roman Catholicism is the official and dominant religion and some Evangelicalism and Protestant churches and The Church of Jesus Christ and minority religions such as African religions, Afro-American religions, African diaspora religions, Haitian Vodou, Dominican Vodou, Dominican Santeria, Congos Del Espiritu Santo, Dominican Protestants, Pentecostals, 
Judaism, Islam and Baháʼí Faith, Hinduism, Buddhism, Unitarian Universalism, Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, Pentecostalism and others also exist.


Haiti is a Creole-speaking nation of roughly 11.7 million people. Although French is spoken as a primary language by the educated and wealthy minority, virtually the entire population speaks Haitian Creole, one of several French-derived creole languages. Roman Catholicism is the dominant religion, practiced by more than half the population, although in some cases in combination with Haitian Vodou faith. Another 25% of the populace belong to Protestant churches.

===Ethnic composition===
The ethnic composition of the Dominican population is 73% mixed ethnicity, 16% white and 11% black. Descendants of early Spanish settlers and of black slaves from West Africa constitute the two main racial strains.

The ethnic composition of Haiti is estimated to be 95% black and 5% white and Mulatto.

In recent times, Dominican and Puerto Rican researchers identified in the current Dominican population the presence of genes belonging to the aborigines of the Canary Islands (commonly called Guanches). These genes also have been detected in Puerto Rico.

==Economics==


The island has the largest economy in the Greater Antilles; however, most of the economic development is found in the Dominican Republic, the Dominican economy being nearly 800% larger than the Haitian economy. , the estimated annual per capita income is US$868 in Haiti and US$8,050 in the Dominican Republic.

The divergence between the level of economic development in Haiti and the Dominican Republic makes its border the highest contrast of all western land borders.

===Natural resources===
The island also has an economic history and current day interest and involvement in precious metals. In 1860, it was observed that the island contained a large supply of gold, which the early Spaniards had hardly developed. By 1919, Condit and Ross noted that much of the island was covered by government granted concessions for mining different types of minerals. Besides gold, these minerals included silver, manganese, copper, magnetite, iron and nickel.

Mining operations in 2016 have taken advantage of the volcanogenic massive sulfide ore deposits around Maimón. To the northeast, the Pueblo Viejo Gold Mine was operated by state-owned Rosario Dominicana from 1975 until 1991. In 2009, Pueblo Viejo Dominicana Corporation, formed by Barrick Gold and Goldcorp, started open-pit mining operations of the Monte Negro and Moore oxide deposits. The mined ore is processed with gold cyanidation. Pyrite and sphalerite are the main sulfide minerals found in the 120-meter thick volcanic conglomerates and agglomerates, which constitute the world&#x27;s second largest sulphidation gold deposit.

Between Bonao and Maimón, Falconbridge Dominicana has been mining nickel laterites since 1971. The Cerro de Maimon copper/gold open-pit mine southeast of Maimón has been operated by Perilya since 2006. Copper is extracted from the sulfide ores, while gold and silver are extracted from both the sulfide and the oxide ores. Processing is via froth flotation and cyanidation. The ore is located in the VMS Early Cretaceous Maimón Formation. Goethite enriched with gold and silver is found in the 30-meter thick oxide cap. Below that cap is a supergene zone containing pyrite, chalcopyrite, and sphalerite. Below the supergene zone is found the unaltered massive sulphide mineralization.

==Human development==
This is a list of Dominican Republic and Haiti regions by Human Development Index as of 2018.

==See also==

* Casa de Contratación
* Dominican Republic–Haiti relations
* Geology of Haiti
* Geology of the Dominican Republic
* History of the Caribbean
* List of divided islands
* Spanish colonization of the Americas
* Spanish West Indies

==References==
==Further reading==
* Altman, Ida. &quot;Life and Society in the Early Caribbean: The Greater Antilles, 1493–1550&quot;. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press 2021. .
* Altman, Ida and David Wheat, eds. &quot;The Spanish Caribbean &amp; the Atlantic World in the Long Sixteenth Century&quot;. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press 2019.
* Deagan, Kathleen and José María Cruxent. &quot;Columbus&#x27;s Outpost Among the Taínos&quot;. New Haven: Yale University Press 2002.
* Floyd, Troy S. &quot;The Columbus Dynasty in the Caribbean, 1492–1526&quot;. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press 1973.
* Livi-Bacci, Maximo. &quot;Return to Hispaniola: Assessing a Demographic Catastrophe&quot;. &quot;Hispanic American Historical Review&quot; 83, no. 1 (2003): 3–51. .
* Rodríguez Morel, Genaro. &quot;The Sugar Economy of Española in the Sixteenth Century&quot; in &quot;Tropical Bablyons: Sugar and the Making of the Atlantic World. 1450–1680&quot;, ed. Stuart B. Schwartz. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press 2004.
* Sauer, Carl O. &quot;The Early Spanish Main&quot;. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1966.
* Tibesar, Antonine S. &quot;The Franciscan Province of the Holy Cross of Española, 1505–1559&quot;. &quot;The Americas&quot; 13, no. 4 (1957).
* Wilson, Samuel M. &quot;Hispaniola: Caribbean Chiefdoms in the Age of Columbus&quot;. Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press 1990.

==External links==

* Map of the Islands of Hispaniola and Puerto Rico from 1639
* The Kraus Collection of Sir Francis Drake at the Library of Congress contains primary materials on Hispaniola.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="0" end="10" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503155" start="37" end="41" title="Geography of Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527656" start="46" end="57" title="Geography of Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q128011" start="65" end="81" title="Greater Antilles" label="Greater Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="89" end="98" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="146" end="157" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491824" start="185" end="194" title="List of Caribbean islands by area" label="land area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503155" start="202" end="206" title="Geography of Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088651" start="222" end="229" title="Dominican Republic–Haiti border" label="divided"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="248" end="257" title="Sovereign state" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="290" end="308" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="331" end="337" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q33491" start="342" end="356" title="Haitian Creole" label="Haitian Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="366" end="371" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q25596" start="437" end="449" title="Saint Martin (island)" label="Saint Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="475" end="481" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q126125" start="483" end="495" title="Collectivity of Saint Martin" label="Saint Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29999" start="505" end="516" title="Kingdom of the Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q26273" start="518" end="530" title="Sint Maarten" label="Sint Maarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798978" start="609" end="619" title="La Navidad" label="La Navidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543031" start="665" end="675" title="La Isabela" label="La Isabela"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="772" end="785" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="858" end="878" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18578423" start="898" end="905" title="Voyages of Christopher Columbus" label="voyages"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="912" end="926" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="1021" end="1027" title="pirate" label="pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919465" start="1203" end="1216" title="Captaincy General of Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q44091" start="1230" end="1243" title="Saint Dominic" label="Saint Dominic"/>
<link wikidata="Q210623" start="1322" end="1327" title="Taíno people" label="Taíno"/>
<link wikidata="Q163381" start="1460" end="1488" title="Peter Martyr d&amp;#x27;Anghiera" label="Peter Martyr d&amp;#x27;Anghiera"/>
<link wikidata="Q207416" start="1508" end="1530" title="Bartolomé de las Casas" label="Bartolomé de las Casas"/>
<link wikidata="Q919967" start="1535" end="1562" title="Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo y Valdés" label="Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5274892" start="1843" end="1863" title="Diego Álvarez Chanca" label="Diego Álvarez Chanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q186513" start="2291" end="2298" title="Hispania" label="Hispana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919465" start="2726" end="2751" title="Captaincy General of Santo Domingo" label="&amp;quot;Santo Domingo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q861551" start="2762" end="2776" title="Saint-Domingue" label="Saint-Domingue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258994" start="3074" end="3093" title="Harry Shepard Knapp" label="Harry Shepard Knapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q167186" start="3193" end="3220" title="National Geographic Society" label="National Geographic Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q212068" start="3287" end="3310" title="Jean-Jacques Dessalines" label="Jean-Jacques Dessalines"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681694" start="3493" end="3518" title="Republic of Spanish Haiti" label="Republic of Spanish Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q95408244" start="3584" end="3589" title="Republic of Haiti (1820–1849)" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q25716" start="3836" end="3853" title="1st millennium BC" label="1st millennium BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="4015" end="4022" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q599898" start="4345" end="4352" title="cacique" label="cacique"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="5845" end="5852" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q27106" start="6214" end="6220" title="Kalinago" label="Caribs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429630" start="6581" end="6599" title="Môle-Saint-Nicolas" label="Môle-Saint-Nicolas"/>
<link wikidata="Q107900" start="6967" end="6978" title="Santa Maria (ship)" label="Santa Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798978" start="7132" end="7142" title="La Navidad" label="La Navidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543031" start="7624" end="7634" title="La Isabela" label="La Isabela"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="7650" end="7668" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="7823" end="7836" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16799549" start="7960" end="7974" title="Latin American" label="Latin American"/>
<link wikidata="Q126236" start="8076" end="8088" title="conquistador" label="conquistador"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="8103" end="8117" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047607" start="8153" end="8197" title="Spanish colonization of the Americas" label="further colonial expansion into the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="8353" end="8362" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q938405" start="8401" end="8429" title="Slavery in colonial Spanish America" label="forced labor and enslavement"/>
<link wikidata="Q396287" start="8773" end="8783" title="encomienda" label="encomienda"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="8979" end="9011" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="began to bring enslaved Africans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344189" start="9245" end="9255" title="Enriquillo" label="Enriquillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q445485" start="9370" end="9377" title="maroons" label="maroons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257629" start="9749" end="9754" title="Cibao" label="Cibao"/>
<link wikidata="Q776071" start="9818" end="9839" title="Yaque del Norte River" label="Yaque del Norte River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010694" start="10015" end="10022" title="Caonabo" label="Caonabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543031" start="10127" end="10137" title="La Isabela" label="La Isabela"/>
<link wikidata="Q313369" start="10160" end="10175" title="Alonso de Ojeda" label="Alonso de Ojeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770660" start="10469" end="10475" title="Jánico" label="Jánico"/>
<link wikidata="Q741356" start="10571" end="10583" title="Guacanagarix" label="Guacanagarix"/>
<link wikidata="Q396287" start="10794" end="10797" title="encomienda" label="pay"/>
<link wikidata="Q925893" start="11155" end="11173" title="Francisco de Garay" label="Francisco de Garay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507004" start="11191" end="11202" title="gold nugget" label="gold nugget"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639349" start="11217" end="11228" title="Haina River" label="Haina River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751984" start="11373" end="11383" title="cordillera" label="cordillera"/>
<link wikidata="Q373759" start="11600" end="11613" title="San Cristobal, Dominican Republic" label="San Cristobal"/>
<link wikidata="Q538953" start="11660" end="11667" title="La Vega, Dominican Republic" label="La Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306136" start="11674" end="11679" title="Bonao" label="Bonao"/>
<link wikidata="Q42763" start="11696" end="11722" title="Santiago de los Caballeros" label="Santiago de los Caballeros"/>
<link wikidata="Q538953" start="11724" end="11734" title="La Vega, Dominican Republic" label="Concepción"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="11924" end="11946" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="Ferdinand II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12148490" start="11996" end="12003" title="placer mining" label="placers"/>
<link wikidata="Q720589" start="12161" end="12178" title="Nicolás de Ovando y Cáceres" label="Nicolás de Ovando"/>
<link wikidata="Q396287" start="12384" end="12394" title="encomienda" label="encomienda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993888" start="12742" end="12755" title="repartimiento" label="repartimiento"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="12888" end="12896" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="13206" end="13214" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="13586" end="13596" title="Sugar cane" label="Sugar cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="13647" end="13661" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q97585797" start="13979" end="14019" title="1521 Santo Domingo Slave Revolt" label="first major slave revolt in the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="14032" end="14045" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="14073" end="14080" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q217397" start="14088" end="14093" title="Wolof people" label="Wolof"/>
<link wikidata="Q452379" start="14156" end="14167" title="Diego Colon" label="Diego Colon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="14176" end="14196" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q445485" start="14271" end="14277" title="maroons" label="maroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="14347" end="14360" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="14651" end="14657" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q130905" start="14705" end="14716" title="Gulf Stream" label="Gulf Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q702252" start="14787" end="14793" title="flota system" label="flotas"/>
<link wikidata="Q42763" start="14905" end="14931" title="Santiago de los Caballeros" label="Santiago de los Caballeros"/>
<link wikidata="Q538953" start="14936" end="14957" title="Concepción de la Vega" label="Concepción de la Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q208345" start="15243" end="15250" title="Tortuga (Haiti)" label="Tortuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469245" start="15287" end="15304" title="Piracy in the Caribbean" label="Caribbean pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q34464" start="15333" end="15343" title="Philip III of Spain" label="Philip III"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="15624" end="15630" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q208345" start="15676" end="15683" title="Tortuga (Haiti)" label="Tortuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429291" start="15851" end="15873" title="Fadrique Álvarez de Toledo, 1st Marquis of Villanueva de Valdueza" label="Don Fadrique de Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037013" start="16147" end="16184" title="Capture of Fort Rocher" label="re-captured Tortuga for the last time"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16509" end="16518" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q861551" start="16557" end="16571" title="Saint-Domingue" label="Saint-Domingue"/>
<link wikidata="Q215502" start="16605" end="16617" title="Henry Morgan" label="Henry Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q861551" start="16946" end="16960" title="Saint-Domingue" label="Saint-Domingue"/>
<link wikidata="Q951602" start="16987" end="16999" title="Port-de-Paix" label="Port-de-Paix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="17061" end="17071" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q192520" start="17080" end="17087" title="sailing" label="sailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q14660" start="17102" end="17106" title="flag" label="flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041111" start="17227" end="17245" title="Treaty of Ratisbon" label="Treaty of Ratisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q164393" start="17443" end="17460" title="Treaty of Ryswick" label="Treaty of Ryswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="17701" end="17712" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="18193" end="18210" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="18271" end="18286" title="First French Republic" label="French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q667080" start="18473" end="18488" title="Peace of Basel" label="Treaty of Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="18698" end="18706" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258450" start="18715" end="18732" title="Law of 20 May 1802" label="reimposed slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q154874" start="18883" end="18895" title="yellow fever" label="yellow fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q689128" start="19149" end="19167" title="Haitian Revolution" label="Haitian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="19226" end="19231" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q212068" start="19408" end="19431" title="Jean-Jacques Dessalines" label="Jean Jacques Dessalines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510383" start="19483" end="19508" title="Siege of Santo Domingo (1805)" label="invasion of Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q39194" start="19744" end="19761" title="Spanish reconquest of Santo Domingo" label="second revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242047" start="19851" end="19859" title="Criollo people" label="criollos"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="19929" end="19942" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681694" start="20214" end="20239" title="Republic of Spanish Haiti" label="Republic of Spanish Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q181982" start="20440" end="20458" title="Western Hemisphere" label="Western Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128939" start="20622" end="20672" title="Haitian occupation of Santo Domingo" label="the entire island was united under Haitian control"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439047" start="20775" end="20804" title="Dominican War of Independence" label="Dominican War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="20834" end="20852" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933273" start="21013" end="21076" title="Annexation of the Dominican Republic to Spain" label="reintegration of the Dominican Republic to Spanish rule in 1861"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815421" start="21441" end="21466" title="Dominican Restoration War" label="Dominican Restoration War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21572" end="21596" title="The Treaty of El Carmelo" label="The Treaty of El Carmelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q24204921" start="21808" end="21842" title="Six Years&amp;#x27; War" label="were ousted in an uprising in 1874"/>
<link wikidata="Q768496" start="22094" end="22105" title="Banana Wars" label="Banana Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="22110" end="22121" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298759" start="22482" end="22486" title="United States occupation of Haiti" label="1915"/>
<link wikidata="Q131744619" start="22518" end="22522" title="Military Government of Santo Domingo" label="1916"/>
<link wikidata="Q187697" start="22726" end="22743" title="François Duvalier" label="François Duvalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q310775" start="22768" end="22788" title="Jean-Claude Duvalier" label="Jean-Claude Duvalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q152474" start="22830" end="22845" title="Rafael Trujillo" label="Rafael Trujillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882219" start="22979" end="22992" title="assassination" label="assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q955457" start="23058" end="23075" title="Dominican Civil War" label="bloody revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639713" start="23155" end="23164" title="Anti-Duvalier protest movement" label="overthrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q209617" start="23306" end="23328" title="Jean-Bertrand Aristide" label="Jean-Bertrand Aristide"/>
<link wikidata="Q147989" start="23343" end="23359" title="Joaquín Balaguer" label="Joaquín Balaguer"/>
<link wikidata="Q740123" start="23659" end="23688" title="United Nations Stabilisation Mission in Haiti" label="mass intervention by the U.N."/>
<link wikidata="Q43777" start="23753" end="23803" title="2010 Haiti earthquake" label="suffered a massive catastrophic earthquake in 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075913" start="23805" end="23822" title="2010s Haiti cholera outbreak" label="cholera outbreaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q116291120" start="23875" end="23909" title="Gang war in Haiti" label="which is still ongoing to this day"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="24068" end="24083" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="24092" end="24101" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="24379" end="24383" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="24451" end="24458" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512419" start="24477" end="24492" title="Jamaica Channel" label="Jamaica Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5785" start="24498" end="24512" title="Cayman Islands" label="Cayman Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q25359" start="24517" end="24531" title="Navassa Island" label="Navassa Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="24535" end="24546" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418401" start="24582" end="24594" title="Mona Passage" label="Mona Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="24596" end="24607" title="The Bahamas" label="The Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18221" start="24612" end="24636" title="Turks and Caicos Islands" label="Turks and Caicos Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q128011" start="24808" end="24824" title="Greater Antilles" label="Greater Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q166131" start="24859" end="24867" title="Antilles" label="Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="24876" end="24887" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q83788" start="24995" end="25013" title="Cordillera Central, Dominican Republic" label="Cordillera Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q783742" start="25237" end="25248" title="Pico Duarte" label="Pico Duarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q125465" start="25258" end="25267" title="sea level" label="sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049917" start="25273" end="25297" title="Cordillera Septentrional" label="Cordillera Septentrional"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279055" start="25425" end="25441" title="Samaná Peninsula" label="Samaná Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257629" start="25532" end="25544" title="Cibao" label="Cibao Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284041" start="26002" end="26016" title="Massif du Nord" label="Massif du Nord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297666" start="26025" end="26041" title="Montagnes Noires, Haiti" label="Montagnes Noires"/>
<link wikidata="Q844003" start="26169" end="26183" title="Gulf of Gonâve" label="Gulf of Gonâve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403979" start="26296" end="26314" title="Baoruco Mountain Range" label="Sierra de Bahoruco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384085" start="26351" end="26369" title="Massif de la Selle" label="Massif de la Selle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116170" start="26378" end="26396" title="Massif de la Hotte" label="Massif de la Hotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971319" start="26467" end="26482" title="Pic la Selle" label="Pic de la Selle"/>
<link wikidata="Q190429" start="26632" end="26642" title="Depression (geology)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000332" start="26770" end="26790" title="Plaine du Cul-de-Sac" label="Plaine du Cul-de-Sac"/>
<link wikidata="Q34261" start="26826" end="26840" title="Port-au-Prince" label="Port-au-Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q188025" start="26903" end="26912" title="salt lake" label="salt lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722327" start="26925" end="26935" title="Etang Saumâtre" label="Lake Azuei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464758" start="26949" end="26964" title="Lake Enriquillo" label="Lake Enriquillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="27022" end="27031" title="ecoregion" label="ecoregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5772822" start="27038" end="27063" title="Hispaniolan moist forests" label="Hispaniolan moist forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q104204244" start="27225" end="27248" title="Hispaniolan dry forests" label="Hispaniolan dry forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q747173" start="27314" end="27325" title="rain shadow" label="rain shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257629" start="27404" end="27409" title="Cibao" label="Cibao"/>
<link wikidata="Q287885" start="27456" end="27480" title="Hispaniolan pine forests" label="Hispaniolan pine forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143162" start="27544" end="27575" title="flooded grasslands and savannas" label="flooded grasslands and savannas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722327" start="27709" end="27719" title="Etang Saumatre" label="Lake Azuei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805779" start="27724" end="27735" title="Trou Caïman" label="Trou Caïman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464758" start="27760" end="27775" title="Lake Enriquillo" label="Lake Enriquillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q166131" start="28057" end="28065" title="Antilles" label="Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="28172" end="28183" title="trade winds" label="trade winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q747173" start="28293" end="28304" title="rain shadow" label="rain shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="28388" end="28405" title="semi-arid climate" label="semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049917" start="28979" end="29003" title="Cordillera Septentrional" label="Cordillera Septentrional"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590598" start="29748" end="29753" title="frost" label="frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607683" start="29867" end="29893" title="List of birds of Hispaniola" label="bird species in Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q20717835" start="29899" end="29934" title="List of amphibians of Hispaniola" label="the island&amp;#x27;s amphibian species"/>
<link wikidata="Q549103" start="30344" end="30361" title="Hispaniolan hutia" label="Hispaniolan hutia"/>
<link wikidata="Q754041" start="30404" end="30425" title="Hispaniolan solenodon" label="Hispaniolan solenodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q857654" start="30541" end="30554" title="Calyptophilus" label="Calyptophilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q845457" start="30568" end="30573" title="Palmchat" label="Dulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q547920" start="30587" end="30597" title="Nesoctites" label="Nesoctites"/>
<link wikidata="Q970291" start="30611" end="30625" title="Phaenicophilus" label="Phaenicophilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q529238" start="30639" end="30648" title="Xenoligea" label="Xenoligea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092562" start="30665" end="30675" title="Microligea" label="Microligea"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="31340" end="31349" title="ecoregion" label="ecoregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5772822" start="31356" end="31381" title="Hispaniolan moist forests" label="Hispaniolan moist forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q747173" start="31632" end="31643" title="rain shadow" label="rain shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257629" start="31723" end="31728" title="Cibao" label="Cibao"/>
<link wikidata="Q287885" start="31775" end="31799" title="Hispaniolan pine forests" label="Hispaniolan pine forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143162" start="31863" end="31894" title="flooded grasslands and savannas" label="flooded grasslands and savannas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722327" start="32017" end="32031" title="Etang Saumatre" label="Etang Saumatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805779" start="32036" end="32047" title="Trou Caïman" label="Trou Caïman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464758" start="32072" end="32087" title="Lake Enriquillo" label="Lake Enriquillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="32119" end="32124" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3043219" start="32126" end="32139" title="Deforestation in Haiti" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q177463" start="32354" end="32362" title="charcoal" label="charcoal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259364" start="32450" end="32462" title="forest cover" label="forest cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="33574" end="33589" title="desertification" label="desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247924" start="34566" end="34582" title="People of the Dominican Republic" label="Dominican people"/>
<link wikidata="Q514022" start="34824" end="34836" title="Hispanophone" label="Hispanophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q10359135" start="35000" end="35008" title="Religion in the Dominican Republic" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="35018" end="35032" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="35037" end="35047" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723001" start="35061" end="35087" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the Dominican Republic" label="The Church of Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q388202" start="35163" end="35189" title="African diaspora religions" label="African diaspora religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q302729" start="35191" end="35204" title="Haitian Vodou" label="Haitian Vodou"/>
<link wikidata="Q18810132" start="35206" end="35221" title="Dominican Vodou" label="Dominican Vodou"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35223" end="35241" title="Dominican Santeria" label="Dominican Santeria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35243" end="35268" title="Congos Del Espiritu Santo" label="Congos Del Espiritu Santo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35270" end="35291" title="Dominican Protestants" label="Dominican Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="35293" end="35305" title="Pentecostals" label="Pentecostals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036835" start="35308" end="35315" title="History of the Jews in the Dominican Republic" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8135020" start="35317" end="35322" title="Islam in the Dominican Republic" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="35327" end="35339" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="35341" end="35349" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="35351" end="35359" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622507" start="35361" end="35383" title="Unitarian Universalism" label="Unitarian Universalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="35385" end="35409" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q483978" start="35411" end="35425" title="Pentecostalism" label="Pentecostalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33491" start="35642" end="35656" title="Haitian Creole" label="Haitian Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311188" start="35740" end="35748" title="Religion in Haiti" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q302729" start="35837" end="35850" title="Haitian Vodou" label="Haitian Vodou"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="35896" end="35906" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q191923" start="36237" end="36244" title="Mulatto" label="Mulatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="36407" end="36421" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q219995" start="36439" end="36447" title="Guanches" label="Guanches"/>
<link wikidata="Q128011" start="36561" end="36577" title="Greater Antilles" label="Greater Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q207987" start="36746" end="36770" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita" label="annual per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q7940083" start="37529" end="37569" title="volcanogenic massive sulfide ore deposit" label="volcanogenic massive sulfide ore deposit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843528" start="37578" end="37584" title="Maimón" label="Maimón"/>
<link wikidata="Q808908" start="37756" end="37768" title="Barrick Gold" label="Barrick Gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534795" start="37773" end="37781" title="Goldcorp" label="Goldcorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q15104297" start="37791" end="37806" title="open-pit mining" label="open-pit mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q775155" start="37895" end="37911" title="gold cyanidation" label="gold cyanidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="37913" end="37919" title="Pyrite" label="Pyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q105006" start="37924" end="37934" title="sphalerite" label="sphalerite"/>
<link wikidata="Q927407" start="37948" end="37964" title="sulfide minerals" label="sulfide minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="37994" end="38002" title="volcanic" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191704" start="38003" end="38016" title="conglomerate (geology)" label="conglomerates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257738" start="38021" end="38032" title="agglomerate" label="agglomerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306136" start="38120" end="38125" title="Bonao" label="Bonao"/>
<link wikidata="Q965130" start="38138" end="38161" title="Falconbridge Ltd." label="Falconbridge Dominicana"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="38178" end="38184" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q622845" start="38185" end="38193" title="laterite" label="laterite"/>
<link wikidata="Q898459" start="38453" end="38468" title="froth flotation" label="froth flotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q752187" start="38516" end="38532" title="Early Cretaceous" label="Early Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q736917" start="38540" end="38549" title="formation (geology)" label="Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189703" start="38551" end="38559" title="Goethite" label="Goethite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504655" start="38652" end="38661" title="supergene (geology)" label="supergene"/>
<link wikidata="Q111044" start="38686" end="38698" title="chalcopyrite" label="chalcopyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="38838" end="38856" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="38861" end="38866" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="38878" end="38901" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046537" start="38931" end="38951" title="Casa de Contratación" label="Casa de Contratación"/>
<link wikidata="Q17002289" start="38954" end="38988" title="Dominican Republic–Haiti relations" label="Dominican Republic–Haiti relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q60521170" start="38991" end="39007" title="Geology of Haiti" label="Geology of Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q60521208" start="39010" end="39043" title="Geology of the Dominican Republic" label="Geology of the Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q457898" start="39046" end="39070" title="History of the Caribbean" label="History of the Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156779" start="39073" end="39096" title="List of divided islands" label="List of divided islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047607" start="39099" end="39135" title="Spanish colonization of the Americas" label="Spanish colonization of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12213222" start="39138" end="39157" title="Spanish West Indies" label="Spanish West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q15497924" start="39196" end="39207" title="Ida Altman" label="Altman, Ida"/>
<link wikidata="Q15759585" start="39883" end="39918" title="Hispanic American Historical Review" label="Hispanic American Historical Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626296" start="40138" end="40156" title="Stuart B. Schwartz" label="Stuart B. Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823362" start="40214" end="40227" title="Carl O. Sauer" label="Sauer, Carl O"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="40436" end="40448" title="The Americas" label="The Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="40740" end="40759" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13717" wikidata="Q1033016" url="?curid=13717" title="Halle Berry">
<text>Halle Maria Berry ( ; born Maria Halle Berry; August 14, 1966) is an American actress. She began her career as a model and entered several beauty contests, finishing as the first runner-up in the Miss USA pageant and coming in sixth in the Miss World 1986. Her breakthrough film role was in the romantic comedy &quot;Boomerang&quot; (1992), alongside Eddie Murphy, which led to roles in &quot;The Flintstones&quot; (1994) and &quot;Bulworth&quot; (1998) as well as the television film &quot;Introducing Dorothy Dandridge&quot; (1999), for which she won a Primetime Emmy Award and a Golden Globe Award.

Berry established herself as one of the highest-paid actresses in Hollywood during the 2000s. For her performance of a struggling widow in the romantic drama &quot;Monster&#x27;s Ball&quot; (2001), Berry became the only African-American woman to win the Academy Award for Best Actress, and the first woman of color. Berry took on high-profile roles such as Storm in four installments of the &quot;X-Men&quot; film series (2000–2014), the henchwoman of a robber in the thriller &quot;Swordfish&quot; (2001), Bond girl Jinx in &quot;Die Another Day&quot; (2002), and the title role in the much-derided &quot;Catwoman&quot; (2004).

A varying critical and commercial reception followed in subsequent years, with &quot;Perfect Stranger&quot; (2007), &quot;Cloud Atlas&quot; (2012) and &quot;The Call&quot; (2013) being among her notable film releases in that period. Berry launched a production company, 606 Films, in 2014 and has been involved in the production of a number of projects in which she performed, such as the CBS science fiction series &quot;Extant&quot; (2014–2015). She appeared in the action films &quot;&quot; (2017) and &quot;John Wick: Chapter 3 – Parabellum&quot; (2019) and made her directorial debut with the Netflix drama &quot;Bruised&quot; (2020).

Berry has been a Revlon spokesmodel since 1996. She was formerly married to baseball player David Justice, singer-songwriter Eric Benét, and actor Olivier Martinez. She has two children, one with Martinez and another with model Gabriel Aubry.

==Early life==
Berry was born Maria Halle Berry in Cleveland, Ohio, on August 14, 1966, to Judith Ann (née Hawkins), a first generation American whose mother, Nelle Hawkins, (née Dicken), came from Liverpool, and Jerome Jesse Berry, an African-American man. Her name was legally changed to Halle Maria Berry at the age of five. Her parents selected her middle name from Halle&#x27;s Department Store, which was then a local landmark in Cleveland. Berry&#x27;s mother worked as a psychiatric nurse, and her father worked in the same hospital as an attendant in the psychiatric ward; he later became a bus driver. They divorced when Berry was four years old, and she and her older sister Heidi Berry-Henderson were raised exclusively by their mother. She has been estranged from her father since childhood, noting in 1992 that she did not even know if he was still alive. Her father was abusive to her mother, and Berry has recalled witnessing her mother being beaten daily, kicked down stairs, and hit in the head with a wine bottle. Berry said she was bullied as a kid, so she learned how to fight and protect herself.

Berry grew up in Oakwood, Ohio, and graduated from Bedford High School, where she was a cheerleader, honor student, editor of the school newspaper, and prom queen. She worked in the children&#x27;s department at Higbee&#x27;s Department store. She then studied at Cuyahoga Community College. In the 1980s, she entered several beauty contests, winning Miss Teen All American 1985 and Miss Ohio USA in 1986. She was the 1986 Miss USA first runner-up to Christy Fichtner of Texas. In the Miss USA 1986 pageant interview competition, she said she hoped to become an entertainer or to have something to do with the media. Her interview was awarded the highest score by the judges. She was the first African-American Miss World entrant in 1986, where she finished sixth and Trinidad and Tobago&#x27;s Giselle Laronde was crowned Miss World.

==Career==
===Early work and breakthrough (1989–1999)===
In 1989, Berry moved to New York City to pursue her acting ambitions. During her early time there, she ran out of money and briefly lived in a homeless shelter and a YMCA. Her situation improved by the end of that year, and she was cast in the role of model Emily Franklin in the short-lived ABC television series &quot;Living Dolls&quot;, which was shot in New York and was a spin-off of the hit series &quot;Who&#x27;s the Boss?&quot;. During the taping of &quot;Living Dolls&quot;, she lapsed into a coma and was diagnosed with type 1 diabetes. After the cancellation of &quot;Living Dolls&quot;, she moved to Los Angeles.

Berry&#x27;s film debut was in a small role for Spike Lee&#x27;s &quot;Jungle Fever&quot; (1991), in which she played Vivian, a drug addict. That same year, Berry had her first co-starring role in &quot;Strictly Business&quot;. In 1992, Berry portrayed a career woman who falls for the lead character played by Eddie Murphy in the romantic comedy &quot;Boomerang&quot;. The following year, she caught the public&#x27;s attention as a headstrong biracial slave in the TV adaptation of &quot;&quot;, based on the book by Alex Haley. Berry was also in the live-action &quot;Flintstones&quot; film as Sharon Stone, a sultry secretary who attempts to seduce Fred Flintstone.

Berry tackled a more serious role, playing a former drug addict struggling to regain custody of her son in &quot;Losing Isaiah&quot; (1995), starring opposite Jessica Lange. She portrayed Sandra Beecher in &quot;Race the Sun&quot; (1996), which was based on a true story, shot in Australia, and co-starred alongside Kurt Russell in &quot;Executive Decision&quot;. Beginning in 1996, she was a Revlon spokeswoman for seven years and renewed her contract in 2004.

She starred alongside Natalie Deselle Reid in the 1997 comedy film &quot;B*A*P*S&quot;. In 1998, Berry received praise for her role in &quot;Bulworth&quot; as an intelligent woman raised by activists who gives a politician (Warren Beatty) a new lease on life. The same year, she played the singer Zola Taylor, one of the three wives of pop singer Frankie Lymon, in the biopic &quot;Why Do Fools Fall in Love&quot;.

In the 1999 HBO biopic &quot;Introducing Dorothy Dandridge&quot;, she portrayed Dorothy Dandridge, the first African American woman to be nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress. It was to Berry a heartfelt project that she introduced, co-produced and fought intensely for it to come through. Berry won awards including a Primetime Emmy Award and Golden Globe Award.

===Worldwide recognition (2000–2004)===
Berry portrayed the mutant superhero Storm in the film adaptation of the comic book series &quot;X-Men&quot; (2000) and its sequels, &quot;X2&quot; (2003), &quot;X-Men: The Last Stand&quot; (2006) and &quot;X-Men: Days of Future Past&quot; (2014). In 2001, Berry appeared in the film &quot;Swordfish&quot;, which featured her first topless scene. At first, she was opposed to a sunbathing scene in the film in which she would appear topless, but Berry eventually agreed. Some people attributed her change of heart to a substantial increase in the amount Warner Bros. offered her; she was reportedly paid an additional $500,000 for the short scene. Berry denied these stories, telling one interviewer that they amused her and &quot;made for great publicity for the movie.&quot; After turning down numerous roles that required nudity, she said she decided to make &quot;Swordfish&quot; because her then-husband, Eric Benét, supported her and encouraged her to take risks.

Berry appeared as Leticia Musgrove, the troubled wife of an executed murderer (Sean Combs), in the 2001 feature film &quot;Monster&#x27;s Ball&quot;. Her performance was awarded the National Board of Review and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actress. She became the only African-American woman to win the Academy Award for Best Actress. The NAACP issued the statement: &quot;Congratulations to Halle Berry and Denzel Washington for giving us hope and making us proud. If this is a sign that Hollywood is finally ready to give opportunity and judge performance based on skill and not on skin color then it is a good thing.&quot; This role generated controversy. Her graphic nude love scene with a racist character played by co-star Billy Bob Thornton was the subject of much media chatter and discussion among African Americans. Many in the African-American community were critical of Berry for taking the part. Berry responded: &quot;I don&#x27;t really see a reason to ever go that far again. That was a unique movie. That scene was special and pivotal and needed to be there, and it would be a really special script that would require something like that again.&quot;

Berry asked for a higher fee for Revlon advertisements after winning the Oscar. Ron Perelman, the cosmetics firm&#x27;s chief, congratulated her, saying how happy he was that she modeled for his company. She replied, &quot;Of course, you&#x27;ll have to pay me more.&quot; Perelman stalked off in a rage. In accepting her award, she gave an acceptance speech honoring previous black actresses who had never had the opportunity. She said, &quot;This moment is so much bigger than me. This is for every nameless, faceless woman of color who now has a chance tonight because this door has been opened.&quot;

As Bond girl Giacinta &#x27;Jinx&#x27; Johnson in the 2002 blockbuster &quot;Die Another Day&quot;, Berry recreated a scene from &quot;Dr. No&quot;, emerging from the surf to be greeted by James Bond as Ursula Andress had 40 years earlier. Lindy Hemming, costume designer on &quot;Die Another Day&quot;, had insisted that Berry wear a bikini and knife as a homage. Berry has said of the scene: &quot;It&#x27;s splashy,&quot; &quot;exciting,&quot; &quot;sexy,&quot; &quot;provocative&quot; and &quot;it will keep me still out there after winning an Oscar.&quot; According to an ITV news poll, Jinx was voted the fourth toughest girl on screen of all time. Berry was hurt during filming when debris from a smoke grenade flew into her eye. It was removed in a 30-minute operation. After Berry won the Academy Award, rewrites were commissioned to give her more screentime for &quot;X2&quot;.

She starred in the psychological thriller &quot;Gothika&quot; opposite Robert Downey, Jr. in November 2003, during which she broke her arm in a scene with Downey, who twisted her arm too hard. Production was halted for eight weeks. It was a moderate hit at the United States box office, taking in $60 million; it earned another $80 million abroad. Berry appeared in the nu metal band Limp Bizkit&#x27;s music video for &quot;Behind Blue Eyes&quot; for the motion picture soundtrack for the film. The same year, she was named No. 1 in &quot;FHM&quot;″s 100 Sexiest Women in the World poll.

Berry starred as the title role in the film &quot;Catwoman&quot;, for which she received US$12.5 million. It is widely regarded by critics as one of the worst films ever made. She was awarded the Worst Actress Razzie Award for her performance; she appeared at the ceremony to accept the award in person (while holding her Oscar from &quot;Monster&#x27;s Ball&quot;) with a sense of humor, considering it an experience of the &quot;rock bottom&quot; in order to be &quot;at the top.&quot; Holding the Academy Award in one hand and the Razzie in the other she said, &quot;I never in my life thought that I would be up here, winning a Razzie! It&#x27;s not like I ever aspired to be here, but thank you. When I was a kid, my mother told me that if you could not be a good loser, then there&#x27;s no way you could be a good winner.&quot;

===Established actress and career fluctuations (2005–2013)===
Her next film appearance was in the Oprah Winfrey-produced ABC television film &quot;Their Eyes Were Watching God&quot; (2005), an adaptation of Zora Neale Hurston&#x27;s novel, with Berry portraying a free-spirited woman whose unconventional sexual mores upset her 1920s contemporaries in a small community. She received her second Primetime Emmy Award nomination for her role. Also in 2005, she served as an executive producer in &quot;Lackawanna Blues&quot;, and landed her voice for the character of Cappy, one of the many mechanical beings in the animated feature &quot;Robots&quot;.

In the thriller &quot;Perfect Stranger&quot; (2007), Berry starred with Bruce Willis, playing a reporter who goes undercover to uncover the killer of her childhood friend. The film grossed a modest US$73 million worldwide, and received lukewarm reviews from critics, who felt that despite the presence of Berry and Willis, it is &quot;too convoluted to work, and features a twist ending that&#x27;s irritating and superfluous.&quot; Her next 2007 film release was the drama &quot;Things We Lost in the Fire&quot;, co-starring Benicio del Toro, where she took on the role of a recent widow befriending the troubled friend of her late husband. The film was the first time in which she worked with a female director, Danish Susanne Bier, giving her a new feeling of &quot;thinking the same way,&quot; which she appreciated. While the film made US$8.6 million in its global theatrical run, it garnered positive reviews from writers; &quot;The Austin Chronicle&quot; found the film to be &quot;an impeccably constructed and perfectly paced drama of domestic and internal volatility&quot; and felt that &quot;Berry is brilliant here, as good as she&#x27;s ever been.&quot;

In April 2007, Berry was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in front of the Kodak Theatre at 6801 Hollywood Boulevard for her contributions to the film industry, and by the end of the decade, she established herself as one of the highest-paid actresses in Hollywood, earning an estimated $10 million per film.

In the independent drama &quot;Frankie and Alice&quot; (2010), Berry played the leading role of a young multiracial American woman with dissociative identity disorder struggling against her alter personality to retain her true self. The film received a limited theatrical release, to a mixed critical response. &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; nevertheless described the film as &quot;a well-wrought psychological drama that delves into the dark side of one woman&#x27;s psyche&quot; and found Berry to be &quot;spellbinding&quot; in it. She earned the African-American Film Critics Association Award for Best Actress and a Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Actress – Motion Picture Drama. She next made part of a large ensemble cast in Garry Marshall&#x27;s romantic comedy &quot;New Year&#x27;s Eve&quot; (2011), with Michelle Pfeiffer, Jessica Biel, Robert De Niro, Josh Duhamel, Zac Efron, Sarah Jessica Parker, and Sofía Vergara, among many others. In the film, she took on the supporting role of a nurse befriending a man in the final stages (De Niro). While the film was panned by critics, it made US$142 million worldwide.

In 2012, Berry starred as an expert diver tutor alongside then-husband Olivier Martinez in the little-seen thriller &quot;Dark Tide&quot;, and led an ensemble cast opposite Tom Hanks and Jim Broadbent in The Wachowskis&#x27;s epic science fiction film &quot;Cloud Atlas&quot; (2012), with each of the actors playing six different characters across a period of five centuries. Budgeted at US$128.8 million, &quot;Cloud Atlas&quot; made US$130.4 million worldwide, and garnered polarized reactions from both critics and audiences.

Berry appeared in a segment of the independent anthology comedy &quot;Movie 43&quot; (2013), which the &quot;Chicago Sun-Times&quot; called &quot;the &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; of awful.&quot; Berry found greater success with her next performance, as a 9-1-1 operator receiving a call from a girl kidnapped by a serial killer, in the crime thriller &quot;The Call&quot; (2013). Berry was drawn to &quot;the idea of being a part of a movie that was so empowering for women. We don&#x27;t often get to play roles like this, where ordinary people become heroic and do something extraordinary.&quot; Manohla Dargis of &quot;The New York Times&quot; found the film to be &quot;an effectively creepy thriller,&quot; while reviewer Dwight Brown felt that &quot;the script gives Berry a blue-collar character she can make accessible, vulnerable and gutsy[...].&quot; &quot;The Call&quot; was a sleeper hit, grossing US$68.6 million around the globe.

===Continued film and television work (2014–present)===
In 2014, Berry signed on to star and serve as a co-executive producer in CBS drama series &quot;Extant&quot;, where she took on the role of Molly Woods, an astronaut who struggles to reconnect with her husband and android son after spending 13 months in space. The show ran for two seasons until 2015, receiving largely positive reviews from critics. &quot;USA Today&quot; remarked: &quot;She [Halle Berry] brings a dignity and gravity to Molly, a projected intelligence that allows you to buy her as an astronaut and to see what has happened to her as frightening rather than ridiculous. Berry&#x27;s all in, and you float along.&quot; Also in 2014, Berry launched a new production company, 606 Films, with producing partner Elaine Goldsmith-Thomas. It is named after the Anti-Paparazzi Bill, SB 606, that the actress pushed for and which was signed into law by California Governor Jerry Brown in the fall of 2013. The new company emerged as part of a deal for Berry to work in &quot;Extant&quot;.

In the stand-up comedy concert film &quot;Kevin Hart: What Now?&quot; (2016), Berry appeared as herself, opposite Kevin Hart, attending a poker game event that goes horribly wrong. She provided uncredited vocals to the song &quot;Calling All My Lovelies&quot; by Bruno Mars from his third studio album, &quot;24K Magic&quot; (2016). &quot;Kidnap&quot;, an abduction thriller Berry filmed in 2014, was released in 2017. In the film, she starred as a diner waitress tailing a vehicle when her son is kidnapped by its occupants. &quot;Kidnap&quot; grossed US$34 million and garnered mixed reviews from writers, who felt that it &quot;strays into poorly scripted exploitation too often to take advantage of its pulpy premise — or the still-impressive talents of [Berry].&quot; She next played an agent employed by a secret American spy organisation in the action comedy sequel &quot;&quot; (2017), as part of an ensemble cast, consisting of Colin Firth, Taron Egerton, Mark Strong, Julianne Moore, and Elton John. While critical response towards the film was mixed, it made US$414 million worldwide.

Alongside Daniel Craig, Berry starred as a working-class mother during the 1992 Los Angeles riots in Deniz Gamze Ergüven&#x27;s drama &quot;Kings&quot; (2017). The film found a limited theatrical release following its initial screening at the Toronto International Film Festival, and as part of an overall lukewarm reception, &quot;Variety&quot; noted: &quot;It should be said that Berry has given some of the best and worst performances of the past quarter-century, but this is perhaps the only one that swings to both extremes in the same movie.&quot; Berry competed against James Corden in the first rap battle on the first episode of TBS&#x27;s &quot;Drop the Mic&quot;, originally aired on October 24, 2017.

She played Sofia, an assassin, in the film &quot;John Wick: Chapter 3 – Parabellum&quot;, which was released on May 17, 2019, by Lionsgate. She is, as of February 2019, executive producer of the BET television series &quot;Boomerang&quot;, based on the film in which she starred. The series premiered February 12, 2019.

Berry made her directorial debut with the feature &quot;Bruised&quot; in which she plays a disgraced MMA fighter named Jackie Justice, who reconnects with her estranged son. The film premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival in September 2020 and was released on Netflix in November 2021. Berry received a positive review from &quot;Deadline&quot; for her performance.

In January 2023, Berry signed with Range Media Partners as a producer and director.

==Media image==
Berry was ranked No. 1 on &quot;People&quot; &quot;50 Most Beautiful People in the World&quot; list in 2003 after making the top ten seven times and appeared No. 1 on &quot;FHM&quot; &quot;100 Sexiest Women in the World&quot; the same year. She was named &quot;Esquire&quot; magazine&#x27;s &quot;Sexiest Woman Alive&quot; in October 2008, about which she stated: &quot;I don&#x27;t know exactly what it means, but being 42 and having just had a baby, I think I&#x27;ll take it.&quot; &quot;Men&#x27;s Health&quot; ranked her at No. 35 on their &quot;100 Hottest Women of All-Time&quot; list. In 2009, she was voted #23 on &quot;Empire&quot;&#x27;s 100 Sexiest Film Stars. The same year, rapper Hurricane Chris released a song titled &quot;Halle Berry (She&#x27;s Fine)&quot; extolling Berry&#x27;s beauty and sex appeal. At the age of 42 (in 2008), she was named the &quot;Sexiest Black Woman&quot; by Access Hollywood&#x27;s &quot;TV One Access&quot; survey. Born to an African-American father and a white mother, Berry has stated that her biracial background was &quot;painful and confusing&quot; when she was a young woman, and she made the decision early on to identify as a black woman because she knew that was how she would be perceived.

==Personal life==
Berry dated Chicago dentist John Ronan from March 1989 to October 1991. In November 1993, Ronan sued Berry for $80,000 in what he claimed were unpaid loans to help launch her career. Berry contended that the money was a gift, and a judge dismissed the case because Ronan did not list Berry as a debtor when he filed for bankruptcy in 1992.

According to Berry, a beating from a former abusive boyfriend during the filming of &quot;The Last Boy Scout&quot; in 1991 punctured her eardrum and caused her to lose 80% of her hearing in her left ear. She has never named the abuser, but she said that he was someone &quot;well known in Hollywood&quot;. In 2004, her former boyfriend Christopher Williams accused Wesley Snipes of being responsible for the incident, saying, &quot;I&#x27;m so tired of people thinking I&#x27;m the guy [who did it]. Wesley Snipes busted her eardrum, not me.&quot;

Berry first saw baseball player David Justice on TV playing in an MTV celebrity baseball game in February 1992. When a reporter from Justice&#x27;s hometown of Cincinnati told her that Justice was a fan, Berry gave her phone number to the reporter to give to Justice. Berry married Justice shortly after midnight on January 1, 1993. Following their separation in February 1996, Berry stated publicly that she was so depressed that she had considered taking her own life. Berry and Justice were divorced on June 20, 1997.

In May 2000, Berry pleaded no contest to a charge of leaving the scene of a car accident; she was sentenced to three years&#x27; probation, fined $13,500, and ordered to perform 200 hours of community service.

Berry married her second husband, singer-songwriter Eric Benét, on January 24, 2001, following a two-year courtship. Benét underwent treatment for sex addiction in 2002. By early October 2003, they had separated, and their divorce was finalized on January 3, 2005.

In November 2005, Berry began dating French-Canadian model Gabriel Aubry, whom she had met at a Versace photoshoot. Berry gave birth to their daughter in March 2008. On April 30, 2010, Berry and Aubry announced that their relationship had ended some months earlier. In January 2011, Berry and Aubry became involved in a highly publicized custody battle, centered primarily on Berry&#x27;s desire to move with their daughter from Los Angeles, where Berry and Aubry resided, to France, the home of French actor Olivier Martinez, whom Berry had started dating in 2010, having met him while filming &quot;Dark Tide&quot; in South Africa. Aubry objected to the move on the ground that it would interfere with their joint custody arrangement. In November 2012, a judge denied Berry&#x27;s request to move the couple&#x27;s daughter to France. Less than two weeks later, on November 22, 2012, Aubry and Martinez were both treated at a hospital for injuries after engaging in a physical altercation at Berry&#x27;s residence. Martinez performed a citizen&#x27;s arrest on Aubry and, because it was considered a domestic violence incident, was granted a temporary emergency protective order preventing Aubry from coming within 100 yards of Berry, Martinez, and the child with whom he shares custody with Berry, until November 29, 2012. In turn, Aubry obtained a temporary restraining order against Martinez on November 26, 2012, asserting that the fight had begun when Martinez had threatened to kill Aubry if he did not allow the couple to move to France. Leaked court documents included photos showing significant injuries to Aubry&#x27;s face, which were widely displayed in the media. On November 29, 2012, Berry&#x27;s lawyer announced that Berry and Aubry had reached an amicable custody agreement in court. In June 2014, a Superior Court ruling called for Berry to pay Aubry $16,000 a month in child support as well as a retroactive payment of $115,000 and $300,000 for Aubry&#x27;s attorney fees.

Berry and Martinez confirmed their engagement in March 2012, and married in France on July 13, 2013. In October 2013, Berry gave birth to their son. In 2015, after two years of marriage, the couple announced they were divorcing. The divorce 
was finalized in December 2016. In August 2023, issues dealing with custody and child support were settled.

Berry started dating American musician Van Hunt in 2020, which was revealed through her Instagram.

===Activism===

Along with Pierce Brosnan, Cindy Crawford, Jane Seymour, Dick Van Dyke, Téa Leoni, and Daryl Hannah, Berry successfully fought in 2006 against the Cabrillo Port Liquefied Natural Gas facility that was proposed off the coast of Malibu. Berry said, &quot;I care about the air we breathe, I care about the marine life and the ecosystem of the ocean.&quot; In May 2007, Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger vetoed the facility. Hasty Pudding Theatricals gave her its 2006 &quot;Woman of The Year&quot; award. Berry took part in a nearly 2,000-house cellphone-bank campaign for Barack Obama in February 2008. In April 2013, she appeared in a video clip for Gucci&#x27;s &quot;Chime for Change&quot; campaign that aims to raise funds and awareness of women&#x27;s issues in terms of education, health, and justice. In August 2013, Berry testified alongside Jennifer Garner before the California State Assembly&#x27;s Judiciary Committee in support of a bill that would protect celebrities&#x27; children from harassment by photographers. The bill passed in September.

In May 2024, Berry advocated for more research and education on menopause by supporting a bill introduced by Senators Patty Murray and Lisa Murkowski. Berry said, &quot;I&#x27;m in menopause, OK?... The shame has to be taken out of menopause. We have to talk about this very normal part of our life that happens. Our doctors can&#x27;t even say the word to us, let alone walk us through the journey.&quot;

==Filmography==
===Film===
===Television===
===Video game===
===Music videos===
==Awards and nominations==
==See also==
* List of African American firsts
* List of female film and television directors
* List of LGBT-related films directed by women

==References==
== General bibliography ==
* Banting, Erinn. &quot;Halle Berry&quot;, Weigl Publishers, 2005. .
* Gogerly, Liz. &quot;Halle Berry&quot;, Raintree, 2005. .
* Naden, Corinne J. &quot;Halle Berry&quot;, Sagebrush Education Resources, 2001. .
* O&#x27;Brien, Daniel. &quot;Halle Berry&quot;, Reynolds &amp; Hearn, 2003. .
* Sanello, Frank. &quot;Halle Berry: A Stormy Life&quot;, Virgin Books, 2003. .
* Schuman, Michael A. &quot;Halle Berry: Beauty Is Not Just Physical&quot;, Enslow, 2006. .

==External links==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1033016" start="0" end="17" title="Halle Berry" label="Halle Maria Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033016" start="27" end="44" title="Halle Berry" label="Maria Halle Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q746813" start="196" end="204" title="Miss USA" label="Miss USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466756" start="240" end="255" title="Miss World 1986" label="Miss World 1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q642511" start="317" end="326" title="Boomerang (1992 film)" label="Boomerang"/>
<link wikidata="Q43874" start="351" end="363" title="Eddie Murphy" label="Eddie Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q602094" start="393" end="408" title="The Flintstones (film)" label="The Flintstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q576505" start="432" end="440" title="Bulworth" label="Bulworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503830" start="491" end="520" title="Introducing Dorothy Dandridge" label="Introducing Dorothy Dandridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q989447" start="555" end="575" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Limited Series or Movie" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q673229" start="582" end="600" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Miniseries or Television Film" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="669" end="678" title="Hollywood (film industry)" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124875" start="767" end="786" title="Monster&amp;#x27;s Ball" label="Monster&amp;#x27;s Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="857" end="887" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072081" start="903" end="917" title="woman of color" label="woman of color"/>
<link wikidata="Q632212" start="960" end="965" title="Storm (Marvel Comics)" label="Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006869" start="994" end="1023" title="X-Men (film series)" label="&amp;quot;X-Men&amp;quot; film series"/>
<link wikidata="Q486954" start="1086" end="1095" title="Swordfish (film)" label="Swordfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649366" start="1110" end="1119" title="Bond girl" label="Bond girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761876" start="1120" end="1124" title="Jinx (James Bond)" label="Jinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q30931" start="1134" end="1149" title="Die Another Day" label="Die Another Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q115760" start="1209" end="1217" title="Catwoman (film)" label="Catwoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q930430" start="1318" end="1334" title="Perfect Stranger (film)" label="Perfect Stranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q28936" start="1355" end="1366" title="Cloud Atlas (film)" label="Cloud Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3019722" start="1390" end="1398" title="The Call (2013 film)" label="The Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033016" start="1503" end="1512" title="606 Films" label="606 Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="1622" end="1625" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q15072814" start="1655" end="1661" title="Extant (TV series)" label="Extant"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1744" end="1777" title="John Wick: Chapter 3 – Parabellum" label="John Wick: Chapter 3 – Parabellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="1831" end="1838" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q96374040" start="1851" end="1858" title="Bruised (film)" label="Bruised"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459595" start="1891" end="1897" title="Revlon" label="Revlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018182" start="1966" end="1979" title="David Justice" label="David Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q739041" start="1999" end="2009" title="Eric Benét" label="Eric Benét"/>
<link wikidata="Q504886" start="2021" end="2037" title="Olivier Martinez" label="Olivier Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q531882" start="2102" end="2115" title="Gabriel Aubry" label="Gabriel Aubry"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="2169" end="2184" title="Cleveland, Ohio" label="Cleveland, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="2316" end="2325" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642820" start="2488" end="2517" title="Halle Brothers Co." label="Halle&amp;#x27;s Department Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184774" start="3255" end="3268" title="Oakwood, Cuyahoga County, Ohio" label="Oakwood, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879156" start="3289" end="3308" title="Bedford High School (Bedford, Ohio)" label="Bedford High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150737" start="3390" end="3400" title="Prom" label="prom queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995348" start="3450" end="3463" title="Higbee&amp;#x27;s" label="Higbee&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197072" start="3502" end="3528" title="Cuyahoga Community College" label="Cuyahoga Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6877218" start="3621" end="3634" title="Miss Ohio USA" label="Miss Ohio USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q746813" start="3661" end="3669" title="Miss USA" label="Miss USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675899" start="3689" end="3705" title="Christy Fichtner" label="Christy Fichtner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466756" start="3949" end="3975" title="Miss World 1986" label="Miss World entrant in 1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q754" start="4006" end="4025" title="Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438135" start="4033" end="4048" title="Giselle Laronde" label="Giselle Laronde"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="4155" end="4168" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q157169" start="4297" end="4301" title="YMCA" label="YMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659078" start="4451" end="4463" title="Living Dolls" label="Living Dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623411" start="4541" end="4561" title="Who&amp;#x27;s the Boss?" label="Who&amp;#x27;s the Boss?"/>
<link wikidata="Q124407" start="4662" end="4677" title="type 1 diabetes" label="type 1 diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q51566" start="4806" end="4815" title="Spike Lee" label="Spike Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234074" start="4829" end="4841" title="Jungle Fever" label="Jungle Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356167" start="4961" end="4978" title="Strictly Business (1991 film)" label="Strictly Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q43874" start="5069" end="5081" title="Eddie Murphy" label="Eddie Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q642511" start="5111" end="5120" title="Boomerang (1992 film)" label="Boomerang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378555" start="5203" end="5211" title="biracial" label="biracial"/>
<link wikidata="Q296069" start="5277" end="5287" title="Alex Haley" label="Alex Haley"/>
<link wikidata="Q602094" start="5329" end="5340" title="The Flintstones (film)" label="Flintstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q614889" start="5411" end="5426" title="Fred Flintstone" label="Fred Flintstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217852" start="5542" end="5555" title="Losing Isaiah" label="Losing Isaiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q173585" start="5588" end="5601" title="Jessica Lange" label="Jessica Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q746538" start="5641" end="5653" title="Race the Sun (film)" label="Race the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="5709" end="5718" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142051" start="5767" end="5785" title="Executive Decision" label="Executive Decision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459595" start="5822" end="5828" title="Revlon" label="Revlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q690167" start="5965" end="5972" title="B.A.P.S." label="B*A*P*S"/>
<link wikidata="Q576505" start="6033" end="6041" title="Bulworth" label="Bulworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q95030" start="6116" end="6129" title="Warren Beatty" label="Warren Beatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q218494" start="6189" end="6200" title="Zola Taylor" label="Zola Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q683420" start="6239" end="6252" title="Frankie Lymon" label="Frankie Lymon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269043" start="6274" end="6299" title="Why Do Fools Fall in Love (film)" label="Why Do Fools Fall in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="6320" end="6323" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503830" start="6337" end="6366" title="Introducing Dorothy Dandridge" label="Introducing Dorothy Dandridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q229251" start="6388" end="6405" title="Dorothy Dandridge" label="Dorothy Dandridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="6464" end="6494" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="6639" end="6659" title="Primetime Emmy Award" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="6664" end="6682" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q632212" start="6762" end="6767" title="Storm (Marvel Comics)" label="Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q106182" start="6822" end="6827" title="X-Men (film)" label="X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q219776" start="6864" end="6866" title="X2 (film)" label="X2"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6887" end="6908" title="X-Men: The Last Stand" label="X-Men: The Last Stand"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6932" end="6958" title="X-Men: Days of Future Past" label="X-Men: Days of Future Past"/>
<link wikidata="Q486954" start="7015" end="7024" title="Swordfish (film)" label="Swordfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q83772" start="7057" end="7064" title="Toplessness" label="topless"/>
<link wikidata="Q216936" start="7775" end="7785" title="Sean Combs" label="Sean Combs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124875" start="7819" end="7838" title="Monster&amp;#x27;s Ball" label="Monster&amp;#x27;s Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133614" start="7878" end="7902" title="National Board of Review" label="National Board of Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q268200" start="7911" end="7936" title="Screen Actors Guild Award" label="Screen Actors Guild Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="8009" end="8039" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="8045" end="8050" title="NAACP" label="NAACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q202735" start="8435" end="8453" title="Billy Bob Thornton" label="Billy Bob Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q557049" start="8955" end="8967" title="Ron Perelman" label="Ron Perelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649366" start="9484" end="9493" title="Bond girl" label="Bond girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761876" start="9494" end="9527" title="Giacinta &amp;#x27;Jinx&amp;#x27; Johnson" label="Giacinta &amp;#x27;Jinx&amp;#x27; Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q30931" start="9558" end="9573" title="Die Another Day" label="Die Another Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q102754" start="9616" end="9622" title="Dr. No (film)" label="Dr. No"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="9670" end="9680" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q211111" start="9684" end="9698" title="Ursula Andress" label="Ursula Andress"/>
<link wikidata="Q606481" start="10418" end="10425" title="Gothika" label="Gothika"/>
<link wikidata="Q165219" start="10441" end="10459" title="Robert Downey, Jr." label="Robert Downey, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q263734" start="10740" end="10748" title="nu metal" label="nu metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q240767" start="10754" end="10765" title="Limp Bizkit" label="Limp Bizkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q814487" start="10795" end="10811" title="Behind Blue Eyes" label="Behind Blue Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q157015" start="10910" end="10913" title="FHM" label="FHM"/>
<link wikidata="Q27921999" start="10922" end="10952" title="FHM 100 Sexiest Women in the World 2003" label="100 Sexiest Women in the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q115760" start="11010" end="11018" title="Catwoman (film)" label="Catwoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776408" start="11102" end="11134" title="List of worst films" label="one of the worst films ever made"/>
<link wikidata="Q40237" start="11170" end="11182" title="Golden Raspberry Awards" label="Razzie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q55800" start="11894" end="11907" title="Oprah Winfrey" label="Oprah Winfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="11917" end="11920" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q17086126" start="11943" end="11971" title="Their Eyes Were Watching God (2005 television)" label="Their Eyes Were Watching God"/>
<link wikidata="Q220480" start="12003" end="12021" title="Zora Neale Hurston" label="Zora Neale Hurston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="12191" end="12211" title="Primetime Emmy Award" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6468685" start="12296" end="12312" title="Lackawanna Blues (film)" label="Lackawanna Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q756238" start="12362" end="12367" title="List of Robots characters" label="Cappy"/>
<link wikidata="Q756238" start="12433" end="12439" title="Robots (2005 film)" label="Robots"/>
<link wikidata="Q930430" start="12470" end="12486" title="Perfect Stranger (film)" label="Perfect Stranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680" start="12520" end="12532" title="Bruce Willis" label="Bruce Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306840" start="12928" end="12954" title="Things We Lost in the Fire (film)" label="Things We Lost in the Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193668" start="12974" end="12990" title="Benicio del Toro" label="Benicio del Toro"/>
<link wikidata="Q236148" start="13169" end="13181" title="Susanne Bier" label="Susanne Bier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519844" start="13383" end="13403" title="The Austin Chronicle" label="The Austin Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719295" start="13651" end="13655" title="List of actors with Hollywood Walk of Fame motion picture stars" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="13663" end="13685" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q180615" start="13702" end="13715" title="Kodak Theatre" label="Kodak Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752012" start="13968" end="13985" title="Frankie and Alice" label="Frankie and Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="14254" end="14276" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444814" start="14492" end="14533" title="African-American Film Critics Association" label="African-American Film Critics Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="14563" end="14581" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q463085" start="14597" end="14632" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Drama" label="Best Actress – Motion Picture Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q315087" start="14681" end="14695" title="Garry Marshall" label="Garry Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052260" start="14725" end="14744" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve (2011 film)" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q159778" start="14764" end="14781" title="Michelle Pfeiffer" label="Michelle Pfeiffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q163249" start="14783" end="14795" title="Jessica Biel" label="Jessica Biel"/>
<link wikidata="Q36949" start="14797" end="14811" title="Robert De Niro" label="Robert De Niro"/>
<link wikidata="Q19794" start="14813" end="14825" title="Josh Duhamel" label="Josh Duhamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q45229" start="14827" end="14836" title="Zac Efron" label="Zac Efron"/>
<link wikidata="Q170530" start="14838" end="14858" title="Sarah Jessica Parker" label="Sarah Jessica Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q231911" start="14864" end="14877" title="Sofía Vergara" label="Sofía Vergara"/>
<link wikidata="Q504886" start="15147" end="15163" title="Olivier Martinez" label="Olivier Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q74319" start="15198" end="15207" title="Dark Tide" label="Dark Tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263" start="15249" end="15258" title="Tom Hanks" label="Tom Hanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q185079" start="15263" end="15276" title="Jim Broadbent" label="Jim Broadbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q195719" start="15280" end="15294" title="The Wachowskis" label="The Wachowskis"/>
<link wikidata="Q652256" start="15302" end="15306" title="Epic film" label="epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28936" start="15334" end="15345" title="Cloud Atlas (film)" label="Cloud Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q548978" start="15676" end="15684" title="Movie 43" label="Movie 43"/>
<link wikidata="Q577417" start="15715" end="15732" title="Chicago Sun-Times" label="Chicago Sun-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q24815" start="15762" end="15774" title="Citizen Kane" label="Citizen Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q533806" start="15857" end="15862" title="9-1-1" label="9-1-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3019722" start="15959" end="15967" title="The Call (2013 film)" label="The Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q441327" start="16200" end="16214" title="Manohla Dargis" label="Manohla Dargis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="16224" end="16242" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539815" start="16490" end="16501" title="sleeper hit" label="sleeper hit"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="16676" end="16679" title="Columbia Broadcasting System" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q15072814" start="16699" end="16705" title="Extant (TV series)" label="Extant"/>
<link wikidata="Q18208341" start="16743" end="16754" title="Molly Woods" label="Molly Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="16960" end="16969" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033016" start="17295" end="17304" title="606 Films" label="606 Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q152451" start="17486" end="17497" title="Jerry Brown" label="Jerry Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q430525" start="17626" end="17638" title="concert film" label="concert film"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17645" end="17666" title="Kevin Hart: What Now?" label="Kevin Hart: What Now?"/>
<link wikidata="Q618352" start="17717" end="17727" title="Kevin Hart" label="Kevin Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450" start="17866" end="17876" title="Bruno Mars" label="Bruno Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q27133229" start="17912" end="17921" title="24K Magic (album)" label="24K Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18388171" start="17942" end="17948" title="Kidnap (2017 film)" label="Kidnap"/>
<link wikidata="Q162492" start="18540" end="18551" title="Colin Firth" label="Colin Firth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239385" start="18553" end="18566" title="Taron Egerton" label="Taron Egerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q312712" start="18568" end="18579" title="Mark Strong" label="Mark Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q80405" start="18581" end="18595" title="Julianne Moore" label="Julianne Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="18601" end="18611" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547" start="18710" end="18722" title="Daniel Craig" label="Daniel Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q696187" start="18775" end="18797" title="1992 Los Angeles riots" label="1992 Los Angeles riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q20730476" start="18801" end="18820" title="Deniz Gamze Ergüven" label="Deniz Gamze Ergüven"/>
<link wikidata="Q28517709" start="18840" end="18845" title="Kings (2017 film)" label="Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q390018" start="18943" end="18978" title="Toronto International Film Festival" label="Toronto International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q767499" start="19277" end="19289" title="James Corden" label="James Corden"/>
<link wikidata="Q543534" start="19338" end="19341" title="TBS (U.S. TV channel)" label="TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q48770943" start="19355" end="19367" title="Drop the Mic" label="Drop the Mic"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19463" end="19496" title="John Wick: Chapter 3 – Parabellum" label="John Wick: Chapter 3 – Parabellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q515869" start="19543" end="19552" title="Lionsgate" label="Lionsgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q880256" start="19609" end="19612" title="BET" label="BET"/>
<link wikidata="Q55605757" start="19637" end="19646" title="Boomerang (U.S. TV series)" label="Boomerang"/>
<link wikidata="Q96374040" start="19791" end="19798" title="Bruised (film)" label="Bruised"/>
<link wikidata="Q390018" start="19935" end="19970" title="Toronto International Film Festival" label="Toronto International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="20009" end="20016" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037100" start="20079" end="20087" title="Deadline Hollywood" label="Deadline"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="20249" end="20255" title="People (American magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q762195" start="20478" end="20485" title="Esquire (magazine)" label="Esquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q384671" start="20708" end="20725" title="Men&amp;#x27;s Health (magazine)" label="Men&amp;#x27;s Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122760" start="20840" end="20858" title="Empire (film magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Empire&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201007" start="20912" end="20927" title="Hurricane Chris (rapper)" label="Hurricane Chris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642822" start="20957" end="20986" title="Halle Berry (She&amp;#x27;s Fine)" label="Halle Berry (She&amp;#x27;s Fine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="21802" end="21812" title="bankruptcy" label="bankruptcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q785719" start="21913" end="21931" title="The Last Boy Scout" label="The Last Boy Scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113434" start="22159" end="22179" title="Christopher Williams (singer)" label="Christopher Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q189694" start="22188" end="22201" title="Wesley Snipes" label="Wesley Snipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018182" start="22404" end="22417" title="David Justice" label="David Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="22438" end="22441" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="22532" end="22542" title="Cincinnati" label="Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q739041" start="23157" end="23167" title="Eric Benét" label="Eric Benét"/>
<link wikidata="Q531882" start="23430" end="23443" title="Gabriel Aubry" label="Gabriel Aubry"/>
<link wikidata="Q696376" start="23467" end="23474" title="Gianni Versace S.p.A." label="Versace"/>
<link wikidata="Q504886" start="23880" end="23896" title="Olivier Martinez" label="Olivier Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q74319" start="23972" end="23981" title="Dark Tide" label="Dark Tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669334" start="24410" end="24431" title="citizen&amp;#x27;s arrest" label="citizen&amp;#x27;s arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="24474" end="24491" title="domestic violence" label="domestic violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577005" start="25192" end="25206" title="Superior Court" label="Superior Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913444" start="25758" end="25766" title="Van Hunt" label="Van Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q81520" start="25846" end="25860" title="Pierce Brosnan" label="Pierce Brosnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q199801" start="25862" end="25876" title="Cindy Crawford" label="Cindy Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q123849" start="25878" end="25890" title="Jane Seymour (actress)" label="Jane Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q310295" start="25892" end="25905" title="Dick Van Dyke" label="Dick Van Dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q202475" start="25907" end="25916" title="Téa Leoni" label="Téa Leoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q207596" start="25922" end="25934" title="Daryl Hannah" label="Daryl Hannah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25982" end="26026" title="List of LNG terminals#United States and Gulf of Mexico" label="Cabrillo Port Liquefied Natural Gas facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="26210" end="26231" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588813" start="26253" end="26278" title="Hasty Pudding Theatricals" label="Hasty Pudding Theatricals"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="26402" end="26414" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q178516" start="26481" end="26486" title="Gucci" label="Gucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q172044" start="26680" end="26695" title="Jennifer Garner" label="Jennifer Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q177708" start="26956" end="26965" title="menopause" label="menopause"/>
<link wikidata="Q258825" start="27001" end="27022" title="Patty Murray" label="Senators Patty Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q22360" start="27027" end="27041" title="Lisa Murkowski" label="Lisa Murkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6560667" start="27421" end="27452" title="List of African American firsts" label="List of African American firsts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619427" start="27455" end="27499" title="List of female film and television directors" label="List of female film and television directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q38805245" start="27502" end="27546" title="List of LGBT-related films directed by women" label="List of LGBT-related films directed by women"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13722" wikidata="Q37193" url="?curid=13722" title="Robert Koch">
<text>Heinrich Hermann Robert Koch ( ; ; 11 December 1843 – 27 May 1910) was a German physician and microbiologist. As the discoverer of the specific causative agents of deadly infectious diseases including tuberculosis, cholera and anthrax, he is regarded as one of the main founders of modern bacteriology. As such he is popularly nicknamed the father of microbiology (with Louis Pasteur), and as the father of medical bacteriology. His discovery of the anthrax bacterium (&quot;Bacillus anthracis&quot;) in 1876 is considered as the birth of modern bacteriology. Koch used his discoveries to establish that germs &quot;could cause a specific disease&quot; and directly provided proofs for the germ theory of diseases, therefore creating the scientific basis of public health, saving millions of lives. For his life&#x27;s work Koch is seen as one of the founders of modern medicine.

While working as a private physician, Koch developed many innovative techniques in microbiology. He was the first to use the oil immersion lens, condenser, and microphotography in microscopy. His invention of the bacterial culture method using agar and glass plates (later developed as the Petri dish by his assistant Julius Richard Petri) made him the first to grow bacteria in the laboratory. In appreciation of his work, he was appointed to government advisor at the Imperial Health Office in 1880, promoted to a senior executive position (&quot;Geheimer Regierungsrat&quot;) in 1882, Director of Hygienic Institute and Chair (Professor of hygiene) of the Faculty of Medicine at Berlin University in 1885, and the Royal Prussian Institute for Infectious Diseases (later renamed Robert Koch Institute after his death) in 1891.

The methods Koch used in bacteriology led to the establishment of a medical concept known as Koch&#x27;s postulates, four generalized medical principles to ascertain the relationship of pathogens with specific diseases. The concept is still in use in most situations and influences subsequent epidemiological principles such as the Bradford Hill criteria. A major controversy followed when Koch discovered tuberculin as a medication for tuberculosis which was proven to be ineffective, but developed for diagnosis of tuberculosis after his death. For his research on tuberculosis, he received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1905. The day he announced the discovery of the tuberculosis bacterium, 24 March 1882, has been observed by the World Health Organization as &quot;World Tuberculosis Day&quot; every year since 1982.

==Early life and education==
Koch was born in Clausthal, Germany, on 11 December 1843, to Hermann Koch (1814–1877) and Mathilde Julie Henriette (née Biewend; 1818–1871). His father was a mining engineer. He was the third of thirteen siblings. He excelled academically from an early age. Before entering school in 1848, he had taught himself how to read and write. He completed secondary education in 1862, having excelled in science and math.

At the age of 19, in 1862, Koch entered the University of Göttingen to study natural science. He took up mathematics, physics and botany. He was appointed assistant in the university&#x27;s Pathological Museum. After three semesters, he decided to change his area of study to medicine, as he aspired to be a physician. During his fifth semester at the medical school, Jacob Henle, an anatomist who had published a theory of contagion in 1840, asked him to participate in his research project on uterine nerve structure. This research won him a research prize from the university and enabled him to briefly study under Rudolf Virchow, who was at the time considered &quot;Germany&#x27;s most renowned physician&quot;. In his sixth semester, Koch began to research at the Physiological Institute, where he studied the secretion of succinic acid, which is a signalling molecule that is also involved in the metabolism of the mitochondria. This would eventually form the basis of his dissertation. In January 1866, he graduated from the medical school, earning honours of the highest distinction, &quot;maxima cum laude&quot;.

===Anthrax===
Robert Koch is widely known for his work with anthrax, discovering the causative agent of the fatal disease to be &quot;Bacillus anthracis&quot;. After officially becoming a district physician in Wollstein (today&#x27;s Wolsztyn), Poland, in 1872, Robert began to delve into the disease called Anthrax. Near Wollstein, anthrax disease was regularly taking the lives of humans and livestock without evidence explaining why. Eventually, in 1876, Koch was able to make an incredible discovery that anthrax was triggered by one singular pathogen. Koch&#x27;s discovery of the dormant stage, the anthrax spores, allowed him to successfully unravel the mystery behind the anthrax disease. By gaining a better understanding of this pathogen, he was able to shed light on the bacterium&#x27;s remarkable resistance to environmental factors (&quot;Robert Koch – Nobel Lecture&quot; 2018). This groundbreaking achievement marked Koch as the pioneer scientist to discover that a microscopic organism was causing a disease to spread. His findings were especially impressive as they were done in a poorly equipped laboratory in Wollstein.

He published the discovery in a booklet as &quot;Die Ätiologie der Milzbrand-Krankheit, Begründet auf die Entwicklungsgeschichte des Bacillus Anthracis&quot; (&quot;The Etiology of Anthrax Disease, Based on the Developmental History of Bacillus Anthracis&quot;) in 1876 while working at in Wöllstein. His publication in 1877 on the structure of anthrax bacterium marked the first photography of a bacterium. He discovered the formation of spores in anthrax bacteria, which could remain dormant under specific conditions. However, under optimal conditions, the spores were activated and caused disease. To determine this causative agent, he dry-fixed bacterial cultures onto glass slides, used dyes to stain the cultures, and observed them through a microscope. His work with anthrax is notable in that he was the first to link a specific microorganism with a specific disease, rejecting the idea of spontaneous generation and supporting the germ theory of disease. 
==Career==
After graduation in 1866, Koch briefly worked as an assistant in the General Hospital of Hamburg. In October of that year, he moved to Idiot&#x27;s Hospital of Langenhagen (as it was known in English, later named KRH Psychiatrie Langenhagen), near Hanover, as a junior physician. In 1868, he moved to Neimegk and then to Rakwitz in 1869. As the Franco-Prussian War started in 1870, he enlisted in the German army as a volunteer surgeon in 1871 to support the war effort. He was discharged a year later and was appointed as a district physician (&quot;Kreisphysikus&quot;) in Wollstein in Prussian Posen (now Wolsztyn, Poland). As his family settled there, his wife gave him a microscope as a birthday gift. With the microscope, he set up a private laboratory and started his career in microbiology.

Koch began conducting research on microorganisms in a laboratory connected to his patient&#x27;s examination room. His early research in this laboratory yielded one of his major contributions to the field of microbiology, as he developed the technique of growing bacteria. Furthermore, he managed to isolate and grow selected pathogens in a pure laboratory culture. His discovery of the anthrax bacillus (later named &quot;Bacillus anthracis&quot;) hugely impressed Ferdinand Julius Cohn, professor at the University of Breslau (now the University of Wrocław), who helped him publish the discovery in 1876. Cohn had established the Institute of Plant Physiology and invited Koch to demonstrate his new bacterium there in 1877. Koch was transferred to Breslau as district physician in 1879. A year after, he left for Berlin when he was appointed a government advisor at the Imperial Health Office, where he worked from 1880 to 1885. Following his discovery of the tuberculosis bacterium, he was promoted to &quot;Geheimer Regierungsrat&quot;, a senior executive position, in June 1882.

In 1885, Koch received two appointments as an administrator and professor at Berlin University. He became Director of Hygienic Institute and Chair (Professor of hygiene) of the Faculty of Medicine. In 1891, he relinquished his professorship and became a director of the Royal Prussian Institute for Infectious Diseases (now the Robert Koch Institute) which consisted of a clinical division and beds for the division of clinical research. For this, he accepted harsh conditions. The Prussian Ministry of Health insisted after the 1890 scandal with tuberculin, which Koch had discovered and intended as a remedy for tuberculosis, that any of Koch&#x27;s inventions would unconditionally belong to the government and he would not be compensated. Koch lost the right to apply for patent protection. In 1906, he moved to East Africa to research a cure for trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness). He established the Bugula research camp where up to 1000 people a day were treated with the experimental drug Atoxyl.

==Scientific contributions==
===Techniques in bacteria study===
Robert Koch made two important developments in microscopy; he was the first to use an oil immersion lens and a condenser that enabled smaller objects to be seen. In addition, he was also the first to effectively use photography (microphotography) for microscopic observation. He introduced the &quot;bedrock methods&quot; of bacterial staining using methylene blue and Bismarck (Vesuvin) brown dye. In an attempt to grow bacteria, Koch began to use solid nutrients such as potato slices. Through these initial experiments, Koch observed individual colonies of identical, pure cells. He found that potato slices were not suitable media for all organisms, and later began to use nutrient solutions with gelatin. However, he soon realized that gelatin, like potato slices, was not the optimal medium for bacterial growth, as it did not remain solid at 37 °C, the ideal temperature for growth of most human pathogens. Furthermore, many bacteria can hydrolyze gelatin, making it a liquid. As suggested to him by his post-doctoral assistant Walther Hesse, who got the idea from his wife Fanny Hesse, in 1881, Koch started using agar to grow and isolate pure cultures. Agar is a polysaccharide that remains solid at 37 °C, is not degraded by most bacteria, and results in a stable transparent medium.

==== Development of Petri dish ====
Koch&#x27;s booklet published in 1881 titled &quot;Zur Untersuchung von Pathogenen Organismen&quot; (&quot;Methods for the Study of Pathogenic Organisms&quot;) has been known as the &quot;Bible of Bacteriology.&quot; In it he described a novel method of using glass slide with agar to grow bacteria. The method involved pouring a liquid agar onto the glass slide and then spreading a thin layer of gelatin over it. The gelatin made the culture medium solidify, in which bacterial samples could be spread uniformly. The whole bacterial culture was then put on a glass plate together with a small wet paper. Koch named this container as &quot;feuchte Kammer&quot; (moist chamber). The typical chamber was a circular glass dish 20 cm in diameter and 5 cm in height and had a lid to prevent contamination. The glass plate and the transparent culture media made observation of the bacterial growth easy.

Koch publicly demonstrated his plating method at the Seventh International Medical Congress in London in August 1881. There, Louis Pasteur exclaimed, &quot;&quot;C&#x27;est un grand progrès, Monsieur&quot;!&quot; (&quot;What a great progress, Sir!&quot;) It was using Koch&#x27;s microscopy and agar-plate culture method that his students discovered new bacteria. Friedrich Loeffler discovered the bacteria of glanders (&quot;Burkholderia mallei&quot;) in 1882 and diphtheria (&quot;Corynebacterium diphtheriae&quot;) in 1884; and Georg Theodor August Gaffky, the bacterium of typhoid (&quot;Salmonella enterica&quot;) in 1884. Koch&#x27;s assistant Julius Richard Petri developed an improved method and published it in 1887 as &quot;Eine kleine Modification des Koch’schen Plattenverfahrens&quot; (A minor modification of the plating technique of Koch). The culture plate was given an eponymous name Petri dish. It is often asserted that Petri developed a new culture plate, but this was not so. He simply discarded the use of glass plate and instead used the circular glass dish directly, not just as a moist chamber, but as the main culture container. This further reduced the chances of contaminations. It would also have been appropriate if the name &quot;Koch dish&quot; had been given.

===Tuberculosis===

During his time as the government advisor with the Imperial Health Agency in Berlin in the 1880s, Koch became interested in tuberculosis research. At the time, it was widely believed that tuberculosis was an inherited disease. However, Koch was convinced that the disease was caused by a bacterium and was infectious. In 1882, he published his findings on tuberculosis, in which he reported the causative agent of the disease to be the slow-growing &quot;Mycobacterium tuberculosis&quot;. He published the discovery as &quot;Die Ätiologie der Tuberkulose&quot; (&quot;The Etiology of Tuberculosis&quot;), and presented before the German Physiological Society at Berlin on 24 March 1882. Koch said,When the cover-glasses were exposed to this staining fluid [methylene blue mixed with potassium hydroxide] for 24 hours, very fine rod-like forms became apparent in the tubercular mass for the first time, having, as further observations showed, the power of multiplication and of spore formation and hence belonging to the same group of organisms as the anthrax bacillus... Microscopic examination then showed that only the previously blue-stained cell nuclei and detritus became brown, while the tubercle bacilli remained a beautiful blue.

There was no particular reaction to this announcement. Eminent scientists such as Rudolf Virchow remained sceptical. Virchow clung to his theory that all diseases are due to faulty cellular activities. On the other hand, Paul Ehrlich later recollected that this moment was his &quot;single greatest scientific experience.&quot; Koch expanded the report and published it under the same title as a booklet in 1884, in which he concluded that the discovery of tuberculosis bacterium fulfilled the three principles, eventually known as Koch&#x27;s postulates, which were formulated by his assistant Friedrich Loeffler in 1883, saying:All these factors together allow me to conclude that the bacilli present in the tuberculous lesions do not only accompany tuberculosis, but rather cause it. These bacilli are the true agents of tuberculosis.

===Cholera===
In August 1883, the German government sent a medical team led by Koch to Alexandria, Egypt, to investigate a cholera epidemic there. Koch soon found that the intestinal mucosa of people who died of cholera always had bacterial infection, yet could not confirm whether the bacteria were the causative pathogens. As the outbreak in Egypt declined, he was transferred to Calcutta (now Kolkata) India, where there was a more severe outbreak. He soon found that the river Ganges was the source of cholera. He performed autopsies of almost 100 bodies, and found in each bacterial infection. He identified the same bacteria from water tanks, linking the source of the infection. He isolated the bacterium in pure culture on 7 January 1884. He subsequently confirmed that the bacterium was a new species, and described as &quot;a little bent, like a comma.&quot; His experiment using fresh blood samples indicated that the bacterium could kill red blood cells, and he hypothesized that some sort of poison was used by the bacterium to cause the disease. In 1959, Indian scientist Sambhu Nath De discovered this poison, the cholera toxin. Koch reported his discovery to the German Secretary of State for the Interior on 2 February, and published it in the &quot;Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift&quot; (&quot;German Medical Weekly&quot;) the following month.

Although Koch was convinced that the bacterium was the cholera pathogen, he could not entirely establish critical evidence the bacterium produced the symptoms in healthy subjects (following Koch&#x27;s postulates). His experiment on animals using his pure bacteria culture did not cause the disease, and correctly explained that animals are immune to human pathogen. The bacterium was then known as &quot;the comma bacillus&quot;, and scientifically as &quot;Bacillus comma&quot;. It was later realised that the bacterium was already described by an Italian physician Filippo Pacini in 1854, and was also observed by the Catalan physician Joaquim Balcells i Pascual around the same time. But they failed to identify the bacterium as the causative agent of cholera. Koch&#x27;s colleague Richard Friedrich Johannes Pfeiffer correctly identified the comma bacillus as Pacini&#x27;s &quot;vibrioni&quot; and renamed it as &quot;Vibrio cholera&quot; in 1896.

=== Tuberculosis treatment and tuberculin ===
Koch gave much of his research attention to tuberculosis throughout his career. After medical expeditions to various parts of the world, he again focussed on tuberculosis from the mid-1880s. By that time the Imperial Health Office was carrying out a project for disinfection of sputum of tuberculosis patients. Koch experimented with arsenic and creosote as possible disinfectants. These chemicals and other available drugs did not work. His report in 1883 also mentioned a failed experiment in an attempt to make a tuberculosis vaccine. By 1888, Koch turned his attention to synthetic dyes as antibacterial chemicals. He developed a method for examining antibacterial activity by mixing the gelatin-based culture media with a yellow dye, auramin. His notebook indicates that by February 1890, he tested hundreds of compounds. In one of such tests, he found that an extract from the tuberculosis bacterium culture dissolved in glycerine could cure tuberculosis in guinea pigs. Based on a series of experiments from April to July 1891, he could conclude that the extract did not kill the tuberculosis bacterium, but destroyed (by necrosis) the infected tissues, thereby depriving bacterial growth. He made a vague announcement in August 1890 at the Tenth International Medical Congress in Berlin, saying,In a communication which I made a few months ago to the International Medical Congress [in London in 1881], I described a substance of which the result is to make laboratory animals insensitive to inoculation of tubercle bacilli, and in the case of already infected animals, to bring the tuberculous process to a halt.

I can tell […] that much, that guinea pigs, which are highly susceptible to the disease [tuberculosis], no longer react upon inoculation with tubercle virus [bacterium] when treated with that substance and that in guinea pigs, which are sick (with tuberculosis), the pathological process can be brought to a complete standstill.By November 1890, Koch demonstrated the effectiveness of the extract in treating humans by administering the vaccine through the Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) technique. This absorbs the vaccine through the skin by means of multiple shallow punctures on the skin and many patients and doctors went to Berlin to get Koch&#x27;s remedy. While this was effective in humans, his experiments also revealed that when the substance was inoculated into his tuberculosis-infected test guinea pigs, they presented with severe symptoms. This outcome, characterized by an exaggerated immune response, coined the term &quot;Koch’s phenomenon.&quot; This is known as an extreme skin reaction that manifests itself at the BCG vaccination site within a few days after the vaccine is administered to an individual infected with tuberculosis. When a normal guinea pig was inoculated with pure &quot;tubercle bacillus&quot;, the wound would close rapidly and heal within several days. Afterwards, the site of the injection would open and form an ulcer until the animal died. However, if the same inoculated culture was injected into a guinea pig that was previously infected with tuberculosis, the site of the injection becomes dark, and eventually heals normally and quickly (Moreland, 2024). The uncertainty in the chemical nature coined the term phenomenon in the name &quot;Koch’s phenomenon.&quot;

Koch published his experiments in the 15 January 1891 issue of &quot;Deutsche Medizinische Wochenschrift&quot;, and &quot;The British Medical Journal&quot; immediately published the English version simultaneously. The English version was also reproduced in &quot;Nature&quot;, and &quot;The Lancet&quot; in the same month. &quot;The Lancet&quot; presented it as &quot;glad tidings of great joy.&quot; Koch simply referred to the medication as &quot;brownish, transparent fluid.&quot; Josephs Pohl-Pincus had used the name tuberculin in 1844 for tuberculosis culture media, and Koch subsequently adopted as &quot;tuberkulin.&quot;

The first report on the clinical trial in 1891 was disappointing. By then 1061 patients with tuberculosis of internal organs and of 708 patients with tuberculosis of external tissues were given the treatment. An attempt to use tuberculin as a therapeutic drug is regarded as Koch&#x27;s &quot;greatest failure.&quot; With it his reputation greatly waned. But he devoted the rest of his life trying to make tuberculin as a usable medication. His discovery was not a total failure: the substance is now used to test for hypersensitivity in tuberculosis patients.

=== Acquired immunity ===
Koch observed the phenomenon of acquired immunity. On 26 December 1900, he arrived as part of an expedition to German New Guinea, which was then a protectorate of the German Reich. Koch serially examined the Papuan people, the indigenous inhabitants, and their blood samples and noticed they contained &quot;Plasmodium&quot; parasites, the cause of malaria, but their bouts of malaria were mild or could not even be noticed, i.e. were subclinical. On the contrary, German settlers and Chinese workers, who had been brought to New Guinea, fell sick immediately. The longer they had stayed in the country, however, the more they too seemed to develop a resistance against it.

=== Koch&#x27;s postulates ===

During his time as government advisor, Koch published a report on how he discovered and experimentally showed tuberculosis bacterium as the pathogen of tuberculosis. He described the importance of pure cultures in isolating disease-causing organisms and explained the necessary steps to obtain these cultures, methods which are summarized in Koch&#x27;s four postulates. Koch&#x27;s discovery of the causative agent of anthrax led to the formation of a generic set of which can be used in the determination of the cause of most infectious diseases. These postulates, which not only outlined a method for linking cause and effect of an infectious disease but also established the significance of laboratory culture of infectious agents, became the &quot;gold standard&quot; in infectious diseases.

Although Koch worked out the principles, he did not formulate the postulates, which were introduced by his assistant Friedrich Loeffler. Loeffler, reporting his discovery of diphtheria bacillus in 1883, stated three postulates as follows:
:1. The organism must always be present in every case of the disease, but not in healthy individuals.
:2. The organism must be isolated from a diseased individual and grown in pure culture.
:3. The pure culture must cause the same disease when inoculated into a healthy, susceptible individual.

The fourth postulate was added by an American plant pathologist Erwin Frink Smith in 1905, and is stated as:

:4. The same pathogen must be isolated from the experimentally infected individuals.

== Selected publications ==

* Julius Schwalbe, Georg Gaffky, Eduard Pfuhl (eds.): Robert Koch. Gesammelte Werke. 3 vols. Leipzig 1912 (in German).
** , at Internet Archive
** 

==Personal life==
In July 1867, Koch married Emma (Emmy) Adolfine Josephine Fraatz, and the two had a daughter, Gertrude, in 1868. Their marriage ended after 26 years in 1893, and later that same year, he married actress Hedwig Freiberg (1872–1945).

On 9 April 1910, Koch suffered a heart attack and never made a complete recovery. On 27 May, three days after giving a lecture on his tuberculosis research at the Prussian Academy of Sciences, Koch died in Baden-Baden at the age of 66. Following his death, the Institute named its establishment after him in his honour. He was irreligious.

== Awards and honours ==

Koch was made a Knight Grand Cross in the Prussian Order of the Red Eagle on 19 November 1890, and was elected a Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS) in 1897. In 1905, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine &quot;for his investigations and discoveries in relation to tuberculosis.&quot; In 1906, research on tuberculosis and tropical diseases won him the Order Pour le Merite and in 1908, the Robert Koch Medal, established to honour the greatest living physicians. Emperor Wilhelm I awarded him the Order of the Crown, 100,000 marks and appointment as Privy Imperial Councillor, Surgeon-General of Health Service, and Fellow of the Science Senate of Kaiser Wilhelm Society.

Koch established the Royal Prussian Institute for Infectious Diseases in Berlin in 1891. After his death, it was renamed Robert Koch Institute in his honour.

The World Health Organization has observed &quot;World Tuberculosis Day&quot; every 24 March since 1982 to commemorate the day Koch discovered the tuberculosis bacterium.

Koch&#x27;s name is one of 23 from the fields of hygiene and tropical medicine featured on the frieze of the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine building in Keppel Street, Bloomsbury.

A large marble statue of Koch stands in a small park known as Robert Koch Platz, just north of the Charity Hospital, in the Mitte section of Berlin. His life was the subject of a 1939 German-produced motion picture that featured Oscar-winning actor Emil Jannings in the title role. On 10 December 2017, Google showed a Doodle in celebration of Koch&#x27;s birthday.

Koch and his relationship to Paul Ehrlich, who developed a mechanism to diagnose TB, were portrayed in the 1940 movie &quot;Dr. Ehrlich&#x27;s Magic Bullet&quot;.

== Controversies ==

=== Louis Pasteur ===

At their first meeting at the Seventh International Medical Congress in London in August 1881, Koch and Pasteur were friendly towards each other. But the rest of their careers followed with scientific disputes. The conflict started when Koch interpreted his discovery of anthrax bacillus in 1876 as causality, that is, the germ caused the anthrax infections. Although his postulates were not yet formulated, he did not establish the bacterium as the cause of the disease: it was an inference. Pasteur therefore argued that Koch&#x27;s discovery was not the full proof of causality, but Pasteur&#x27;s anthrax vaccine developed in 1881 was. Koch published his conclusion in 1881 with a statement: &quot;anthrax never occurs without viable anthrax bacilli or spores. In my opinion no more conclusive proof can be given that anthrax bacilli are the true and only cause of anthrax,&quot; and that vaccination such as claimed by Pasteur would be impossible. To prove his vaccine, Pasteur sent his assistant Louis Thuillier to Germany for demonstration and disproved Koch&#x27;s idea. They had a heated public debate at the International Congress for Hygiene in Geneva in 1882, where Koch criticised Pasteur&#x27;s methods as &quot;unreliable,&quot; and claimed they &quot;are false and [as such ] they inevitably lead to false conclusions.&quot; Koch later continued to attack Pasteur, saying, &quot;Pasteur is not a physician, and one cannot expect him to make sound judgments about pathological processes and the symptoms of disease.&quot;

=== Tuberculin ===
When Koch discovered tuberculin in 1890 as a medication for tuberculosis, he kept the experiment secret and avoided disclosing the source. It was only after a year under public pressure that he publicly announced the experiment and the source. Clinical trials with tuberculin were disastrous and complete failures. Rudolf Virchow&#x27;s autopsy report of 21 subjects treated with tuberculin to the Berlin Medical Society on 7 January 1891 revealed that instead of healing tuberculosis, the subjects died because of the treatment. One week later, Koch publicised that the drug was a glycerine extract of a pure cultivation of the tuberculosis bacilli. The German official report in late 1891 declared that tuberculosis was not cured with tuberculin. From this moment onwards, Koch&#x27;s prestige fell apart. The reason for his initial secrecy was due to an ambition for monetary benefits for the new drug, and with that establishment of his own research institute. Since 1885, he had tried to leave government service and create an independent state-run institute of his own. Following the disappointment, he was released from the University of Berlin and forced to work as Director of the Royal Prussian Institute for Infectious Diseases, a newly established institute, in 1891. He was prohibited from working on tuberculin and from claiming patent rights in any of his subsequent works.

=== Human and cattle tuberculosis ===
Koch initially believed that human (&quot;Mycobacterium tuberculosis&quot;) and cattle tuberculosis bacilli (now called &quot;Mycobacterium bovis&quot;) were different pathogens when he made the discovery in 1882. Two years later, he revoked that position and asserted that the two bacilli were the same type. This later assumption was taken as a fact in veterinary practice. Based on it, legislations were made in the US for the inspection of meat and milk. In 1898, an American veterinarian Theobald Smith published a detailed comparative study and found that the tuberculosis bacteria are different based on their structure, growth patterns, and pathogenicity. In addition, he also discovered that there were variations in each type. In his conclusion, he made two important points:

# Human tuberculosis bacillus cannot infect cattle.
# But cattle bacillus may infect humans since it is very pathogenic.

By that time, there was evidence that cattle tuberculosis was transmitted to humans through meat and milk. Upon these reports, Koch conceded that the two bacilli were different but still advocated that cattle tuberculosis was of no health concern. Speaking at the Third International Congress on Tuberculosis, held in London in July 1901, he said that cattle tuberculosis is not dangerous to humans and there is no need for medical attention. He said, &quot;I therefore consider it unnecessary to take any measures against this form of TB. The fight against TB clearly has to concentrate on the human &quot;bacillus.&quot;&quot; Chair of the congress, Joseph Lister reprimanded Koch and explained the medical evidence of cattle tuberculosis in humans.

=== The 1902 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine ===
The Nobel Committee selected the 1902 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine to be awarded for the discovery of the transmission of malaria. But it could not make the final decision on whom to give it to — the British surgeon Ronald Ross or the Italian biologist Giovanni Battista Grassi. Ross had discovered that the human malarial parasite was carried by certain mosquitoes in 1897, and the next year that bird malaria could be transmitted from infected to healthy birds by the bite of a mosquito. Grassi had discovered &quot;Plasmodium vivax&quot; and the bird malaria parasite, and towards the end of 1898 the transmission of &quot;Plasmodium falciparum&quot; between humans through mosquitoes &quot;Anopheles claviger&quot;. To the surprise of the Nobel Committee, the two nominees exchanged polemic arguments against each other publicly justifying the importance of their own works. Robert Koch was then appointed as a &quot;neutral arbitrator&quot; to make the final decision. To his disadvantage, Grassi had criticised Koch on his malaria research in 1898 during an investigation of the epidemic, while Ross had established a cordial relationship with Koch. Ross was selected for the award, as Koch &quot;threw the full weight of his considerable authority in insisting that Grassi did not deserve the honour&quot;.

== See also ==

* Robert Koch Institute

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* Weindling, Paul. &quot;Scientific elites and laboratory organization in fin de siècle Paris and Berlin: The Pasteur Institute and Robert Koch’s Institute for Infectious Diseases compared,&quot; in Andrew Cunningham and Perry Williams, eds. &quot;The Laboratory Revolution in Medicine&quot; (Cambridge University Press, 1992) pp: 170–88.
* Christoph, Hans Gerhard: Robert Koch &quot; Trias deutschen Forschergeistes &quot; Naturheilpraxis / Pflaum- Verlag / Munich 70.Jahrgang December 2017 pages 90–93

==External links==

* Audio version of this page
* , including the Nobel Lecture on 12 December 1905 &quot;The Current State of the Struggle against Tuberculosis&quot;
* MPIWG-Berlin, Robert Koch Biography and bibliography in the Virtual Laboratory of the Max Planck Institute for the History of Science
* Biography on the Science Museum web site 
* Musoptin.com, original microscope out of the laboratory Robert Koch used in Wollstein (1877)
* Musoptin.com, microscope objectives: as they were used by Robert Koch for his first photos of microorganisms (1877–1878)
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37193" start="0" end="28" title="Robert Koch" label="Heinrich Hermann Robert Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="80" end="89" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779582" start="94" end="108" title="microbiologist" label="microbiologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="201" end="213" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="215" end="222" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q129104" start="227" end="234" title="anthrax" label="anthrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q243748" start="289" end="301" title="bacteriology" label="bacteriology"/>
<link wikidata="Q529" start="370" end="383" title="Louis Pasteur" label="Louis Pasteur"/>
<link wikidata="Q614156" start="475" end="493" title="Bacillus anthracis" label="Bacillus anthracis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425837" start="690" end="713" title="germ theory of diseases" label="germ theory of diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="758" end="771" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q904377" start="1006" end="1024" title="oil immersion lens" label="oil immersion lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q571589" start="1026" end="1035" title="Condenser (optics)" label="condenser"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274922" start="1041" end="1057" title="microphotography" label="microphotography"/>
<link wikidata="Q575920" start="1094" end="1118" title="Growth medium" label="bacterial culture method"/>
<link wikidata="Q574816" start="1125" end="1129" title="Agar plate" label="agar"/>
<link wikidata="Q81714" start="1171" end="1181" title="Petri dish" label="Petri dish"/>
<link wikidata="Q57839" start="1199" end="1219" title="Julius Richard Petri" label="Julius Richard Petri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006109" start="1351" end="1373" title="Federal Health Agency" label="Imperial Health Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="1563" end="1580" title="Berlin University" label="Berlin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q679041" start="1662" end="1683" title="Robert Koch Institute" label="Robert Koch Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q19047" start="1804" end="1826" title="Koch&amp;#x27;s postulates" label="Koch&amp;#x27;s postulates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3003004" start="2043" end="2065" title="Bradford Hill criteria" label="Bradford Hill criteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q29505" start="2117" end="2127" title="tuberculin" label="tuberculin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80061" start="2308" end="2345" title="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine" label="Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="2461" end="2486" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q518978" start="2496" end="2518" title="World Tuberculosis Day" label="World Tuberculosis Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q504590" start="2595" end="2613" title="Klausthal" label="Clausthal, Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="3037" end="3060" title="University of Göttingen" label="University of Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q77130" start="3361" end="3372" title="Jacob Henle" label="Jacob Henle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425837" start="3407" end="3426" title="Germ theory of disease" label="theory of contagion"/>
<link wikidata="Q76432" start="3611" end="3625" title="Rudolf Virchow" label="Rudolf Virchow"/>
<link wikidata="Q213050" start="3822" end="3835" title="succinic acid" label="succinic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q133895" start="3897" end="3927" title="Citric acid cycle" label="metabolism of the mitochondria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581478" start="4092" end="4108" title="Latin honors" label="maxima cum laude"/>
<link wikidata="Q129104" start="4177" end="4184" title="anthrax" label="anthrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q614156" start="4251" end="4269" title="Bacillus anthracis" label="Bacillus anthracis"/>
<link wikidata="Q828761" start="5697" end="5703" title="bacterial spore" label="spores"/>
<link wikidata="Q178263" start="6157" end="6179" title="spontaneous generation" label="spontaneous generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425837" start="6199" end="6221" title="germ theory of disease" label="germ theory of disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="6580" end="6599" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="6823" end="6830" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q635253" start="6832" end="6837" title="Province of Posen" label="Posen"/>
<link wikidata="Q852363" start="6843" end="6851" title="Wolsztyn" label="Wolsztyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125312" start="7376" end="7399" title="pure culture" label="pure laboratory culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q614156" start="7458" end="7476" title="Bacillus anthracis" label="Bacillus anthracis"/>
<link wikidata="Q76774" start="7501" end="7522" title="Ferdinand Julius Cohn" label="Ferdinand Julius Cohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q315658" start="7572" end="7593" title="University of Wrocław" label="University of Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="8198" end="8215" title="Berlin University" label="Berlin University"/>
<link wikidata="Q679041" start="8449" end="8470" title="Robert Koch Institute" label="Robert Koch Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q29505" start="8668" end="8678" title="tuberculin" label="tuberculin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443552" start="8972" end="8987" title="trypanosomiasis" label="trypanosomiasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q704203" start="9119" end="9125" title="Arsanilic acid" label="Atoxyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q904377" start="9278" end="9296" title="oil immersion lens" label="oil immersion lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q571589" start="9303" end="9312" title="Condenser (optics)" label="condenser"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274922" start="9421" end="9436" title="microphotograph" label="microphotograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q422134" start="9542" end="9556" title="methylene blue" label="methylene blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q412880" start="9561" end="9589" title="Bismarck brown Y" label="Bismarck (Vesuvin) brown dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="9665" end="9671" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q179254" start="9893" end="9900" title="gelatin" label="gelatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q90373" start="10227" end="10240" title="Walther Hesse" label="Walther Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q97515" start="10273" end="10284" title="Fanny Hesse" label="Fanny Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q177998" start="10314" end="10318" title="agar" label="agar"/>
<link wikidata="Q134219" start="10364" end="10378" title="polysaccharide" label="polysaccharide"/>
<link wikidata="Q111165235" start="11484" end="11514" title="International Medical Congress" label="International Medical Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q529" start="11548" end="11561" title="Louis Pasteur" label="Louis Pasteur"/>
<link wikidata="Q60993" start="11787" end="11805" title="Friedrich Loeffler" label="Friedrich Loeffler"/>
<link wikidata="Q327005" start="11833" end="11841" title="glanders" label="glanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q134434" start="11849" end="11868" title="Burkholderia mallei" label="Burkholderia mallei"/>
<link wikidata="Q134649" start="11888" end="11898" title="diphtheria" label="diphtheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q131649" start="11906" end="11933" title="Corynebacterium diphtheriae" label="Corynebacterium diphtheriae"/>
<link wikidata="Q69179" start="11954" end="11981" title="Georg Theodor August Gaffky" label="Georg Theodor August Gaffky"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="12000" end="12007" title="typhoid" label="typhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264864" start="12015" end="12034" title="Salmonella enterica" label="Salmonella enterica"/>
<link wikidata="Q57839" start="12073" end="12093" title="Julius Richard Petri" label="Julius Richard Petri"/>
<link wikidata="Q81714" start="12324" end="12334" title="Petri dish" label="Petri dish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="12861" end="12873" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q130971" start="13192" end="13218" title="Mycobacterium tuberculosis" label="Mycobacterium tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q132298" start="13520" end="13539" title="potassium hydroxide" label="potassium hydroxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q76432" start="14058" end="14072" title="Rudolf Virchow" label="Rudolf Virchow"/>
<link wikidata="Q57089" start="14197" end="14209" title="Paul Ehrlich" label="Paul Ehrlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q17736" start="14520" end="14530" title="postulates" label="postulates"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="14902" end="14919" title="Alexandria, Egypt" label="Alexandria, Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q17154506" start="14987" end="15004" title="intestinal mucosa" label="intestinal mucosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="15211" end="15218" title="Kolkata" label="Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="15296" end="15302" title="Ganges" label="Ganges"/>
<link wikidata="Q7409041" start="15901" end="15915" title="Sambhu Nath De" label="Sambhu Nath De"/>
<link wikidata="Q83586" start="15944" end="15957" title="cholera toxin" label="cholera toxin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19047" start="16372" end="16394" title="Koch&amp;#x27;s postulates" label="Koch&amp;#x27;s postulates"/>
<link wikidata="Q631304" start="16750" end="16764" title="Filippo Pacini" label="Filippo Pacini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="16803" end="16810" title="Catalonia" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q73255" start="16969" end="17004" title="Richard Friedrich Johannes Pfeiffer" label="Richard Friedrich Johannes Pfeiffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q160821" start="17107" end="17121" title="Vibrio cholerae" label="Vibrio cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q259346" start="17462" end="17468" title="sputum" label="sputum"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="17518" end="17525" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q909808" start="17530" end="17538" title="creosote" label="creosote"/>
<link wikidata="Q66732478" start="17760" end="17774" title="synthetic dyes" label="synthetic dyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025070" start="17923" end="17930" title="Auramine O" label="auramin"/>
<link wikidata="Q178069" start="18313" end="18321" title="necrosis" label="necrosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q111165235" start="18438" end="18468" title="International Medical Congress" label="International Medical Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q546003" start="20643" end="20670" title="The British Medical Journal" label="The British Medical Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q180445" start="20784" end="20790" title="Nature (journal)" label="Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q939416" start="20808" end="20818" title="The Lancet" label="The Lancet"/>
<link wikidata="Q182581" start="21781" end="21789" title="immunity (medical)" label="immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q165008" start="21851" end="21868" title="German New Guinea" label="German New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q424129" start="21948" end="21961" title="Papuan people" label="Papuan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q130948" start="22048" end="22058" title="Plasmodium" label="Plasmodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="22089" end="22096" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707292" start="22175" end="22186" title="subclinical" label="subclinical"/>
<link wikidata="Q19047" start="22789" end="22816" title="Koch&amp;#x27;s postulates" label="Koch&amp;#x27;s four postulates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396128" start="23844" end="23861" title="Erwin Frink Smith" label="Erwin Frink Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q329464" start="24568" end="24596" title="Prussian Academy of Sciences" label="Prussian Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q4100" start="24611" end="24622" title="Baden-Baden" label="Baden-Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q93732" start="24823" end="24845" title="Order of the Red Eagle" label="Order of the Red Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711568" start="24885" end="24931" title="List of Fellows of the Royal Society elected in 1897" label="Foreign Member of the Royal Society (ForMemRS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="24969" end="24980" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q156478" start="25156" end="25176" title="Order Pour le Merite" label="Order Pour le Merite"/>
<link wikidata="Q505132" start="25194" end="25211" title="Robert Koch Medal" label="Robert Koch Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q518978" start="25685" end="25707" title="World Tuberculosis Day" label="World Tuberculosis Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126189" start="25917" end="25965" title="London School of Hygiene &amp;amp; Tropical Medicine" label="London School of Hygiene &amp;amp; Tropical Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q38250739" start="25978" end="25991" title="Keppel Street" label="Keppel Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q150120" start="25993" end="26003" title="Bloomsbury" label="Bloomsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q162684" start="26105" end="26121" title="Charité" label="Charity Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q163966" start="26130" end="26135" title="Mitte" label="Mitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="26147" end="26153" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q77181" start="26255" end="26268" title="Emil Jannings" label="Emil Jannings"/>
<link wikidata="Q185415" start="26325" end="26331" title="Doodle" label="Doodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q57089" start="26402" end="26414" title="Paul Ehrlich" label="Paul Ehrlich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679816" start="26497" end="26528" title="Dr. Ehrlich&amp;#x27;s Magic Bullet" label="Dr. Ehrlich&amp;#x27;s Magic Bullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q111165235" start="26619" end="26649" title="International Medical Congress" label="International Medical Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4007170" start="27182" end="27197" title="anthrax vaccine" label="anthrax vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3263187" start="27583" end="27598" title="Louis Thuillier" label="Louis Thuillier"/>
<link wikidata="Q133447" start="29692" end="29711" title="Mycobacterium bovis" label="Mycobacterium bovis"/>
<link wikidata="Q427418" start="30059" end="30073" title="Theobald Smith" label="Theobald Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049744" start="30745" end="30783" title="International Congress on Tuberculosis" label="International Congress on Tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q155768" start="31127" end="31140" title="Joseph Lister" label="Joseph Lister"/>
<link wikidata="Q102034" start="31508" end="31519" title="Ronald Ross" label="Ronald Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q706466" start="31545" end="31569" title="Giovanni Battista Grassi" label="Giovanni Battista Grassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q311376" start="31810" end="31826" title="Plasmodium vivax" label="Plasmodium vivax"/>
<link wikidata="Q311383" start="31918" end="31939" title="Plasmodium falciparum" label="Plasmodium falciparum"/>
<link wikidata="Q240820" start="31986" end="32004" title="Anopheles claviger" label="Anopheles claviger"/>
<link wikidata="Q679041" start="32625" end="32646" title="Robert Koch Institute" label="Robert Koch Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527919" start="33424" end="33442" title="Virtual Laboratory" label="Virtual Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q318118" start="33450" end="33497" title="Max Planck Institute for the History of Science" label="Max Planck Institute for the History of Science"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13726" wikidata="Q43430" url="?curid=13726" title="Hogshead">
<text>A hogshead (abbreviated &quot;hhd&quot;, plural &quot;hhds&quot;) is a large cask of liquid (or, less often, of a food commodity). It refers to a specified volume, measured in either imperial or US customary measures, primarily applied to alcoholic beverages, such as wine, ale, or cider.

==Etymology==
English philologist Walter William Skeat (1835–1912) noted the origin is to be found in the name for a cask or liquid measure appearing in various forms in Germanic languages, in Dutch &quot;oxhooft&quot; (modern &quot;okshoofd&quot;), Danish &quot;oxehoved&quot;, Old Swedish &quot;oxhuvud&quot;, etc. The &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; of 1911 conjectured that the word should therefore be &quot;oxhead&quot;, &quot;hogshead&quot; being a mere corruption.

==Varieties and standardisation==

A tobacco hogshead was used in British and American colonial times to transport and store tobacco. It was a very large wooden barrel. A standardized hogshead measured long and in diameter at the head (at least , depending on the width in the middle). Fully packed with tobacco, it weighed about .

A hogshead in Britain contains about .

The &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; (OED) notes that the hogshead was first standardized by an act of Parliament (2 Hen. 6. c. 14) in 1423, though the standards continued to vary by locality and content. For example, the OED cites an 1897 edition of &quot;Whitaker&#x27;s Almanack&quot;, which specified the gallons of wine in a hogshead varying most particularly across fortified wines: claret/Madeira , port , sherry . The &quot;American Heritage Dictionary&quot; claims that a hogshead can consist of anything from (presumably) . A hogshead of Madeira wine was approximately equal to 45–48 gallons (0.205–0.218 m3). A hogshead of brandy was approximately equal to 56–61 gallons (0.255–0.277 m3).

Eventually, a hogshead of wine came to be (63 US gallons), while a hogshead of beer or ale came to be 54 gallons (249.5421 L with the pre-1824 beer and ale gallon, or 245.48886 L with the imperial gallon).

A hogshead was also used as unit of measurement for sugar in Louisiana for most of the 19th century. Plantations were listed in sugar schedules by the number of hogsheads of sugar or molasses produced. Used for sugar in the 18th and 19th centuries in the British West Indies, a hogshead weighed on average 16 cwt / 813kg. A hogshead was also used for the measurement of herring fished for sardines in Blacks Harbour, New Brunswick and Cornwall.

==Charts==

==See also==
* English units of wine casks

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q43430" start="2" end="10" title="Hogshead" label="hogshead"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289" start="77" end="81" title="Barrel (storage)" label="cask"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="114" end="128" title="List of traded commodities#Foodstuffs" label="food commodity"/>
<link wikidata="Q39297" start="156" end="162" title="volume" label="volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q641227" start="183" end="191" title="Imperial unit" label="imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116609" start="195" end="207" title="United States customary units" label="US customary"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="239" end="257" title="alcoholic beverage" label="alcoholic beverage"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="268" end="272" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q208385" start="274" end="277" title="ale" label="ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q167296" start="282" end="287" title="cider" label="cider"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="312" end="323" title="philology" label="philologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q322106" start="324" end="344" title="Walter William Skeat" label="Walter William Skeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="460" end="478" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="1151" end="1176" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="1242" end="1259" title="act of Parliament" label="act of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q126003303" start="1261" end="1269" title="2 Hen. 6" label="2 Hen. 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127455" start="1403" end="1427" title="Whitaker&amp;#x27;s Almanack" label="Whitaker&amp;#x27;s Almanack"/>
<link wikidata="Q168461" start="1535" end="1541" title="claret" label="claret"/>
<link wikidata="Q27697" start="1542" end="1549" title="Madeira wine" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q191034" start="1552" end="1556" title="Port wine" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q16398" start="1559" end="1565" title="sherry" label="sherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q464886" start="1578" end="1606" title="American Heritage Dictionary" label="American Heritage Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q27697" start="1694" end="1706" title="Madeira wine" label="Madeira wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q146470" start="1780" end="1786" title="brandy" label="brandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="1873" end="1877" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="1926" end="1930" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q208385" start="1934" end="1937" title="ale" label="ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="2115" end="2124" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201620" start="2155" end="2165" title="plantations in the American South" label="Plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127419" start="2424" end="2431" title="herring" label="herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423795" start="2443" end="2451" title="Sardine (food)" label="sardines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="2471" end="2484" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q42092561" start="2527" end="2554" title="English units of wine casks" label="English units of wine casks"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="13727" wikidata="Q343710" url="?curid=13727" title="Huallaga">
<text>Huallaga may refer to:

*Locations in Peru:
**Huallaga Province
**Huallaga River
**Huallaga Valley</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="38" end="42" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q731515" start="46" end="63" title="Huallaga Province" label="Huallaga Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q611388" start="66" end="80" title="Huallaga River" label="Huallaga River"/>
<link wikidata="Q611388" start="83" end="98" title="Huallaga Valley" label="Huallaga Valley"/>
</links>
</doc>
