<doc id="12446" wikidata="Q22633" url="?curid=12446" title="Germanic peoples">
<text>The Germanic peoples were tribal groups who lived in Northern Europe in Classical Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages. In modern scholarship, they typically include not only the Roman-era Germani who lived in both &quot;Germania&quot; and parts of the Roman empire, but also all Germanic speaking peoples from this era, irrespective of where they lived, most notably the Goths. Another term, ancient Germans, is considered problematic by many scholars since it suggests identity with present-day Germans. Although the first Roman descriptions of &quot;Germani&quot; involved tribes west of the Rhine, their homeland of &quot;Germania&quot; was portrayed as stretching east of the Rhine, to southern Scandinavia and the Vistula in the east, and to the upper Danube in the south. Other Germanic speakers, such as the Bastarnae and Goths, lived further east in what is now Moldova and Ukraine. The term &quot;Germani &quot;is generally only used to refer to historical peoples from the 1st to 4th centuries CE.

Different academic disciplines have their own definitions of what makes someone or something &quot;Germanic&quot;. Some scholars call for the term&#x27;s total abandonment as a modern construct, since lumping &quot;Germanic peoples&quot; together implies a common group identity for which there is little evidence. Other scholars have defended the term&#x27;s continued use and argue that a common Germanic language allows one to speak of &quot;Germanic peoples&quot;, regardless of whether these ancient and medieval peoples saw themselves as having a common identity. Scholars generally agree that it is possible to refer to Germanic languages from about 500 BCE. Archaeologists usually associate the earliest clearly identifiable Germanic speaking peoples with the Jastorf culture of the Pre-Roman Iron Age in central and northern Germany and southern Denmark from the 6th to 1st centuries BCE. This existed around the same time that the First Germanic Consonant Shift is theorized to have occurred, leading to recognizably Germanic languages. Germanic languages expanded south, east, and west, coming into contact with Celtic, Iranic, Baltic, and Slavic peoples before they were noted by the Romans. 

Roman authors first described the &quot;Germani&quot; near the Rhine in the 1st century BCE, while the Roman Empire was establishing its dominance in that region. Under Emperor Augustus (27 BCE – 14 CE), the Romans attempted to conquer a large part of Germania between the Rhine and Elbe, but withdrew after their shocking defeat at the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest in 9 CE. The Romans continued to manage the Germanic frontier carefully, meddling in cross-border politics, and constructing a long fortified border, the Limes Germanicus. From 166 to 180 CE, Rome was embroiled in a conflict against the Germanic Marcomanni and Quadi with their allies, which was known as the Marcomannic Wars. After this major disruption, new Germanic peoples appear for the first time in the historical record, such as the Franks, Goths, Saxons, and Alemanni. During the Migration Period (375–568), such Germanic peoples entered the Roman Empire and eventually established their own &quot;barbarian kingdoms&quot; within the territory of the Western Roman empire itself. Over time, the Franks became the most powerful of them, conquering many of the others. Eventually, the Frankish king Charlemagne claimed the title of Holy Roman Emperor for himself in 800.

Archaeological finds suggest that Roman-era sources portrayed the Germanic way of life as more primitive than it actually was. Instead, archaeologists have unveiled evidence of a complex society and economy throughout Germania. Germanic-speaking peoples originally shared similar religious practices. Denoted by the term Germanic paganism, they varied throughout the territory occupied by Germanic-speaking peoples. Over the course of Late Antiquity, most continental Germanic peoples and the Anglo-Saxons of Britain converted to Christianity, but the Saxons and Scandinavians converted only much later. The Germanic peoples shared a native script—known as runes—from around the first century or before, which was gradually replaced with the Latin script, although runes continued to be used for specialized purposes thereafter.

Traditionally, the Germanic peoples have been seen as possessing a law dominated by the concepts of feuding and blood compensation. The precise details, nature and origin of what is still normally called &quot;Germanic law&quot; are now controversial. Roman sources state that the Germanic peoples made decisions in a popular assembly (the &quot;thing&quot;) but that they also had kings and war leaders. The ancient Germanic-speaking peoples probably shared a common poetic tradition, alliterative verse, and later Germanic peoples also shared legends originating in the Migration Period.

The publishing of Tacitus&#x27;s &quot;Germania&quot; by humanist scholars in the 1400s greatly influenced the emerging idea of &quot;Germanic peoples&quot;. Later scholars of the Romantic period, such as Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm, developed several theories about the nature of the Germanic peoples that were highly influenced by romantic nationalism. For those scholars, the &quot;Germanic&quot; and modern &quot;German&quot; were identical. Ideas about the early Germans were also highly influential among members of the nationalist and racist völkisch movement and later co-opted by the Nazis. During the second half of the 20th century, the controversial misuse of ancient Germanic history and archaeology was discredited and has since resulted in a backlash against many aspects of earlier scholarship.

==Terminology==
===Etymology===
The etymology of the Latin word , from which Latin and English Germanic are derived, is unknown, although several proposals have been put forward. Even the language from which it derives is a subject of dispute, with proposals of Germanic, Celtic, and Latin, and Illyrian origins. Herwig Wolfram, for example, thinks must be Gaulish. The historian Wolfgang Pfeifer more or less concurs with Wolfram and surmises that the name is likely of Celtic etymology and is related to the Old Irish word (&#x27;neighbours&#x27;) or could be tied to the Celtic word for their war cries, , which simplifies into &#x27;the neighbours&#x27; or &#x27;the screamers&#x27;. Regardless of its language of origin, the name was transmitted to the Romans via Celtic speakers.

It is unclear that any people group ever referred to themselves as &quot;Germani&quot;. By late antiquity, only peoples near the Rhine, especially the Franks and sometimes the Alemanni, were called &quot;Germani&quot; or &quot;Germanoi&quot; by Latin and Greek writers respectively. &quot;Germani&quot; subsequently ceased to be used as a name for any group of people and was revived as such only by the humanists in the 16th century. Previously, scholars during the Carolingian period (8th–11th centuries) had already begun using &quot;Germania&quot; and &quot;Germanicus&quot; in a territorial sense to refer to East Francia.

In modern English, the adjective &quot;Germanic&quot; is distinct from &quot;German&quot;, which is generally used when referring to modern Germans only. &quot;Germanic&quot; relates to the ancient &quot;Germani&quot; or the broader Germanic group. In modern German, the ancient &quot;Germani&quot; are called and their country &quot;Germania&quot; is , and there are clearly distinct terms for modern Germans () and modern Germany (). In English however there are no common terms which distinguish &quot;Germans&quot; from &quot;Germani&quot;, or &quot;Germany&quot; from &quot;Germania&quot;, blurring the distinctions. To avoid ambiguity the Latin terms are often used, or the &quot;Germani&quot; are sometimes called &quot;ancient Germans&quot;.

===Modern definitions and controversies===
The modern definition of Germanic peoples developed in the 19th century, when the term &quot;Germanic&quot; was linked to the newly identified Germanic language family. Linguistics provided a new way of defining the Germanic peoples, which came to be used in historiography and archaeology. While Roman authors did not consistently exclude Celtic-speaking people or have a term corresponding to Germanic-speaking peoples, this new definition—which used the Germanic language as the main criterion—presented the &quot;Germani&quot; as a people or nation () with a stable group identity linked to language. As a result, some scholars treat the (Latin) or (Greek) of Roman-era sources as non-Germanic if they seemingly spoke non-Germanic languages. For clarity, Germanic peoples, when defined as &quot;speakers of a Germanic language&quot;, are sometimes referred to as &quot;Germanic-speaking peoples&quot;. Today, the term &quot;Germanic&quot; is widely applied to &quot;phenomena including identities, social, cultural or political groups, to material cultural artefacts, languages and texts, and even specific chemical sequences found in human DNA&quot;. Several scholars continue to use the term to refer to a culture existing between the 1st to 4th centuries CE, but most historians and archaeologists researching Late Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages no longer use it.

Apart from the designation of a language family (i.e., &quot;Germanic languages&quot;), the application of the term &quot;Germanic&quot; has become controversial in scholarship since 1990, especially among archaeologists and historians. Scholars have increasingly questioned the notion of ethnically defined people groups () as stable basic actors of history. The connection of archaeological assemblages to ethnicity has also been increasingly questioned. This has resulted in different disciplines developing different definitions of &quot;Germanic&quot;. Beginning with the work of the &quot;Toronto School&quot; around Walter Goffart, various scholars have denied that anything such as a common Germanic ethnic identity ever existed. Such scholars argue that most ideas about Germanic culture are taken from far later epochs and projected backwards to antiquity. Historians of the Vienna School, such as Walter Pohl, have also called for the term to be avoided or used with careful explanation, and argued that there is little evidence for a common Germanic identity. The Anglo-Saxonist Leonard Neidorf writes that historians of the continental-European Germanic peoples of the 5th and 6th centuries are &quot;in agreement&quot; that there was no pan-Germanic identity or solidarity. Whether a scholar favors the existence of a common Germanic identity or not is often related to their position on the nature of the end of the Roman Empire.

Defenders of continued use of the term &quot;Germanic&quot; argue that the speakers of Germanic languages can be identified as Germanic people by language regardless of how they saw themselves. Linguists and philologists have generally reacted skeptically to claims that there was no Germanic identity or cultural unity, and they may view &quot;Germanic&quot; simply as a long-established and convenient term. Some archaeologists have also argued in favor of retaining the term &quot;Germanic&quot; due to its broad recognizability. Archaeologist Heiko Steuer defines his own work on the &quot;Germani&quot; in geographical terms (covering &quot;Germania&quot;), rather than in ethnic terms. He nevertheless argues for some sense of shared identity between the &quot;Germani&quot;, noting the use of a common language, a common runic script, various common objects of material culture such as bracteates and gullgubber (small gold objects) and the confrontation with Rome as things that could cause a sense of shared &quot;Germanic&quot; culture. Despite being cautious of the use of &quot;Germanic&quot; to refer to peoples, Sebastian Brather, Wilhelm Heizmann and Steffen Patzold nevertheless refer to further commonalities such as the widely attested worship of deities such as Odin, Thor and Frigg, and a shared legendary tradition.

===Classical terminology===

The first author to describe the &quot;Germani&quot; as a large category of peoples distinct from the Gauls and Scythians was Julius Caesar, writing around 55 BCE during his governorship of Gaul. In Caesar&#x27;s account, the clearest defining characteristic of the &quot;Germani&quot; people was that their homeland was east of the Rhine, opposite Gaul on the west side. Caesar sought to explain both why his legions stopped at the Rhine and also why the &quot;Germani&quot; were more dangerous than the Gauls to the empire. Explaining this threat he also classified the Cimbri and Teutons, who had previously invaded Italy, as &quot;Germani&quot;. Although Caesar described the Rhine as the border between &quot;Germani&quot; and Celts, he also describes the &quot;Germani cisrhenani&quot; on the west bank of the Rhine, who he believed had moved from the east. It is unclear if these &quot;Germani&quot; were actually Germanic speakers. According to the Roman historian Tacitus in his &quot;Germania&quot; (c. 98 CE), it was among this group, specifically the Tungri, that the name &quot;Germani&quot; first arose, before it spread to further groups. Tacitus reported that in his time many of the peoples west of the Rhine within Roman Gaul were still considered &quot;Germani&quot;. Caesar&#x27;s division of the &quot;Germani&quot; from the Celts was not taken up by most writers in Greek.

Caesar and authors following him regarded Germania as stretching east of the Rhine for an indeterminate distance, bounded by the Baltic Sea and the Hercynian Forest. Pliny the Elder and Tacitus placed the eastern border at the Vistula. The Upper Danube served as a southern border. Between there and the Vistula Tacitus sketched an unclear boundary, describing Germania as separated in the south and east from the Dacians and the Sarmatians by mutual fear or mountains. This undefined eastern border is related to a lack of stable frontiers in this area such as were maintained by Roman armies along the Rhine and Danube. The geographer Ptolemy (2nd century CE) applied the name Germania magna (&quot;Greater Germania&quot;, ) to this area, contrasting it with the Roman provinces of Germania Prima and Germania Secunda (on the west bank of the Rhine). In modern scholarship, Germania magna is sometimes also called (&quot;free Germania&quot;), a name coined by Jacob Grimm around 1835.

Caesar and, following him, Tacitus, depicted the &quot;Germani&quot; as sharing elements of a common culture. A small number of passages by Tacitus and other Roman authors (Caesar, Suetonius) mention Germanic tribes or individuals speaking a language distinct from Gaulish. For Tacitus (&quot;Germania&quot; 43, 45, 46), language was a characteristic, but not defining feature of the Germanic peoples. Many of the ascribed ethnic characteristics of the &quot;Germani&quot; represented them as typically &quot;barbarian&quot;, including the possession of stereotypical vices such as &quot;wildness&quot; and of virtues such as chastity. Tacitus was at times unsure whether a people were Germanic or not. He expressed uncertainty about the Peucini, who he says spoke and lived like the &quot;Germani&quot;, though they did not live in Germania, and they were beginning to look like Sarmatians through intermarriage. The Osi and Cotini lived in Germania, but were not &quot;Germani&quot;, because they had other languages and customs. The Aesti lived on the eastern shore of the Baltic and were like Suebi in their appearance and customs, although they spoke a different language. Ancient authors did not differentiate consistently between a territorial definition (&quot;those living in &quot;Germania&quot;&quot;) and an ethnic definition (&quot;having Germanic ethnic characteristics&quot;), and the two definitions did not always align.

In the 3rd century, when Romans encountered Germanic-speaking peoples living north of the Lower Danube who fought on horseback, such as Goths and Gepids, they did not call them &quot;Germani&quot;. Instead, they connected them with non-Germanic-speaking peoples such as the Huns, Sarmatians, and Alans, who shared a similar culture. Romans also called them &quot;Gothic peoples&quot;, () even if they did not speak a Germanic language, and they often referred to the Goths as &quot;Getae&quot;, equating them to a non-Germanic people residing in the same region. The writer Procopius described these new &quot;Getic&quot; peoples as sharing similar appearance, laws, Arian religion, and a common language.

===Subdivisions===

Several ancient sources list subdivisions of the Germanic tribes. Writing in the first century CE, Pliny the Elder lists five Germanic subgroups: the Vandili, the Inguaeones, the Istuaeones (living near the Rhine), the Herminones (in the Germanic interior), and the Peucini Basternae (living on the lower Danube near the Dacians). In chapter 2 of the &quot;Germania&quot;, written about a half-century later, Tacitus lists only three subgroups: the Ingvaeones (near the sea), the Herminones (in the interior of Germania), and the Istvaeones (the remainder of the tribes); Tacitus says these groups each claimed descent from the god Mannus, son of Tuisto. Tacitus also mentions a second tradition that there were four sons of either Mannus or Tuisto from whom the groups of the Marsi, Gambrivi, Suebi, and Vandili claim descent. The Herminones are also mentioned by Pomponius Mela, but otherwise, these divisions do not appear in other ancient works on the &quot;Germani&quot;.

There are a number of inconsistencies in the listing of Germanic subgroups by Tacitus and Pliny. While both Tacitus and Pliny mention some Scandinavian tribes, they are not integrated into the subdivisions. While Pliny lists the Suebi as part of the Herminones, Tacitus treats them as a separate group. Additionally, Tacitus&#x27;s description of a group of tribes as united by the cult of Nerthus (&quot;Germania&quot; 40) as well as the cult of the Alcis controlled by the Nahanarvali (&quot;Germania&quot; 43) and Tacitus&#x27;s account of the origin myth of the Semnones (&quot;Germania&quot; 39) all suggest different subdivisions than the three mentioned in &quot;Germania&quot; chapter 2.

The subdivisions found in Pliny and Tacitus have been very influential for scholarship on Germanic history and language up until recent times. However, outside of Tacitus and Pliny there are no other textual indications that these groups were important. The subgroups mentioned by Tacitus are not used by him elsewhere in his work, contradict other parts of his work, and cannot be reconciled with Pliny, who is equally inconsistent. Additionally, there is no linguistic or archaeological evidence for these subgroups. New archaeological finds have tended to show that the boundaries between Germanic peoples were very permeable, and scholars now assume that migration and the collapse and formation of cultural units were constant occurrences within Germania. Nevertheless, various aspects such as the alliteration of many of the tribal names in Tacitus&#x27;s account and the name of Mannus himself suggest that the descent from Mannus was an authentic Germanic tradition.

==Languages==
=== Proto-Germanic ===
All Germanic languages derive from the Proto-Indo-European language (PIE), which is generally thought to have been spoken between 4500 and 2500 BCE. The ancestor of Germanic languages is referred to as Proto- or Common Germanic, and likely represented a group of mutually intelligible dialects. They share distinctive characteristics which set them apart from other Indo-European sub-families of languages, such as Grimm&#x27;s and Verner&#x27;s law, the conservation of the PIE ablaut system in the Germanic verb system (notably in strong verbs), or the merger of the vowels &quot;a&quot; and &quot;o&quot; qualities (&quot;ə&quot;, &quot;a&quot;, &quot;o&quot; &gt; &quot;a;&quot; &quot;ā&quot;, &quot;ō&quot; &gt; &quot;ō&quot;). During the Pre-Germanic linguistic period (2500–500 BCE), the proto-language was almost certainly influenced by an unknown non-Indo-European language, still noticeable in the Germanic phonology and lexicon.

Although Proto-Germanic is reconstructed without dialects via the comparative method, it is almost certain that it never was a uniform proto-language. The late Jastorf culture occupied so much territory that it is unlikely that Germanic populations spoke a single dialect, and traces of early linguistic varieties have been highlighted by scholars. Sister dialects of Proto-Germanic itself certainly existed, as evidenced by the absence of the First Germanic Sound Shift (Grimm&#x27;s law) in some &quot;Para-Germanic&quot; recorded proper names, and the reconstructed Proto-Germanic language was only one among several dialects spoken at that time by peoples identified as &quot;Germanic&quot; by Roman sources or archeological data. Although Roman sources name various Germanic tribes such as Suevi, Alemanni, Bauivari, etc., it is unlikely that the members of these tribes all spoke the same dialect.

=== Early attestations ===
Definite and comprehensive evidence of Germanic lexical units only occurred after Caesar&#x27;s conquest of Gaul in the 1st century BCE, after which contacts with Proto-Germanic speakers began to intensify. The &quot;Alcis&quot;, a pair of brother gods worshipped by the Nahanarvali, are given by Tacitus as a Latinized form of (a kind of &#x27;stag&#x27;), and the word (&#x27;hair dye&#x27;) is certainly borrowed from Proto-Germanic (English &quot;soap)&quot;, as evidenced by the parallel Finnish loanword &quot;.&quot; The name of the &quot;framea&quot;, described by Tacitus as a short spear carried by Germanic warriors, most likely derives from the compound (&#x27;forward-going one&#x27;), as suggested by comparable semantical structures found in early runes (e.g., &quot;raun-ij-az&quot; &#x27;tester&#x27;, on a lancehead) and linguistic cognates attested in the later Old Norse, Old Saxon and Old High German languages: &quot;,&quot; and all mean &#x27;to carry out&#x27;.
 In the absence of earlier evidence, it must be assumed that Proto-Germanic speakers living in &quot;Germania&quot; were members of preliterate societies. The only pre-Roman inscriptions that could be interpreted as Proto-Germanic, written in the Etruscan alphabet, have not been found in &quot;Germania&quot; but rather in the Venetic region. The inscription &quot;harikastiteiva&quot;, engraved on the Negau helmet in the 3rd–2nd centuries BCE, possibly by a Germanic-speaking warrior involved in combat in northern Italy, has been interpreted by some scholars as &quot;Harigasti Teiwǣ&quot; ( &#x27;army-guest&#x27; + &#x27;god, deity&#x27;), which could be an invocation to a war-god or a mark of ownership engraved by its possessor. The inscription &quot;Fariarix&quot; ( &#x27;ferry&#x27; + &#x27;ruler&#x27;) carved on tetradrachms found in Bratislava (mid-1st c. BCE) may indicate the Germanic name of a Celtic ruler.

=== Linguistic disintegration ===
By the time Germanic speakers entered written history, their linguistic territory had stretched farther south, since a Germanic dialect continuum (where neighbouring language varieties diverged only slightly between each other, but remote dialects were not necessarily mutually intelligible due to accumulated differences over the distance) covered a region roughly located between the Rhine, the Vistula, the Danube, and southern Scandinavia during the first two centuries of the Common Era. East Germanic speakers dwelled on the Baltic sea coasts and islands, while speakers of the Northwestern dialects occupied territories in present-day Denmark and bordering parts of Germany at the earliest date when they can be identified.

In the 2nd and 3rd centuries CE, migrations of East Germanic &quot;gentes&quot; from the Baltic Sea coast southeastwards into the hinterland led to their separation from the dialect continuum. By the late 3rd century CE, linguistic divergences like the West Germanic loss of the final consonant &quot;-z&quot; had already occurred within the &quot;residual&quot; Northwest dialect continuum. The latter definitely ended after the 5th- and 6th-century migrations of Angles, Jutes and part of the Saxon tribes towards modern-day England.

=== Classification ===

The Germanic languages are traditionally divided between East, North and West Germanic branches. The modern prevailing view is that North and West Germanic were also encompassed in a larger subgroup called Northwest Germanic.
* Northwest Germanic: mainly characterized by the &quot;i&quot;-umlaut, and the shift of the long vowel &quot;*ē&quot; towards a long &quot;*ā&quot; in accented syllables; it remained a dialect continuum following the migration of East Germanic speakers in the 2nd–3rd century CE;
** North Germanic or Primitive Norse: initially characterized by the monophthongization of the sound &quot;ai&quot; to &quot;ā&quot; (attested from c. 400 BCE); a uniform northern dialect or &quot;koiné&quot; attested in runic inscriptions from the 2nd century CE onward, it remained practically unchanged until a transitional period that started in the late 5th century; and Old Norse, a language attested by runic inscriptions written in the Younger Fuþark from the beginning of the Viking Age (8th–9th centuries CE);
** West Germanic: including Old Saxon (attested from the 5th c. CE), Old English (late 5th c.), Old Frisian (6th c.), Frankish (6th c.), Old High German (6th c.), and possibly Langobardic (6th c.), which is only scarcely attested; they are mainly characterized by the loss of the final consonant -&quot;z&quot; (attested from the late 3rd century), and by the &quot;j&quot;-consonant gemination (attested from c. 400 BCE); early inscriptions from the West Germanic areas found on altars where votive offerings were made to the &quot;Matronae Vacallinehae&quot; (Matrons of Vacallina) in the Rhineland dated to c. 160–260 CE; West Germanic remained a &quot;residual&quot; dialect continuum until the Anglo-Saxon migrations in the 5th–6th centuries CE;
* East Germanic, of which only Gothic is attested by both runic inscriptions (from the 3rd c. CE) and textual evidence (principally Wulfila&#x27;s Bible; c. 350–380). It became extinct after the fall of the Visigothic Kingdom in the early 8th century. The inclusion of the Burgundian and Vandalic languages within the East Germanic group, while plausible, is still uncertain due to their scarce attestation. The latest attested East Germanic language, Crimean Gothic, has been partially recorded in the 16th century.

Further internal classifications are still debated among scholars, as it is unclear whether the internal features shared by several branches are due to early common innovations or to the later diffusion of local dialectal innovations.

==History==
===Prehistory===
The Germanic-speaking peoples speak an Indo-European language. The leading theory for the origin of Germanic languages, suggested by archaeological, linguistic and genetic evidence, postulates a diffusion of Indo-European languages from the Pontic–Caspian steppe towards Northern Europe during the third millennium BCE, via linguistic contacts and migrations from the Corded Ware culture towards modern-day Denmark, resulting in cultural mixing with the earlier Funnelbeaker culture. The subsequent culture of the Nordic Bronze Age (c. 2000/1750c. 500 BCE) shows definite cultural and population continuities with later Germanic peoples, and is often supposed to have been the culture in which the Germanic Parent Language, the predecessor of the Proto-Germanic language, developed. However, it is unclear whether these earlier peoples possessed any ethnic continuity with the later Germanic peoples.

Generally, scholars agree that it is possible to speak of Germanic-speaking peoples after 500 BCE, although the first attestation of the name &quot;Germani&quot; is not until much later. Between around 500 BCE and the beginning of the common era, archeological and linguistic evidence suggest that the &quot;Urheimat&quot; (&#x27;original homeland&#x27;) of the Proto-Germanic language, the ancestral idiom of all attested Germanic dialects, existed in or near the archaeological culture known as the late Jastorf culture, of the central Elbe in present day Germany, stretching north into Jutland and east into present day Poland. If the Jastorf Culture is the origin of the Germanic peoples, then the Scandinavian peninsula would have become Germanic either via migration or assimilation over the course of the same period. Alternatively, has stressed that two other archaeological groups must have belonged to the &quot;Germani&quot;, one on either side of the Lower Rhine and reaching to the Weser, and another in Jutland and southern Scandinavia. These groups would thus show a &quot;polycentric origin&quot; for the Germanic peoples. The neighboring Przeworsk culture in modern Poland is thought to possibly reflect a Germanic and Slavic component. The identification of the Jastorf culture with the &quot;Germani&quot; has been criticized by Sebastian Brather, who notes that it seems to be missing areas such as southern Scandinavia and the Rhine-Weser area, which linguists argue to have been Germanic, while also not according with the Roman era definition of &quot;Germani&quot;, which included Celtic-speaking peoples further south and west.

A category of evidence used to locate the Proto-Germanic homeland is founded on traces of early linguistic contacts with neighbouring languages. Germanic loanwords in the Finnic and Sámi languages have preserved archaic forms (e.g. Finnic &quot;kuningas&quot;, from Proto-Germanic &#x27;king&#x27;; &quot;rengas&quot;, from &#x27;ring&#x27;; etc.), with the older loan layers possibly dating back to an earlier period of intense contacts between pre-Germanic and Finno-Permic (i.e. Finno-Samic) speakers. Shared lexical innovations between Celtic and Germanic languages, concentrated in certain semantic domains such as religion and warfare, indicate intensive contacts between the &quot;Germani&quot; and Celtic peoples, usually identified with the archaeological La Tène culture, found in southern Germany and the modern Czech Republic. Early contacts probably occurred during the Pre-Germanic and Pre-Celtic periods, dated to the 2nd millennium BCE, and the Celts appear to have had a large amount of influence on Germanic culture from up until the first century CE, which led to a high degree of Celtic-Germanic shared material culture and social organization. Some evidence of linguistic convergence between Germanic and Italic languages, whose &quot;Urheimat&quot; is supposed to have been situated north of the Alps before the 1st millennium BCE, have also been highlighted by scholars. Shared changes in their grammars also suggest early contacts between Germanic and Balto-Slavic languages; however, some of these innovations are shared with Baltic only, which may point to linguistic contacts during a relatively late period, at any rate after the initial breakup of Balto-Slavic into Baltic and Slavic languages, with the similarities to Slavic being seen as remnants of Indo-European archaisms or the result of secondary contacts.

=== Earliest recorded history ===
According to some authors the Bastarnae, or Peucini, were the first &quot;Germani&quot; to be encountered by the Greco-Roman world and thus to be mentioned in historical records. They appear in historical sources going as far back as the 3rd century BCE through the 4th century CE. Another eastern people known from about 200 BCE, and sometimes believed to be Germanic-speaking, are the Sciri (Greek: ), who are recorded threatening the city of Olbia on the Black Sea. Late in the 2nd century BCE, Roman and Greek sources recount the migrations of the Cimbri, Teutones and Ambrones whom Caesar later classified as Germanic. The movements of these groups through parts of Gaul, Italy and Hispania resulted in the Cimbrian War (113–101 BCE) against the Romans, in which the Teutons and Cimbri were victorious over several Roman armies but were ultimately defeated.

The first century BCE was a time of the expansion of Germanic-speaking peoples at the expense of Celtic-speaking polities in modern southern Germany and the Czech Republic. Before 60 BCE, Ariovistus, described by Caesar as king of the &quot;Germani&quot;, led a force including Suevi across the Rhine into Gaul near Besançon, successfully aiding the Sequani against their enemies the Aedui at the Battle of Magetobriga. Ariovistus was initially considered an ally of Rome. In 58 BCE, with increasing numbers of settlers crossing the Rhine to join Ariovistus, Julius Caesar went to war with them, defeating them at the Battle of Vosges. In the following years Caesar pursued a controversial campaign to conquer all of Gaul on behalf of Rome, establishing the Rhine as a border. In 55 BCE he crossed the Rhine into Germania near Cologne. Near modern Nijmegen he also massacred a large migrating group of Tencteri and Usipetes who had crossed the Rhine from the east.

===Roman Imperial Period to 375===
==== Early Roman Imperial period (27 BCE – 166 CE) ====

Throughout the reign of Augustus—from 27 BCE until 14 CE—the Roman empire expanded into Gaul, with the Rhine as a border. Starting in 13 BCE, there were Roman campaigns across the Rhine for a 28-year period. First came the pacification of the Usipetes, Sicambri, and Frisians near the Rhine, then attacks increased further from the Rhine, on the Chauci, Cherusci, Chatti and Suevi (including the Marcomanni). These campaigns eventually reached and even crossed the Elbe, and in 5 CE Tiberius was able to show strength by having a Roman fleet enter the Elbe and meet the legions in the heart of &quot;Germania&quot;. Once Tiberius subdued the Germanic people between the Rhine and the Elbe, the region at least up to Weser—and possibly up to the Elbe—was made the Roman province &quot;Germania&quot; and provided soldiers to the Roman army.

However, within this period two Germanic kings formed larger alliances. Both of them had spent some of their youth in Rome; the first of them was Maroboduus of the Marcomanni, who had led his people away from the Roman activities into Bohemia, which was defended by forests and mountains, and had formed alliances with other peoples. In 6 CE, Rome planned an attack against him but the campaign was cut short when forces were needed for the Illyrian revolt in the Balkans.
Just three years later (9 CE), the second of these Germanic figures, Arminius of the Cherusci—initially an ally of Rome—drew a large Roman force into an ambush in northern Germany, and destroyed the three legions of Publius Quinctilius Varus at the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest. Marboduus and Arminius went to war with each other in 17 CE; Arminius was victorious and Marboduus was forced to flee to the Romans.

Following the Roman defeat at the Teutoburg Forest, Rome gave up on the possibility of fully integrating this region into the empire. Rome launched successful campaigns across the Rhine between 14 and 16 CE under Tiberius and Germanicus, but the effort of integrating Germania now seemed to outweigh its benefits. In the reign of Augustus&#x27;s successor, Tiberius, it became state policy to expand the empire no further than the frontier based roughly upon the Rhine and Danube, recommendations that were specified in the will of Augustus and read aloud by Tiberius himself. Roman intervention in Germania led to a shifting and unstable political situation, in which pro- and anti-Roman parties vied for power. Arminius was murdered in 21 CE by his fellow Germanic tribesmen, due in part to these tensions and for his attempt to claim supreme kingly power for himself.

In the wake of Arminius&#x27;s death, Roman diplomats sought to keep the Germanic peoples divided and fractious. Rome established relationships with individual Germanic kings that are often discussed as being similar to client states; however, the situation on the border was always unstable, with rebellions by the Frisians in 28 CE, and attacks by the Chauci and Chatti in the 60s CE. The most serious threat to the Roman order was the Revolt of the Batavi in 69 CE, during the civil wars following the death of Nero known as the Year of the Four Emperors. The Batavi had long served as auxiliary troops in the Roman army as well as in the imperial bodyguard as the so-called &quot;Numerus Batavorum&quot;, often called the Germanic bodyguard. The uprising was led by Gaius Julius Civilis, a member of the Batavian royal family and Roman military officer, and attracted a large coalition of people both inside and outside of the Roman territory. The revolt ended following several defeats, with Civilis claiming to have only supported the imperial claims of Vespasian, who was victorious in the civil war.
The century after the Batavian Revolt saw mostly peace between the Germanic peoples and Rome. In 83 CE, Emperor Domitian of the Flavian dynasty attacked the Chatti north of Mogontiacum (now Mainz). This war would last until 85 CE. Following the end of the war with the Chatti, Domitian reduced the number of Roman soldiers on the upper Rhine and shifted the Roman military to guarding the Danube frontier, beginning the construction of the &quot;limes&quot;, the longest fortified border in the empire. The period afterwards was peaceful enough that the emperor Trajan reduced the number of soldiers on the frontier. According to Edward James, the Romans appear to have reserved the right to choose rulers among the barbarians on the frontier.

====Marcomannic Wars to 375 CE====

Following sixty years of quiet on the frontier, 166 CE saw a major incursion of peoples from north of the Danube during the reign of Marcus Aurelius, beginning the Marcomannic Wars. By 168 (during the Antonine plague), barbarian hosts consisting of Marcomanni, Quadi, and Sarmatian Iazyges, attacked and pushed their way to Italy. They advanced as far as Upper Italy, destroyed Opitergium/Oderzo and besieged Aquileia. The Romans had finished the war by 180, through a combination of Roman military victories, the resettling of some peoples on Roman territory, and by making alliances with others. Marcus Aurelius&#x27;s successor Commodus chose not to permanently occupy any territory conquered north of the Danube, and the following decades saw an increase in the defenses at the &quot;limes&quot;. The Romans renewed their right to choose the kings of the Marcomanni and Quadi, and Commodus forbid them to hold assemblies unless a Roman centurion was present.
The period after the Marcomannic Wars saw the emergence of peoples with new names along the Roman frontiers, which were probably formed by the merger of smaller groups. These new confederacies or peoples tended to border the Roman imperial frontier. Many ethnic names from earlier periods disappear. The Alamanni emerged along the upper Rhine and are mentioned in Roman sources from the third century onward. The Goths begin to be mentioned along the lower Danube, where they attacked the city of Histria in 238. The Franks are first mentioned occupying territory between the Rhine and Weser. The Lombards seem to have moved their center of power to the central Elbe. Groups such as the Alamanni, Goths, and Franks were not unified polities; they formed multiple, loosely associated groups, who often fought each other and some of whom sought Roman friendship. The Romans also begin to mention seaborne attacks by the Saxons, a term used generically in Latin for Germanic-speaking pirates. A system of defenses on both sides of the English Channel, the Saxon Shore, was established to deal with their raids.

From 250 onward, the Gothic peoples formed the &quot;single most potent threat to the northern frontier of Rome&quot;. In 250 CE a Gothic king Cniva led Goths with Bastarnae, Carpi, Vandals, and Taifali into the empire, laying siege to Philippopolis. He followed his victory there with another on the marshy terrain at Abrittus, a battle which cost the life of Roman emperor Decius. In 253/254, further attacks occurred reaching Thessalonica and possibly Thrace. In 267/268 there were large raids led by the Herules in 267/268, and a mixed group of Goths and Herules in 269/270. Gothic attacks were abruptly ended in the years after 270, after a Roman victory in which the Gothic king Cannabaudes was killed.

The Roman &quot;limes&quot; largely collapsed in 259/260, during the Crisis of the Third Century (235–284), and Germanic raids penetrated as far as northern Italy. The &quot;limes&quot; on the Rhine and upper Danube was brought under control again in 270s, and by 300 the Romans had reestablished control over areas they had abandoned during the crisis. From the later third century onward, the Roman army relied increasingly on troops of Barbarian origin, often recruited from Germanic peoples, with some functioning as senior commanders in the Roman army. In the 4th century, warfare along the Rhine frontier between the Romans and Franks and Alemanni seems to have mostly consisted of campaigns of plunder, during which major battles were avoided. The Romans generally followed a policy of trying to prevent strong leaders from emerging among the barbarians, using treachery, kidnapping, and assassination, paying off rival tribes to attack them, or by supporting internal rivals.

===Migration Period (c. 375–568)===
The Migration Period is traditionally cited by historians as beginning in 375 CE, under the assumption that the appearance of the Huns prompted the Visigoths to seek shelter within the Roman Empire in 376. The end of the migration period is usually set at 568 when the Lombards invaded Italy. During this time period, numerous barbarian groups invaded the Roman Empire and established new kingdoms within its boundaries. These Germanic migrations traditionally mark the transition between antiquity and the beginning of the early Middle Ages. The reasons for the migrations of the period are unclear, but scholars have proposed overpopulation, climate change, bad harvests, famines, and adventurousness as possible reasons. Migrations were probably carried out by relatively small groups rather than entire peoples.

====Early Migration Period (before 375–420)====
The Greuthungi, a Gothic group in modern Ukraine under the rule of Ermanaric, were among the first peoples attacked by the Huns, apparently facing Hunnic pressure for some years. Following Ermanaric&#x27;s death, the Greuthungi&#x27;s resistance broke and they moved toward the Dniester river. A second Gothic group, the Tervingi under King Athanaric, constructed a defensive earthwork against the Huns near the Dniester. However, these measures did not stop the Huns and the majority of the Tervingi abandoned Athanaric; they subsequently fled—accompanied by a contingent of Greuthungi—to the Danube in 376, seeking asylum in the Roman Empire. The emperor Valens chose only to admit the Tervingi, who were settled in the Roman provinces of Thrace and Moesia.

Due to mistreatment by the Romans, the Tervingi revolted in 377, starting the Gothic War, joined by the Greuthungi. The Goths and their allies defeated the Romans first at Marcianople, then defeated and killed emperor Valens in the Battle of Adrianople in 378, destroying two-thirds of Valens&#x27; army. Following further fighting, peace was negotiated in 382, granting the Goths considerable autonomy within the Roman Empire. However, these Goths—who would be known as the Visigoths—revolted several more times, finally coming to be ruled by Alaric. In 397, the disunited eastern Empire submitted to some of his demands, possibly giving him control over Epirus. In the aftermath of the large-scale Gothic entries into the empire, the Franks and Alemanni became more secure in their positions in 395, when Stilicho, the barbarian generalissimo who held power in the western Empire, made agreements with them.
In 401, Alaric invaded Italy, coming to an understanding with Stilicho in 404/5. This agreement allowed Stilicho to fight against the force of Radagaisus, who had crossed the Middle Danube in 405/6 and invaded Italy, only to be defeated outside Florence. That same year, a large force of Vandals, Suevi, Alans, and Burgundians crossed the Rhine, fighting the Franks but facing no Roman resistance. In 409, the Suevi, Vandals, and Alans crossing the Pyrenees into Spain, where they took possession of the northern part of the peninsula. The Burgundians seized the land around modern Speyer, Worms, and Strasbourg, territory that was recognized by the Roman Emperor Honorius. When Stilicho fell from power in 408, Alaric invaded Italy again and eventually sacked Rome in 410; Alaric died shortly thereafter. The Visigoths withdrew into Gaul where they faced a power struggle until the succession of Wallia in 415 and his son Theodoric I in 417/18. Following successful campaigns against them by the Roman emperor Flavius Constantius, the Visigoths were settled as Roman allies in Gaul between modern Toulouse and Bourdeaux.

Other Goths, including those of Athanaric, continued to live outside the empire, with three groups crossing into the Roman territory after the Tervingi. The Huns gradually conquered Gothic groups north of the Danube, of which at least six are known, from 376 to 400. Those in Crimea may never have been conquered. The Gepids also formed an important Germanic people under Hunnic rule; the Huns had largely conquered them by 406. One Gothic group under Hunnic domination was ruled by the Amal dynasty, who would form the core of the Ostrogoths. The situation outside the Roman empire in 410s and 420s is poorly attested, but it is clear that the Huns continued to spread their influence onto the middle Danube.

==== The Hunnic Empire (c. 420–453) ====

In 428, the Vandal leader Geiseric moved his forces across the strait of Gibraltar into north Africa. Within two years, they had conquered most of north Africa. By 434, following a renewed political crisis in Rome, the Rhine frontier had collapsed, and in order to restore it, the Roman Flavius Aetius engineered the destruction of the Burgundian kingdom in 435/436, possibly with Hunnic mercenaries, and launched several successful campaigns against the Visigoths. In 439, the Vandals conquered Carthage, which served as an excellent base for further raids throughout the Mediterranean and became the basis for the Vandal Kingdom. The loss of Carthage forced Aetius to make peace with the Visigoths in 442, effectively recognizing their independence within the boundaries of the empire. During the resulting peace, Aetius resettled the Burgundians in Sapaudia in southern Gaul. In the 430s, Aetius negotiated peace with the Suevi in Spain, leading to a practical loss of Roman control in the province. Despite the peace, the Suevi expanded their territory by conquering Mérida in 439 and Seville in 441.

By 440, Attila and the Huns had come to rule a multi-ethnic empire north of the Danube; two of the most important peoples within this empire were the Gepids and the Goths. The Gepid king Ardaric came to power around 440 and participated in various Hunnic campaigns. In 450, the Huns interfered in a Frankish succession dispute, leading in 451 to an invasion of Gaul. Aetius, by uniting a coalition of Visigoths, part of the Franks, and others, was able to defeat the Hunnic army at the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains. In 453, Attila died unexpectedly, and an alliance led by Ardaric&#x27;s Gepids rebelled against the rule of his sons, defeating them in the Battle of Nedao. Either before or after Attila&#x27;s death, Valamer, a Gothic ruler of the Amal dynasty, seems to have consolidated power over a large part of the Goths in the Hunnic domain. For the next 20 years, the former subject peoples of the Huns would fight among each other for preeminence.

The arrival of the Saxons in Britain is traditionally dated to 449, however, archaeology indicates they had begun arriving in Britain earlier. Latin sources used &quot;Saxon&quot; generically for seaborne raiders, meaning that not all of the invaders belonged to the continental Saxons. According to the British monk Gildas (c. 500 – c. 570), this group had been recruited to protect the Romano-British from the Picts, but had revolted. They quickly established themselves as rulers on the eastern part of the island.

====After the death of Attila (453–568)====
In 455, in the aftermath of the death of Aetius in 453 and the murder of emperor Valentinian III in 455, the Vandals invaded Italy and sacked Rome in 455. In 456, the Romans persuaded the Visigoths to fight the Suevi, who had broken their treaty with Rome. The Visigoths and a force of Burgundians and Franks defeated the Suevi at the Battle of Campus Paramus, reducing Suevi control to northwestern Spain. The Visigoths went on to conquer all of the Iberian Peninsula by 484 except a small part that remained under Suevian control.

The Ostrogoths, led by Valamer&#x27;s brother Thiudimer, invaded the Balkans in 473. Thiudimer&#x27;s son Theodoric succeeded him in 476. In that same year, a barbarian commander in the Roman Italian army, Odoacer, mutinied and removed the final western Roman emperor, Romulus Augustulus. Odoacer ruled Italy for himself, largely continuing the policies of Roman imperial rule. He destroyed the Kingdom of the Rugians, in modern Austria, in 487/488. Theodoric, meanwhile, successfully extorted the Eastern Empire through a series of campaigns in the Balkans. The eastern emperor Zeno agreed to send Theodoric to Italy in 487/8. After a successful invasion, Theodoric killed and replaced Odoacer in 493, founding a new Ostrogothic kingdom. Theodoric died in 526, amid increasing tensions with the eastern empire.

Toward the end of the migration period, in the early 500s, Roman sources portray a completely changed ethnic landscape outside of the empire: the Marcomanni and Quadi disappeared, as had the Vandals. Instead, the Thuringians, Rugians, Sciri, Herules, Goths, and Gepids are mentioned as occupying the Danube frontier. From the mid-5th century onward, the Alamanni had greatly expanded their territory in all directions and launched numerous raids into Gaul. The territory under the Frankish influence had grown to encompass northern Gaul and Germania to the Elbe. The Frankish king Clovis I united the various Frankish groups in 490s, and conquered the Alamanni by 506. From the 490s onward, Clovis waged wars against the Visigoths, defeating them in 507 and taking control of most of Gaul. Clovis&#x27;s heirs conquered the Thuringians by 530 and the Burgundians by 532. The continental Saxons, composed of many subgroups, were made tributary to the Franks, as were the Frisians, who faced an attack by the Danes under Hygelac in 533.

The Vandal and Ostrogothic kingdoms were destroyed in 534 and 555 respectively by the Eastern Roman (Byzantine) empire under Justinian. Around 500, a new ethnic identity appears in modern southern Germany, the Baiuvarii (Bavarians), under the patronage of Theodoric&#x27;s Ostrogothic kingdom and then of the Franks. The Lombards, moving out of Bohemia, destroyed the kingdom of the Heruli in Pannonia in 510. In 568, after destroying the Gepid kingdom, the last Germanic kingdom in the Carpathian basin, the Lombards under Alboin invaded northern Italy, eventually conquering most of it. This invasion has traditionally been regarded as the end of the migration period. The eastern part of Germania, formerly inhabited by the Goths, Gepids, Vandals, and Rugians, was gradually Slavicized, a process enabled by the invasion of the nomadic Avars.

===Early Middle Ages to c. 800===


Merovingian Frankia became divided into three subkingdoms: Austrasia in the east around the Rhine and Meuse, Neustria in the west around Paris, and Burgundy in the southeast around Chalon-sur-Saône. The Franks ruled a multilingual and multi-ethnic kingdom, divided between a mostly Romance-speaking West and a mostly Germanic-speaking east, that integrated former Roman elites but remained centered on a Frankish ethnic identity. In 687, the Pippinids came to control the Merovingian rulers as mayors of the palace in Neustria. Under their direction, the subkingdoms of Frankia were reunited. Following the mayoralty of Charles Martel, the Pippinids replaced the Merovingians as kings in 751, when Charles&#x27;s son Pepin the Short became king and founded the Carolingian dynasty. His son, Charlemagne, would go on to conquer the Lombards, Saxons, and Bavarians. Charlemagne was crowned Roman emperor in 800 and regarded his residence of Aachen as the new Rome.

Following their invasion in 568, the Lombards quickly conquered larger parts of the Italian peninsula. From 574 to 584, a period without a single Lombard ruler, the Lombards nearly collapsed, until a more centralized Lombard polity emerged under King Agilulf in 590. The invading Lombards only ever made up a very small percentage of the Italian population, however Lombard ethnic identity expanded to include people of both Roman and barbarian descent. Lombard power reached its peak during the reign of King Liutprand (712–744). After Liutprand&#x27;s death, the Frankish King Pippin the Short invaded in 755, greatly weakening the kingdom. The Lombard kingdom was finally annexed by Charlemagne in 773.

After a period of weak central authority, the Visigothic kingdom came under the rule of Liuvigild, who conquered the Kingdom of the Suebi in 585. A Visigothic identity that was distinct from the Romance-speaking population they ruled had disappeared by 700, with the removal of all legal differences between the two groups. In 711, a Muslim army landed at Grenada; the entire Visigothic kingdom would be conquered by the Umayyad Caliphate by 725.

In what would become England, the Anglo-Saxons were divided into several competing kingdoms, the most important of which were Northumbria, Mercia, and Wessex. In the 7th century, Northumbria established overlordship over the other Anglo-Saxon Kingdoms, until Mercia revolted under Wulfhere in 658. Subsequently, Mercia would establish dominance until 825 with the death of King Cenwulf. Few written sources report on Vendel period Scandinavia from 400 to 700, however this period saw profound societal changes and the formation of early states with connections to the Anglo-Saxon and Frankish kingdoms. In 793, the first recorded Viking raid occurred at Lindisfarne, ushering in the Viking Age.

==Religion==
===Germanic paganism===
Germanic paganism refers to the traditional, culturally significant religion of the Germanic-speaking peoples. It did not form a uniform religious system across Germanic-speaking Europe, but varied from place to place, people to people, and time to time. In many contact areas (e.g. Rhineland and eastern and northern Scandinavia), it was similar to neighboring religions such as those of the Slavs, Celts, and Finnic peoples. The term is sometimes applied as early as the Stone Age, Bronze Age, or the earlier Iron Age, but it is more generally restricted to the time period after the Germanic languages had become distinct from other Indo-European languages. From the first reports in Roman sources to the final conversion to Christianity, Germanic paganism thus covers a period of around one thousand years. Scholars are divided as to the degree of continuity between the religious practices of the earlier Germanic peoples and those attested in later Norse paganism and elsewhere: while some scholars argue that Tacitus, early medieval sources, and the Norse sources indicate religious continuity, other scholars are highly skeptical of such arguments.

Like their neighbors and other historically related peoples, the ancient Germanic peoples venerated numerous indigenous deities. These deities are attested throughout literature authored by or written about Germanic-speaking peoples, including runic inscriptions, contemporary written accounts, and in folklore after Christianization. As an example, the second of the two Merseburg charms (two Old High German examples of alliterative verse from a manuscript dated to the ninth century) mentions six deities: Woden, Balder, Sinthgunt, Sunna, Frija, and Volla.

With the exception of &quot;Sinthgunt&quot;, proposed cognates to these deities occur in other Germanic languages, such as Old English and Old Norse. By way of the comparative method, philologists are then able to reconstruct and propose early Germanic forms of these names from early Germanic mythology. Compare the following table:

The structure of the magic formula in this charm has a long history prior to this attestation: it is first known to have occurred in Vedic India, where it occurs in the Atharvaveda, dated to around 500 BCE. Numerous other beings common to various groups of ancient Germanic peoples receive mention throughout the ancient Germanic record. One such type of entity, a variety of supernatural women, is also mentioned in the first of the two Merseburg Charms:

Other widely attested entities from the North and West Germanic folklore include elves, dwarfs, and the mare. (For more discussion on these entities, see Proto-Germanic folklore.)

The great majority of material describing Germanic mythology stems from the North Germanic record. The body of myths among the North Germanic-speaking peoples is known today as Norse mythology and is attested in numerous works, the most expansive of which are the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot; and the &quot;Prose Edda&quot;. While these texts were composed in the 13th century, they frequently quote genres of traditional alliterative verse known today as &quot;eddic poetry&quot; and &quot;skaldic poetry&quot; dating to the pre-Christian period.

West Germanic mythology (that of speakers of, e.g., Old English and Old High German) is comparatively poorly attested. Notable texts include the Old Saxon Baptismal Vow and the Old English Nine Herbs Charm. While most extant references are simply to deity names, some narratives do survive into the present, such as the Lombard origin myth, which details a tradition among the Lombards that features the deities Frea (cognate with Old Norse ) and Godan (cognate with Old Norse ). Attested in the 7th-century &quot;Origo Gentis Langobardorum&quot; and the 8th-century &quot;Historia Langobardorum&quot; from the Italian Peninsula, the narrative strongly corresponds in numerous ways with the prose introduction to the eddic poem &quot;Grímnismál&quot;, recorded in 13th-century Iceland.

Very few texts make up the corpus of Gothic and other East Germanic languages, and East Germanic paganism and its associated mythic body is especially poorly attested. Notable topics that provide insight into the matter of East Germanic paganism include the Ring of Pietroassa, which appears to be a cult object (see also Gothic runic inscriptions), and the mention of the Gothic (cognate with Old Norse &quot;Æsir&quot; &#x27;(pagan) gods&#x27;) by Jordanes.

Practices associated with the religion of the ancient Germanic peoples see fewer attestations. However, elements of religious practices are discernable throughout the textual record associated with the ancient Germanic peoples, including a focus on sacred groves and trees, the presence of seeresses, and numerous vocabulary items. The archaeological record has yielded a variety of depictions of deities, a number of them associated with depictions of the ancient Germanic peoples (see Anthropomorphic wooden cult figurines of Central and Northern Europe). Notable from the Roman period are the Matres and Matronae, some having Germanic names, to whom devotional altars were set up in regions of Germania, Eastern Gaul, and Northern Italy (with a small distribution elsewhere) that were occupied by the Roman army from the first to the fifth century.

Germanic mythology and religious practice is of particular interest to Indo-Europeanists, scholars who seek to identify aspects of ancient Germanic culture—both in terms of linguistic correspondence and by way of motifs—stemming from Proto-Indo-European culture, including Proto-Indo-European mythology. The primordial being Ymir, attested solely in Old Norse sources, makes for a commonly cited example. In Old Norse texts, the death of this entity results in creation of the cosmos, a complex of motifs that finds strong correspondence elsewhere in the Indo-European sphere, notably in Vedic mythology.

===Conversion to Christianity===
Germanic peoples began entering the Roman Empire in large numbers at the same time that Christianity was spreading there, and this connection was a major factor encouraging conversion. The East Germanic peoples, the Langobards, and the Suevi in Spain converted to Arian Christianity, a form of Christianity that believed that God the Father was superior to God the Son. The first Germanic people to convert to Arianism were the Visigoths, at the latest in 376 when they entered the Roman Empire. This followed a longer period of missionary work by both Orthodox Christians and Arians, such as the Arian Wulfila, who was made missionary bishop of the Goths in 341 and translated the Bible into Gothic. The Arian Germanic peoples all eventually converted to Nicene Christianity, which had become the dominant form of Christianity within the Roman Empire; the last to convert were the Visigoths in Spain under their king Reccared in 587.

The areas of the Roman Empire conquered by the Franks, Alemanni, and Baiuvarii were mostly Christian already, but it appears that Christianity declined there. In 496, the Frankish king Clovis I converted to Nicene Christianity. This began a period of missionizing within Frankish territory. The Anglo-Saxons gradually converted following a mission sent by Pope Gregory the Great in 595. In the 7th century, Frankish-supported missionary activity spread out of Gaul, led by figures of the Anglo-Saxon mission such as Saint Boniface. The Saxons initially rejected Christianization, but were eventually forcibly converted by Charlemagne as a result of their conquest in the Saxon Wars in 776/777.

While attempts to convert the Scandinavian peoples began in 831, they were mostly unsuccessful until the 10th and 11th centuries. The last Germanic people to convert were the Swedes, although the Geats had converted earlier. The pagan Temple at Uppsala seems to have continued to exist into the early 1100s.

==Society and culture==
===Runic writing===

Germanic speakers developed a native script, the runes (or the &quot;fuþark&quot;), and the earliest known form of which consists of 24 characters. The runes are generally held to have been used exclusively by Germanic-speaking populations. All known early runic inscriptions are found in Germanic contexts with the potential exception of one inscription, which may indicate cultural transfer between the Germanic speakers to Slavic speakers (and may potentially be the earliest known writing among Slavic speakers).

Like other indigenous scripts of Europe, the runes ultimately developed from the Phoenician alphabet, but unlike similar scripts, the runes were not replaced by the Latin alphabet by the first century BCE. Runes remained in use among the Germanic peoples throughout their history despite the significant influence of Rome.

The precise date that Germanic speakers developed the runic alphabet is unknown, with estimates varying from 100 BCE to 100 CE. Generally accepted inscriptions in the oldest attested form of the script, called the Elder Futhark, date from 200 to 700 CE. The word &quot;rune&quot; is widely attested among Germanic languages, where it developed from Proto-Germanic and held a primary meaning of &#x27;secret&#x27;, but also other meanings such as &#x27;whisper&#x27;, &#x27;mystery&#x27;, &#x27;closed deliberation&#x27;, and &#x27;council&#x27;. In most cases, runes appear not to have been used for everyday communication and knowledge of them may have generally been limited to a small group, for whom the term &quot;erilaR&quot; is attested from the sixth century onward.

The letters of the Elder Futhark are arranged in an order called the &quot;futhark&quot;, so named after its first six characters. The alphabet is supposed to have been extremely phonetic, and each letter could also represent a word or concept, so that, for instance, the f-rune also stood for (&#x27;cattle, property&#x27;). Such examples are known as &quot;Begriffsrunen&quot; (&#x27;concept runes&#x27;). Runic inscriptions are found on organic materials such as wood, bone, horn, ivory, and animal hides, as well as on stone and metal. Inscriptions tend to be short, and are difficult to interpret as profane or magical. They include names, inscriptions by the maker of an object, memorials to the dead, as well as inscriptions that are religious or magical in nature.

===Personal names===

Germanic personal names are commonly dithematic, consisting of two components that may be combined freely (such as the Old Norse female personal name &quot;Sigríðr&quot;, consisting of &#x27;victory&#x27; + &#x27;beloved&#x27;). As summarized by Per Vikstrand, &quot;The old Germanic personal names are, from a social and ideological point of view, characterized by three main features: religion, heroism, and family bonds. The religious aspect [of Germanic names] seems to be an inherited, Indo-European trace, which the Germanic languages share with Greek and other Indo-European languages.&quot;

One point of debate surrounding Germanic name-giving practice is whether name elements were considered semantically meaningful when combined. Whatever the case, an element of a name could be inherited by a male or female&#x27;s offspring, leading to an alliterative lineage (related, see alliterative verse). The runestone D359 in Istaby, Sweden provides one such example, where three generations of men are connected by way of the element , meaning &#x27;wolf&#x27; (the alliterative &quot;Haþuwulfaz&quot;, *&quot;Heruwulfaz&quot;, and &quot;Hariwulfaz&quot;). Sacral components to Germanic personal names are also attested, including elements such as *&quot;hailaga&quot;- and *&quot;wīha&quot;- (both usually translated as &#x27;holy, sacred&#x27;, see for example Vé), and deity names (theonyms). Deity names as first components of personal names are attested primarily in Old Norse names, where they commonly reference in particular the god Thor (Old Norse ).

===Poetry and legend===

The ancient Germanic-speaking peoples were a largely oral culture. Written literature in Germanic languages is not recorded until the 6th century (Gothic Bible) or the 8th century in modern England and Germany. The philologist Andreas Heusler proposed the existence of various genres of literature in the &quot;Old Germanic&quot; period, which were largely based on genres found in high medieval Old Norse poetry. These include ritual poetry, epigrammatic poetry (), memorial verses (), lyric, narrative poetry, and praise poetry. Heinrich Beck suggests that, on the basis of Latin mentions in late antiquity and the early Middle Ages, the following genres can be adduced: origo gentis (the origin of a people or their rulers), the fall of heroes (), praise poetry, and laments for the dead.

Some stylistic aspects of later Germanic poetry appear to have origins in the Indo-European period, as shown by comparison with ancient Greek and Sanskrit poetry. Originally, the Germanic-speaking peoples shared a metrical and poetic form, alliterative verse, which is attested in very similar forms in Old Saxon, Old High German and Old English, and in a modified form in Old Norse. Alliterative verse is not attested in the small extant Gothic corpus. The poetic forms diverge among the different languages from the 9th century onward.

Later Germanic peoples shared a common legendary tradition. These heroic legends mostly involve historical personages who lived during the migration period (4th–6th centuries CE), placing them in highly ahistorical and mythologized settings; they originate and develop as part of an oral tradition. Some early Gothic heroic legends are already found in Jordanes&#x27; &quot;Getica&quot; (). The close link between Germanic heroic legend and Germanic language and possibly poetic devices is shown by the fact that the Germanic speakers in Francia who adopted a Romance language, do not preserve Germanic legends but rather developed their own heroic folklore—excepting the figure of Walter of Aquitaine.

===Germanic law===

Until the middle of the 20th century, the majority of scholars assumed the existence of a distinct Germanic legal culture and law. Early ideas about Germanic law have come under intense scholarly scrutiny since the 1950s, and specific aspects of it such as the legal importance of &quot;Sippe,&quot; retinues, and loyalty, and the concept of outlawry can no longer be justified. Besides the assumption of a common Germanic legal tradition and the use of sources of different types from different places and time periods, there are no native sources for early Germanic law. The earliest written legal sources, the &quot;Leges Barbarorum&quot;, were all written under Roman and Christian influence and often with the help of Roman jurists, and contain large amounts of &quot;Vulgar Latin Law&quot;, an unofficial legal system that functioned in the Roman provinces.

As of 2023, scholarly consensus is that Germanic law is best understood in contrast with Roman law, in that whereas Roman law was &quot;learned&quot; and the same across regions, Germanic law was not learned and incorporated regional peculiarities. Common elements include an emphasis on orality, gesture, formulaic language, legal symbolism, and ritual. Some items in the &quot;Leges&quot;, such as the use of vernacular words, may reveal aspects of originally Germanic, or at least non-Roman, law. Legal historian Ruth Schmidt-Wiegand writes that this vernacular, often in the form of Latinized words, belongs to &quot;the oldest layers of a Germanic legal language&quot; and shows some similarities to Gothic.

===Warfare===

Warfare seems to have been a constant in Germanic society, including conflicts among and within Germanic peoples. There is no common Germanic word for &quot;war&quot;, and it was not necessarily differentiated from other forms of violence. Historical information on Germanic warfare almost entirely depends on Greco-Roman sources, however their accuracy has been questioned. The core of the army was formed by the comitatus (retinue), a group of warriors following a chief. As retinues grew larger, their names could become associated with entire peoples. Many retinues functioned as (mercenary units in the Roman army).

Roman sources stress, perhaps partially as a literary topos, that the Germanic peoples fought without discipline. Germanic warriors fought mostly on foot, in tight formations in close combat. Tacitus mentions a single formation as used by the &quot;Germani&quot;, the wedge (). Cavalry was rare: in the Roman period, it mostly consisted of chiefs and their immediate retinues, who may have dismounted to fight. However, East Germanic peoples such as the Goths developed cavalry forces armed with lances due to contact with various nomadic peoples. Archaeological finds, mostly in the form of grave goods, indicate that most warriors were armed with spear, shield, and often with swords. Higher status individuals were often buried with spurs for riding. The only archaeological evidence for helmets and chain mail shows them to be of Roman manufacture.

==Economy and material culture==
===Agriculture and population density===
Unlike agriculture in the Roman provinces, which was organized around the large farms known as villae rusticae, Germanic agriculture was organized around villages. When Germanic peoples expanded into northern Gaul in the 4th and 5th centuries CE, they brought this village-based agriculture with them, which increased the agricultural productivity of the land; Heiko Steuer suggests this means that Germania was more agriculturally productive than is generally assumed. Villages were not distant from each other but often within sight, revealing a fairly high population density, and contrary to the assertions of Roman sources, only about 30% of Germania was covered in forest, about the same percentage as today.

Based on pollen samples and the finds of seeds and plant remains, the chief grains cultivated in Germania were barley, oats, and wheat (both Einkorn and emmer), while the most common vegetables were beans and peas. Flax was also grown. Agriculture in Germania relied heavily on animal husbandry, primarily the raising of cattle, which were smaller than their Roman counterparts Both cultivation and animal husbandry methods improved with time, with examples being the introduction of rye, which grew better in Germania, and the introduction of the three-field system.

===Crafts===
It is unclear if there was a special class of craftsmen in Germania, however archaeological finds of tools are frequent. Many everyday items such as dishes were made out of wood, and archaeology has found the remains of wooden well construction. The 4th-century CE Nydam and Illerup ships show highly developed knowledge of ship construction, while elite graves have revealed wooden furniture with complex joinery. Products made from ceramics included cooking, drinking, and storage, vessels, as well as lamps. While originally formed by hand, the period around 1 CE saw the introduction of the potter&#x27;s wheel. Some of the ceramics produced on potter&#x27;s wheels seem to have been done in direct imitation of Roman wares, and may have been produced by Romans in Germania or by &quot;Germani&quot; who had learned Roman techniques while serving in the Roman army. The shape and decoration of Germanic ceramics vary by region and archaeologists have traditionally used these variations to determine larger cultural areas. Many ceramics were probably produced locally in hearths, but large pottery kilns have also been discovered, and it seems clear that there were areas of specialized production.

===Metalworking===

Despite the claims of Roman writers such as Tacitus that the &quot;Germani&quot; had little iron and lacked expertise in working it, deposits of iron were commonly found in Germania and Germanic smiths were skillful metalworkers. Smithies are known from multiple settlements, and smiths were often buried with their tools. An iron mine discovered at Rudki, in the Łysogóry mountains of modern central Poland, operated from the 1st to the 4th centuries CE and included a substantial smelting workshop; similar facilities have been found in Bohemia. The remains of large smelting operations have been discovered by Ribe in Jutland (4th to 6th century CE), as well as at Glienick in northern Germany and at Heeten in the Netherlands (both 4th century CE). Germanic smelting furnaces may have produced metal that was as high-quality as that produced by the Romans. In addition to large-scale production, nearly every individual settlement seems to have produced some iron for local use. Iron was used for agricultural tools, tools for various crafts, and for weapons.

Lead was needed in order to make molds and for the production of jewelry, however it is unclear if the &quot;Germani&quot; were able to produce lead. While lead mining is known from within the Siegerland across the Rhine from the Roman Empire, it is sometimes theorized that this was the work of Roman miners. Another mine within Germania was near modern Soest, where again it is theorized that lead was exported to Rome. The neighboring Roman provinces of Germania superior and Germania inferior produced a great deal of lead, which has been found stamped as (&quot;Germanic lead&quot;) in Roman shipwrecks.

Deposits of gold are not found naturally within Germania and had to either be imported or could be found having naturally washed down rivers. The earliest known gold objects made by Germanic craftsmen are mostly small ornaments dating from the later 1st century CE. Silver working likewise dates from the first century CE, and silver often served as a decorative element with other metals. From the 2nd century onward, increasingly complex gold jewelry was made, often inlaid with precious stones and in a polychrome style. Inspired by Roman metalwork, Germanic craftsmen also began working with gold and silver-gilt foils on belt buckles, jewelry, and weapons. Pure gold objects produced in the late Roman period included torcs with snakeheads, often displaying filigree and cloisonné work, techniques that dominated throughout Germanic Europe.

===Clothing and textiles===

Clothing does not generally preserve well archaeologically. Early Germanic clothing is shown on some Roman stone monuments such as Trajan&#x27;s Column and the Column of Marcus Aurelius, and is occasionally discovered in finds from in moors, mostly from Scandinavia. Frequent finds include long trousers, sometimes including connected stockings, shirt-like gowns () with long sleeves, large pieces of cloth, and capes with fur on the inside. All of these are thought to be male clothing, while finds of tubular garments are thought to be female clothing. These would have reached to the ankles and would likely have been held in place by brooches at the height of the shoulders, as shown on Roman monuments. On Roman depictions, the dress was gathered below the breast or at the waist, and there are frequently no sleeves. Sometimes a blouse or skirt is depicted below the dress, along with a neckerchief around the throat. By the middle of the 5th century CE, both men and women among the continental Germanic peoples came to wear a Roman-style tunic as their most important piece of clothing. This was secured at the waist and likely adopted due to intensive contact with the Roman world. The Romans typically depict Germanic men and women as bareheaded, although some head-coverings have been found. Although Tacitus mentions an undergarment made of linen, no examples of these have been found.

Surviving examples indicate that Germanic textiles were of high quality and mostly made of flax and wool. Roman depictions show the Germani wearing materials that were only lightly worked. Surviving examples indicate that a variety of weaving techniques were used. Leather was used for shoes, belts, and other gear. Spindles, sometimes made of glass or amber, and the weights from looms and distaffs are frequently found in Germanic settlements.

===Trade===

Archaeology shows that from at least the turn of the 3rd century CE larger regional settlements in Germania existed that were not exclusively involved in an agrarian economy, and that the main settlements were connected by paved roads. The entirety of Germania was within a system of long-distance trade. Migration-period seaborne trade is suggested by Gudme on the Danish island of Funen and other harbors on the Baltic.

Roman trade with Germania is poorly documented. Roman merchants crossing the Alps for Germania are recorded already by Caesar in the 1st century BCE. During the imperial period, most trade probably took place in trading posts in Germania or at major Roman bases. The most well-known Germanic export to the Roman Empire was amber, with a trade centered on the Baltic coast. Economically, however, amber is likely to have been fairly unimportant. The use of Germanic loanwords in surviving Latin texts suggests that besides amber (), the Romans also imported the feathers of Germanic geese () and hair dye (). Germanic slaves were also a major commodity. Archaeological discoveries indicate that lead was exported from Germania as well, perhaps mined in Roman-Germanic &quot;joint ventures&quot;.

Products imported from Rome are found archaeologically throughout the Germanic sphere and include vessels of bronze and silver, glassware, pottery, brooches; other products such as textiles and foodstuffs may have been just as important. Rather than mine and smelt non-ferrous metals themselves, Germanic smiths seem to have often preferred to melt down finished metal objects from Rome, which were imported in large numbers, including coins, metal vessels, and metal statues. Tacitus mentions in &quot;Germania&quot; chapter 23 that the Germani living along the Rhine bought wine, and Roman wine has been found in Denmark and northern Poland. Finds of Roman silver coinage and weapons might have been war booty or the result of trade, while high quality silver items may have been diplomatic gifts. Roman coinage may have acted as a form of currency as well.

==Genetics==

The use of genetic studies to investigate the Germanic past is controversial, with scholars such as Guy Halsall suggesting it could represent a hearkening back to 19th-century ideas of race. Sebastian Brather, Wilhelm Heizmann, and Steffen Patzold write that genetics studies are of great use for demographic history, but cannot give us any information about cultural history. In a 2013 book which reviewed studies made up until then, scholars noted that most Germanic speakers today have a Y-DNA that is a mixture including haplogroup I1, R1a1a, R1b-P312 and R1b-U106; however, the authors also note that these groups are older than Germanic languages and found among speakers of other languages.

==Modern reception==
The rediscovery of Tacitus&#x27;s &quot;Germania&quot; in the 1450s was used by German humanists to claim a glorious classical past for their nation that could compete with that of Greece and Rome, and to equate the &quot;Germanic&quot; with the &quot;German&quot;. While the humanists&#x27; notion of the &quot;Germanic&quot; was initially vague, later it was narrowed and used to support a notion of German(ic) superiority to other nations. Equally important was Jordanes&#x27;s &quot;Getica&quot;, rediscovered by Aeneas Sylvius Piccolomini in the mid-15th century and first printed in 1515 by Konrad Peutinger, which depicted Scandinavia as the &quot;womb of nations&quot; () from which all the historical northeastern European barbarians migrated in the distant past. While treated with suspicion by German scholars, who preferred the indigenous origin given by Tacitus, this motif became very popular in contemporary Swedish Gothicism, as it supported Sweden&#x27;s imperial ambitions. Peutinger printed the &quot;Getica&quot; together with Paul the Deacon&#x27;s &quot;History of the Lombards&quot;, so that the &quot;Germania&quot;, the &quot;Getica&quot;, and the &quot;History of the Lombards&quot; formed the basis for the study of the Germanic past. Scholars did not clearly differentiate between the Germanic peoples, Celtic peoples, and the &quot;Scythian peoples&quot; until the late 18th century with the discovery of Indo-European and the establishment of language as the primary criterion for nationality. Before that time, German scholars considered the Celtic peoples to be part of the Germanic group.

The beginning of Germanic philology proper starts around the turn of the 19th century, with Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm being the two most significant founding figures. Their oeuvre included various monumental works on linguistics, culture, and literature. Jacob Grimm offered many arguments identifying the Germans as the &quot;most Germanic&quot; of the Germanic-speaking peoples, many of which were taken up later by others who sought to equate &quot;Germanicness&quot; () with &quot;Germanness&quot; (). Grimm also argued that the Scandinavian sources were, while much later, more &quot;pure&quot; attestations of &quot;Germanness&quot; than those from the south, an opinion that remains common today. German nationalist thinkers of the völkisch movement placed a great emphasis on the connection of modern Germans to the &quot;Germania&quot; using Tacitus to prove the purity and virtue of the German people, which had allowed them to conquer the decadent Romans. German historians used the Germanic past to argue for a liberal, democratic form of government and a unified German state. Contemporary Romantic nationalism in Scandinavia placed more weight on the Viking Age, resulting in the movement known as Scandinavism.

In the late 19th century, Gustaf Kossinna developed several widely accepted theories tying archaeological finds of specific assemblages of objects. Kossina used his theories to extend Germanic identity back to the Neolithic period and to state with confidence when and where various Germanic and other peoples had migrated within Europe. In the 1930s and 40s, the Nazi Party made use of notions of Germanic &quot;purity&quot; reaching back into the earliest prehistoric times. Nazi ideologues also used the &quot;Germanic&quot; nature of peoples such as the Franks and Goths to justify territorial annexations in northern France, Ukraine, and the Crimea. Scholars reinterpreted Germanic culture to justify the Nazis&#x27; rule as anchored in the Germanic past, emphasizing noble leaders and warlike retinues who dominated surrounding peoples. After 1945, these associations led to a scholarly backlash and re-examining of Germanic origins. Many medieval specialists have even argued that scholars should avoid the term &quot;Germanic&quot; altogether since it is too emotionally charged, adding that it has been politically abused and creates more confusion than clarity.

==See also==
* List of early Germanic peoples

==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* .
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

Classical and medieval sources
* Agathias, &quot;Histories&quot;
* Bede, &quot;Ecclesiastical history of England&quot;, in Latin
* Caesar, &quot;De Bello Gallico&quot;
* Cicero, &quot;Against Piso&quot;
* Dio Cassius, &quot;Roman History&quot;
* &quot;Historia Augusta&quot;
* Jordanes, &quot;Getica&quot;
* Titus Livy, &quot;History of Rome&quot;
* Paul the Deacon, &quot;History of the Langobards&quot;, in Latin
* Pliny the Elder, &quot;Natural Histories&quot;
* Pomponius Mela, Description of the World
* Procopius, &quot;Gothic War&quot;
* Ptolemy, &quot;Geography&quot;
* Strabo, &quot;Geography&quot;
* Suetonius, &quot;12 Caesars&quot;
* Tacitus, &quot;Germania&quot;
* Tacitus, &quot;The History&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="4" end="20" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="53" end="68" title="Northern Europe" label="Northern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="72" end="91" title="Classical Antiquity" label="Classical Antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="100" end="117" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q62646" start="220" end="228" title="Germania" label="Germania"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="279" end="304" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic speaking peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="371" end="376" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="392" end="407" title="Germanic peoples" label="ancient Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="496" end="503" title="Germans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="680" end="685" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="699" end="710" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="719" end="726" title="Vistula" label="Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="757" end="763" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q755749" start="815" end="824" title="Bastarnae" label="Bastarnae"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="870" end="877" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="882" end="889" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q500099" start="1777" end="1792" title="Jastorf culture" label="Jastorf culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6606068" start="1800" end="1818" title="Pre-Roman Iron Age" label="Pre-Roman Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q193329" start="1950" end="1980" title="Grimm&amp;#x27;s law" label="First Germanic Consonant Shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="2132" end="2136" title="Celts" label="Celt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672477" start="2140" end="2146" title="Iranian peoples" label="Iranic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207761" start="2148" end="2154" title="Balts" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378782" start="2160" end="2166" title="Early Slavs" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="2392" end="2400" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="2498" end="2502" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q87779" start="2552" end="2582" title="Battle of the Teutoburg Forest" label="Battle of the Teutoburg Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q707801" start="2737" end="2753" title="Limes Germanicus" label="Limes Germanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q209851" start="2829" end="2839" title="Marcomanni" label="Marcomanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q308885" start="2844" end="2849" title="Quadi" label="Quadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q933963" start="2892" end="2908" title="Marcomannic Wars" label="Marcomannic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="3024" end="3030" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="3032" end="3037" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="3039" end="3045" title="Saxons" label="Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q132990" start="3051" end="3059" title="Alemanni" label="Alemanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q131192" start="3072" end="3088" title="Migration Period" label="Migration Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q5402094" start="3190" end="3208" title="barbarian kingdoms" label="barbarian kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="3389" end="3400" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="3422" end="3440" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122452" start="3783" end="3800" title="Germanic paganism" label="Germanic paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="3897" end="3911" title="Late Antiquity" label="Late Antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="3955" end="3967" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="4025" end="4038" title="Scandinavians" label="Scandinavians"/>
<link wikidata="Q82996" start="4119" end="4124" title="runes" label="runes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="4204" end="4216" title="Latin script" label="Latin script"/>
<link wikidata="Q467033" start="4392" end="4396" title="feud" label="feud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423355" start="4404" end="4422" title="wergild" label="blood compensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078683" start="4502" end="4514" title="Germanic law" label="Germanic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q387834" start="4638" end="4643" title="thing (assembly)" label="thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397862" start="4778" end="4796" title="alliterative verse" label="alliterative verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q105763473" start="4830" end="4844" title="Germanic heroic legend" label="shared legends"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="4901" end="4908" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q846933" start="4940" end="4957" title="Renaissance humanism" label="humanist scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="5063" end="5078" title="Romantic period" label="Romantic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793" start="5088" end="5111" title="Brothers Grimm" label="Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q263985" start="5212" end="5232" title="romantic nationalism" label="romantic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q589614" start="5428" end="5436" title="völkisch" label="völkisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="5472" end="5477" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="5963" end="5969" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35976" start="5986" end="5994" title="Illyrian language" label="Illyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q78997" start="6004" end="6018" title="Herwig Wolfram" label="Herwig Wolfram"/>
<link wikidata="Q29977" start="6048" end="6055" title="Gaulish" label="Gaulish"/>
<link wikidata="Q20242878" start="6071" end="6087" title="Wolfgang Pfeifer (etymologist)" label="Wolfgang Pfeifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35308" start="6201" end="6210" title="Old Irish" label="Old Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="6569" end="6583" title="late antiquity" label="late antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="6629" end="6635" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="6733" end="6738" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q846933" start="6882" end="6891" title="Renaissance humanism" label="humanists"/>
<link wikidata="Q133602" start="6945" end="6963" title="Carolingian period" label="Carolingian period"/>
<link wikidata="Q153080" start="7092" end="7104" title="East Francia" label="East Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="8044" end="8068" title="Germanic language family" label="Germanic language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="8241" end="8263" title="Celtic peoples" label="Celtic-speaking people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541449" start="9901" end="9915" title="Walter Goffart" label="Walter Goffart"/>
<link wikidata="Q89384" start="10186" end="10197" title="Walter Pohl" label="Walter Pohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q57111154" start="10369" end="10384" title="Leonard Neidorf" label="Leonard Neidorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="10698" end="10721" title="Fall of the Western Roman Empire" label="end of the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507961" start="11271" end="11283" title="Heiko Steuer" label="Heiko Steuer"/>
<link wikidata="Q82996" start="11552" end="11564" title="runic script" label="runic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q848960" start="11617" end="11627" title="bracteates" label="bracteates"/>
<link wikidata="Q269115" start="11632" end="11642" title="gullgubber" label="gullgubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262624" start="11850" end="11867" title="Sebastian Brather" label="Sebastian Brather"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573168" start="11869" end="11885" title="Wilhelm Heizmann" label="Wilhelm Heizmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296245" start="11890" end="11905" title="Steffen Patzold" label="Steffen Patzold"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="12005" end="12009" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="12011" end="12015" title="Thor" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131654" start="12020" end="12025" title="Frigg" label="Frigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q105763473" start="12033" end="12059" title="Germanic heroic legend" label="shared legendary tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q273854" start="12193" end="12198" title="Gauls" label="Gauls"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="12203" end="12212" title="Scythians" label="Scythians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="12217" end="12230" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="12424" end="12429" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="12440" end="12444" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q106599" start="12663" end="12669" title="Cimbri" label="Cimbri"/>
<link wikidata="Q179674" start="12674" end="12681" title="Teutons" label="Teutons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426737" start="12858" end="12876" title="Germani cisrhenani" label="Germani cisrhenani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="13064" end="13071" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167763" start="13154" end="13160" title="Tungri" label="Tungri"/>
<link wikidata="Q699675" start="13635" end="13651" title="Hercynian Forest" label="Hercynian Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="13653" end="13668" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="13714" end="13721" title="Vistula" label="Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="14124" end="14131" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q62646" start="14166" end="14180" title="Germania magna" label="Germania magna"/>
<link wikidata="Q153553" start="14271" end="14285" title="Germania Prima" label="Germania Prima"/>
<link wikidata="Q152136" start="14290" end="14306" title="Germania Secunda" label="Germania Secunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q755749" start="15213" end="15220" title="Bastarnae" label="Peucini"/>
<link wikidata="Q21095203" start="15393" end="15396" title="Osi (tribe)" label="Osi"/>
<link wikidata="Q430457" start="15401" end="15407" title="Cotini" label="Cotini"/>
<link wikidata="Q256937" start="15511" end="15516" title="Aesti" label="Aesti"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="16188" end="16192" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q162858" start="16194" end="16204" title="Sarmatians" label="Sarmatians"/>
<link wikidata="Q178054" start="16210" end="16215" title="Alans" label="Alans"/>
<link wikidata="Q19012" start="16396" end="16401" title="Getae" label="Getae"/>
<link wikidata="Q186153" start="16488" end="16497" title="Procopius" label="Procopius"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="16740" end="16755" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q283533" start="17273" end="17279" title="Mannus" label="Mannus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402038" start="17288" end="17294" title="Tuisto" label="Tuisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q297515" start="17506" end="17520" title="Pomponius Mela" label="Pomponius Mela"/>
<link wikidata="Q155085" start="17848" end="17853" title="Suebi" label="Suebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q598518" start="18009" end="18016" title="Nerthus" label="Nerthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q392085" start="18070" end="18075" title="Alcis (gods)" label="Alcis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963646" start="18094" end="18105" title="Nahanarvali" label="Nahanarvali"/>
<link wikidata="Q855704" start="18185" end="18193" title="Semnones" label="Semnones"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="19333" end="19351" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="19368" end="19396" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="Proto-Indo-European language"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="19531" end="19556" title="Proto-Germanic" label="Proto- or Common Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="19614" end="19621" title="dialect" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q193329" start="19744" end="19756" title="Grimm&amp;#x27;s law" label="Grimm&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q840690" start="19761" end="19778" title="Verner&amp;#x27;s law" label="Verner&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125709" start="19808" end="19814" title="Indo-European ablaut" label="ablaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551934" start="19829" end="19849" title="Germanic verb" label="Germanic verb system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129241" start="19862" end="19874" title="Germanic strong verb" label="strong verbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114754" start="20073" end="20085" title="Germanic parent language" label="Pre-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q206577" start="20124" end="20138" title="proto-language" label="proto-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q609074" start="20174" end="20211" title="Germanic substrate hypothesis" label="an unknown non-Indo-European language"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="20246" end="20255" title="phonology" label="phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q8096" start="20260" end="20267" title="lexicon" label="lexicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q950464" start="20336" end="20354" title="comparative method" label="comparative method"/>
<link wikidata="Q156740" start="21082" end="21090" title="Baiuvarii" label="Bauivari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="21284" end="21290" title="Julius Caesar" label="Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="21310" end="21314" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q392085" start="21419" end="21424" title="Alcis (gods)" label="Alcis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963646" start="21473" end="21484" title="Nahanarvali" label="Nahanarvali"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="21547" end="21551" title="Deer" label="stag"/>
<link wikidata="Q34396" start="21653" end="21657" title="soap" label="soap"/>
<link wikidata="Q954417" start="21748" end="21754" title="Migration Period spear" label="framea"/>
<link wikidata="Q245423" start="21859" end="21867" title="Compound (linguistics)" label="compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q82996" start="21965" end="21970" title="runes" label="runes"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="22041" end="22060" title="Cognate" label="linguistic cognates"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="22083" end="22092" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q35219" start="22094" end="22103" title="Old Saxon" label="Old Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="22108" end="22123" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q271565" start="22435" end="22452" title="Etruscan alphabet" label="Etruscan alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q989738" start="22592" end="22604" title="Negau helmet" label="Negau helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083662" start="23014" end="23025" title="tetradrachm" label="tetradrachm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780" start="23036" end="23046" title="Bratislava" label="Bratislava"/>
<link wikidata="Q215844" start="23277" end="23294" title="dialect continuum" label="dialect continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q829257" start="23418" end="23439" title="Mutual intelligibility" label="mutually intelligible"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="23535" end="23540" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="23546" end="23553" title="Vistula" label="Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="23559" end="23565" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="23580" end="23591" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="23630" end="23640" title="Common Era" label="Common Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q104238" start="24346" end="24352" title="Angles (tribe)" label="Angles"/>
<link wikidata="Q154845" start="24354" end="24359" title="Jutes" label="Jutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="24376" end="24381" title="Saxons" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q108662" start="24499" end="24503" title="East Germanic languages" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q106085" start="24505" end="24510" title="North Germanic languages" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q26721" start="24515" end="24528" title="West Germanic languages" label="West Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13137302" start="24670" end="24688" title="Northwest Germanic" label="Northwest Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621167" start="24718" end="24738" title="Germanic umlaut" label="&amp;quot;i&amp;quot;-umlaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q215844" start="24854" end="24871" title="dialect continuum" label="dialect continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q106085" start="24952" end="24966" title="North Germanic languages" label="North Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671294" start="24970" end="24985" title="Proto-Norse" label="Primitive Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423916" start="25018" end="25036" title="monophthongization" label="monophthongization"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="25325" end="25334" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306379" start="25393" end="25407" title="Younger Futhark" label="Younger Fuþark"/>
<link wikidata="Q213649" start="25434" end="25444" title="Viking Age" label="Viking Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q26721" start="25472" end="25485" title="West Germanic languages" label="West Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35219" start="25497" end="25506" title="Old Saxon" label="Old Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="25538" end="25549" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35133" start="25565" end="25576" title="Old Frisian" label="Old Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860505" start="25587" end="25595" title="Frankish language" label="Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="25606" end="25621" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q35972" start="25645" end="25656" title="Lombardic language" label="Langobardic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985215" start="25829" end="25863" title="West Germanic gemination" label="&amp;quot;j&amp;quot;-consonant gemination"/>
<link wikidata="Q152243" start="26060" end="26069" title="Rhineland" label="Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435247" start="26168" end="26190" title="Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain" label="Anglo-Saxon migrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q108662" start="26222" end="26235" title="East Germanic languages" label="East Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35722" start="26251" end="26257" title="Gothic language" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920146" start="26278" end="26296" title="Gothic runic inscriptions" label="runic inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q498766" start="26352" end="26372" title="Gothic Bible" label="Wulfila&amp;#x27;s Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q126936" start="26427" end="26445" title="Visigothic Kingdom" label="Visigothic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q150412" start="26493" end="26503" title="Burgundians" label="Burgundian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36835" start="26508" end="26525" title="Vandalic language" label="Vandalic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36211" start="26672" end="26686" title="Crimean Gothic" label="Crimean Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="27042" end="27064" title="Indo-European language" label="Indo-European language"/>
<link wikidata="Q599529" start="27244" end="27265" title="Pontic–Caspian steppe" label="Pontic–Caspian steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q933996" start="27371" end="27390" title="Corded Ware culture" label="Corded Ware culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q875115" start="27465" end="27485" title="Funnelbeaker culture" label="Funnelbeaker culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q605601" start="27517" end="27534" title="Nordic Bronze Age" label="Nordic Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114754" start="27701" end="27725" title="Germanic Parent Language" label="Germanic Parent Language"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28140" end="28150" title="Anno Domini#CE and BCE" label="common era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458559" start="28213" end="28221" title="Urheimat" label="Urheimat"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="28267" end="28290" title="Proto-Germanic language" label="Proto-Germanic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q465299" start="28370" end="28392" title="archaeological culture" label="archaeological culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q500099" start="28411" end="28426" title="Jastorf culture" label="Jastorf culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q370470" start="28868" end="28879" title="Lower Rhine" label="Lower Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650" start="28900" end="28905" title="Weser" label="Weser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423912" start="29060" end="29077" title="Przeworsk culture" label="Przeworsk culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378782" start="29141" end="29147" title="early Slavs" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262624" start="29253" end="29270" title="Sebastian Brather" label="Sebastian Brather"/>
<link wikidata="Q33328" start="29730" end="29736" title="Finnic languages" label="Finnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56463" start="29741" end="29755" title="Sámi languages" label="Sámi languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q161240" start="30022" end="30034" title="Finno-Permic languages" label="Finno-Permic"/>
<link wikidata="Q163652" start="30041" end="30052" title="Finno-Samic languages" label="Finno-Samic"/>
<link wikidata="Q121854754" start="30071" end="30090" title="Lexical Innovation" label="lexical innovations"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="30099" end="30105" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="30265" end="30279" title="Celtic peoples" label="Celtic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q208247" start="30324" end="30339" title="La Tène culture" label="La Tène culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q131848" start="30785" end="30801" title="Italic languages" label="Italic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q147356" start="31035" end="31057" title="Balto-Slavic languages" label="Balto-Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33136" start="31254" end="31260" title="Baltic languages" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="31265" end="31281" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q755749" start="31467" end="31476" title="Bastarnae" label="Bastarnae"/>
<link wikidata="Q755749" start="31481" end="31488" title="Peucini" label="Peucini"/>
<link wikidata="Q937284" start="31550" end="31567" title="Greco-Roman world" label="Greco-Roman world"/>
<link wikidata="Q622776" start="31824" end="31829" title="Sciri" label="Sciri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143233" start="31882" end="31887" title="Olbia (Pontic)" label="Olbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q459098" start="32010" end="32018" title="Ambrones" label="Ambrones"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="32108" end="32112" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="32114" end="32119" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186513" start="32124" end="32132" title="Hispania" label="Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q903199" start="32149" end="32161" title="Cimbrian War" label="Cimbrian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q316833" start="32489" end="32499" title="Ariovistus" label="Ariovistus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37776" start="32617" end="32625" title="Besançon" label="Besançon"/>
<link wikidata="Q852935" start="32651" end="32658" title="Sequani" label="Sequani"/>
<link wikidata="Q677863" start="32685" end="32690" title="Aedui" label="Aedui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628304" start="32698" end="32719" title="Battle of Magetobriga" label="Battle of Magetobriga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="32860" end="32873" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267513" start="32919" end="32935" title="Battle of Vosges (58 BC)" label="Battle of Vosges"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="33128" end="33135" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q47887" start="33149" end="33157" title="Nijmegen" label="Nijmegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143734" start="33203" end="33211" title="Tencteri" label="Tencteri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517050" start="33216" end="33224" title="Usipetes" label="Usipetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q106416" start="33626" end="33634" title="Frisians" label="Frisians"/>
<link wikidata="Q168549" start="33705" end="33711" title="Chauci" label="Chauci"/>
<link wikidata="Q268307" start="33713" end="33721" title="Cherusci" label="Cherusci"/>
<link wikidata="Q164076" start="33723" end="33729" title="Chatti" label="Chatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q155085" start="33734" end="33739" title="Suevi" label="Suevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q209851" start="33755" end="33765" title="Marcomanni" label="Marcomanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650" start="34075" end="34080" title="Weser" label="Weser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="34104" end="34108" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q61454461" start="34143" end="34151" title="Germania Antiqua" label="Germania"/>
<link wikidata="Q165144" start="34346" end="34356" title="Maroboduus" label="Maroboduus"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="34435" end="34442" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265861" start="34641" end="34656" title="Bellum Batonianum" label="Illyrian revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q68880" start="34742" end="34750" title="Arminius" label="Arminius"/>
<link wikidata="Q214765" start="34889" end="34914" title="Publius Quinctilius Varus" label="Publius Quinctilius Varus"/>
<link wikidata="Q87779" start="34922" end="34952" title="Battle of the Teutoburg Forest" label="Battle of the Teutoburg Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151405" start="36180" end="36192" title="client state" label="client state"/>
<link wikidata="Q106416" start="36276" end="36284" title="Frisians" label="Frisians"/>
<link wikidata="Q168549" start="36314" end="36320" title="Chauci" label="Chauci"/>
<link wikidata="Q164076" start="36325" end="36331" title="Chatti" label="Chatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q576364" start="36398" end="36418" title="Revolt of the Batavi" label="Revolt of the Batavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="36474" end="36478" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q470596" start="36492" end="36517" title="Year of the Four Emperors" label="Year of the Four Emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q176825" start="36523" end="36529" title="Batavi (Germanic tribe)" label="Batavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514172" start="36644" end="36661" title="Numerus Batavorum" label="Numerus Batavorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q433458" start="36730" end="36750" title="Gaius Julius Civilis" label="Gaius Julius Civilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419" start="37020" end="37029" title="Vespasian" label="Vespasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423" start="37180" end="37188" title="Domitian" label="Domitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q200565" start="37196" end="37211" title="Flavian dynasty" label="Flavian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q571790" start="37241" end="37252" title="Roman Mogontiacum" label="Mogontiacum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720" start="37258" end="37263" title="Mainz" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q146924" start="37514" end="37519" title="Limes (Roman Empire)" label="limes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="37630" end="37636" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343720" start="37698" end="37710" title="Edward James (historian)" label="Edward James"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430" start="37982" end="37997" title="Marcus Aurelius" label="Marcus Aurelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q933963" start="38013" end="38029" title="Marcomannic Wars" label="Marcomannic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q599141" start="38050" end="38065" title="Antonine plague" label="Antonine plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434" start="38480" end="38488" title="Commodus" label="Commodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q132990" start="39116" end="39124" title="Alamanni" label="Alamanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="39225" end="39230" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164460" start="39309" end="39316" title="Histria (ancient city)" label="Histria"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="39844" end="39859" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773614" start="39865" end="39876" title="Saxon Shore" label="Saxon Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q558526" start="40064" end="40069" title="Cniva" label="Cniva"/>
<link wikidata="Q524178" start="40116" end="40123" title="Taifali" label="Taifali"/>
<link wikidata="Q27047924" start="40157" end="40170" title="Philippopolis (Thrace)" label="Philippopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421082" start="40240" end="40248" title="Battle of Abritus" label="Abrittus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1830" start="40296" end="40302" title="Decius" label="Decius"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="40350" end="40362" title="Thessalonica" label="Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="40376" end="40382" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655387" start="40606" end="40617" title="Cannabaudes" label="Cannabaudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q329838" start="40700" end="40727" title="Crisis of the Third Century" label="Crisis of the Third Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q131192" start="41656" end="41672" title="Migration Period" label="Migration Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="41782" end="41786" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="41800" end="41809" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="42182" end="42193" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400317" start="42521" end="42531" title="Greuthungi" label="Greuthungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28987" start="42584" end="42593" title="Ermanaric" label="Ermanaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q131210" start="42795" end="42803" title="Dniester" label="Dniester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290818" start="42838" end="42846" title="Tervingi" label="Tervingi"/>
<link wikidata="Q312598" start="42858" end="42867" title="Athanaric" label="Athanaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q4102687" start="42883" end="42902" title="Athanaric&amp;#x27;s Wall" label="defensive earthwork"/>
<link wikidata="Q172471" start="43174" end="43180" title="Valens" label="Valens"/>
<link wikidata="Q635058" start="43258" end="43264" title="Thracia" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q199499" start="43269" end="43275" title="Moesia" label="Moesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366196" start="43356" end="43366" title="Gothic War (376-382)" label="Gothic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q431280" start="43450" end="43461" title="Marcianople" label="Marcianople"/>
<link wikidata="Q192473" start="43510" end="43530" title="Battle of Adrianople" label="Battle of Adrianople"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="43753" end="43762" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q102371" start="43822" end="43828" title="Alaric I" label="Alaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q565751" start="43934" end="43940" title="Epirus" label="Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q203636" start="44085" end="44093" title="Stilicho" label="Stilicho"/>
<link wikidata="Q452209" start="44331" end="44341" title="Radagaisus" label="Radagaisus"/>
<link wikidata="Q684915" start="44515" end="44532" title="Crossing of the Rhine" label="crossed the Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829" start="44770" end="44776" title="Speyer" label="Speyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852" start="44778" end="44783" title="Worms (city)" label="Worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q159798" start="44852" end="44860" title="Honorius (emperor)" label="Honorius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463845" start="44942" end="44953" title="Sack of Rome (410)" label="sacked Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463732" start="45085" end="45091" title="Wallia" label="Wallia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110892" start="45111" end="45122" title="Theodoric I" label="Theodoric I"/>
<link wikidata="Q201905" start="45199" end="45218" title="Constantius III" label="Flavius Constantius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341201" start="45578" end="45593" title="Crimean Goths" label="Those in Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q201706" start="45629" end="45635" title="Gepids" label="Gepids"/>
<link wikidata="Q452762" start="45798" end="45810" title="Amal dynasty" label="Amal dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q103122" start="45843" end="45853" title="Ostrogoths" label="Ostrogoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q152127" start="46090" end="46098" title="Geiseric" label="Geiseric"/>
<link wikidata="Q185476" start="46351" end="46365" title="Flavius Aetius" label="Flavius Aetius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="46560" end="46568" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q10416611" start="46680" end="46694" title="Vandal Kingdom" label="Vandal Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473124" start="46916" end="46924" title="Sapaudia" label="Sapaudia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36724" start="47178" end="47184" title="Attila" label="Attila"/>
<link wikidata="Q201706" start="47320" end="47326" title="Gepids" label="Gepids"/>
<link wikidata="Q377507" start="47357" end="47364" title="Ardaric" label="Ardaric"/>
<link wikidata="Q139808" start="47656" end="47688" title="Battle of the Catalaunian Plains" label="Battle of the Catalaunian Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q841211" start="47830" end="47845" title="Battle of Nedao" label="Battle of Nedao"/>
<link wikidata="Q558533" start="47891" end="47898" title="Valamer" label="Valamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q352995" start="48448" end="48454" title="Gildas" label="Gildas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142976" start="48519" end="48533" title="Romano-British" label="Romano-British"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="48543" end="48548" title="Picts" label="Picts"/>
<link wikidata="Q170026" start="48775" end="48790" title="Valentinian III" label="Valentinian III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463832" start="48829" end="48840" title="Sack of Rome (455)" label="sacked Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q105105" start="49334" end="49343" title="Theodoric the Great" label="Theodoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q103333" start="49434" end="49441" title="Odoacer" label="Odoacer"/>
<link wikidata="Q130601" start="49497" end="49515" title="Romulus Augustulus" label="Romulus Augustulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q183452" start="49807" end="49811" title="Zeno (emperor)" label="Zeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q82339" start="50622" end="50630" title="Clovis I" label="Clovis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q889694" start="51060" end="51067" title="Hygelac" label="Hygelac"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="51202" end="51211" title="Justinian" label="Justinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q156740" start="51287" end="51296" title="Baiuvarii" label="Baiuvarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="51564" end="51580" title="Carpathian basin" label="Carpathian basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q152877" start="51601" end="51607" title="Alboin" label="Alboin"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="51916" end="51921" title="Pannonian Avars" label="Avars"/>
<link wikidata="Q105098" start="52019" end="52028" title="Austrasia" label="Austrasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="52052" end="52057" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q41986" start="52062" end="52067" title="Meuse" label="Meuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q106577" start="52069" end="52077" title="Neustria" label="Neustria"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="52097" end="52102" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q530670" start="52108" end="52116" title="Kingdom of Burgundy" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q203645" start="52141" end="52157" title="Chalon-sur-Saône" label="Chalon-sur-Saône"/>
<link wikidata="Q931785" start="52402" end="52411" title="Pippinids" label="Pippinids"/>
<link wikidata="Q594819" start="52454" end="52474" title="mayors of the palace" label="mayors of the palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301" start="52580" end="52594" title="Charles Martel" label="Charles Martel"/>
<link wikidata="Q81212" start="52677" end="52692" title="Pepin the Short" label="Pepin the Short"/>
<link wikidata="Q133602" start="52721" end="52740" title="Carolingian dynasty" label="Carolingian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="52751" end="52762" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="52848" end="52861" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="52899" end="52905" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q315276" start="53175" end="53182" title="Agilulf" label="Agilulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q251836" start="53434" end="53443" title="Liutprand, King of the Lombards" label="Liutprand"/>
<link wikidata="Q313065" start="53719" end="53728" title="Liuvigild" label="Liuvigild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455917" start="53963" end="53994" title="Umayyad conquest of Hispania" label="a Muslim army landed at Grenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="54052" end="54069" title="Umayyad Caliphate" label="Umayyad Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="54113" end="54125" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="54205" end="54216" title="Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q105092" start="54218" end="54224" title="Mercia" label="Mercia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105313" start="54230" end="54236" title="Wessex" label="Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q164499" start="54360" end="54368" title="Wulfhere" label="Wulfhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q762675" start="54457" end="54464" title="Cenwulf" label="Cenwulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275225" start="54496" end="54509" title="Vendel period" label="Vendel period"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="54709" end="54715" title="Vikings" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q213804" start="54733" end="54744" title="Lindisfarne" label="Lindisfarne"/>
<link wikidata="Q213649" start="54762" end="54772" title="Viking Age" label="Viking Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q152243" start="55095" end="55104" title="Rhineland" label="Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="55205" end="55210" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="55212" end="55217" title="Celts" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745748" start="55223" end="55237" title="Baltic Finnic peoples" label="Finnic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="55285" end="55294" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="55296" end="55306" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="55323" end="55331" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q121617" start="55767" end="55781" title="Norse paganism" label="Norse paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q862030" start="56060" end="56097" title="List of Germanic deities" label="venerated numerous indigenous deities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379880" start="56214" end="56232" title="runic inscriptions" label="runic inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q549342" start="56342" end="56358" title="Merseburg charms" label="Merseburg charms"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="56364" end="56379" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397862" start="56392" end="56410" title="alliterative verse" label="alliterative verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="56479" end="56484" title="Odin" label="Woden"/>
<link wikidata="Q131658" start="56486" end="56492" title="Baldr" label="Balder"/>
<link wikidata="Q746454" start="56494" end="56503" title="Sinthgunt" label="Sinthgunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q654596" start="56505" end="56510" title="Sól (Germanic mythology)" label="Sunna"/>
<link wikidata="Q131654" start="56512" end="56517" title="Frigg" label="Frija"/>
<link wikidata="Q847429" start="56523" end="56528" title="Fulla" label="Volla"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="56585" end="56592" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="56654" end="56665" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="56670" end="56679" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q950464" start="56695" end="56713" title="comparative method" label="comparative method"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="56715" end="56727" title="philology" label="philologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551960" start="56816" end="56834" title="Germanic mythology" label="Germanic mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q215262" start="56999" end="57010" title="Vedic India" label="Vedic India"/>
<link wikidata="Q236092" start="57035" end="57046" title="Atharvaveda" label="Atharvaveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q174396" start="57404" end="57409" title="elf" label="elves"/>
<link wikidata="Q214045" start="57411" end="57416" title="Dwarf (folklore)" label="dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262457" start="57427" end="57431" title="mare (folklore)" label="mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q107585025" start="57477" end="57500" title="Proto-Germanic folklore" label="Proto-Germanic folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="57681" end="57696" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="57774" end="57785" title="Poetic Edda" label="Poetic Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q205882" start="57806" end="57816" title="Prose Edda" label="Prose Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="57961" end="57973" title="Poetic Edda" label="eddic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57990" end="58004" title="Skald#Skaldic poetry" label="skaldic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q439340" start="58193" end="58216" title="Old Saxon Baptismal Vow" label="Old Saxon Baptismal Vow"/>
<link wikidata="Q490230" start="58237" end="58253" title="Nine Herbs Charm" label="Nine Herbs Charm"/>
<link wikidata="Q130900" start="58425" end="58433" title="Lombards" label="Lombards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030819" start="58562" end="58588" title="Origo Gentis Langobardorum" label="Origo Gentis Langobardorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q660642" start="58621" end="58643" title="Historia Langobardorum" label="Historia Langobardorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="58659" end="58676" title="Italian Peninsula" label="Italian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429923" start="58782" end="58792" title="Grímnismál" label="Grímnismál"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126225" start="59093" end="59111" title="Ring of Pietroassa" label="Ring of Pietroassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920146" start="59157" end="59182" title="Gothic runic inscriptions" label="Gothic runic inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q170358" start="59245" end="59249" title="Æsir" label="Æsir"/>
<link wikidata="Q131548" start="59285" end="59293" title="Jordanes" label="Jordanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q30590735" start="59534" end="59568" title="Sacred trees and groves in Germanic paganism and mythology" label="a focus on sacred groves and trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477129" start="59586" end="59595" title="Seeress (Germanic)" label="seeresses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59601" end="59626" title="Proto-Germanic folklore#Other" label="numerous vocabulary items"/>
<link wikidata="Q574422" start="59783" end="59851" title="Anthropomorphic wooden cult figurines of Central and Northern Europe" label="Anthropomorphic wooden cult figurines of Central and Northern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909041" start="59892" end="59911" title="Matres and Matronae" label="Matres and Matronae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60362" end="60368" title="Motif-Index of Folk-Literature#Terminology" label="motifs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773811" start="60383" end="60410" title="Proto-Indo-European culture" label="Proto-Indo-European culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401124" start="60422" end="60451" title="Proto-Indo-European mythology" label="Proto-Indo-European mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q194497" start="60737" end="60752" title="Vedic mythology" label="Vedic mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="60876" end="60888" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="61052" end="61070" title="Arianism" label="Arian Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q207937" start="61341" end="61349" title="Nicene Creed" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q107317" start="61391" end="61398" title="Wulfila" label="Wulfila"/>
<link wikidata="Q498766" start="61470" end="61487" title="Gothic Bible" label="Bible into Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q313057" start="61706" end="61714" title="Reccared" label="Reccared"/>
<link wikidata="Q132990" start="61779" end="61787" title="Alemanni" label="Alemanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q156740" start="61793" end="61802" title="Baiuvarii" label="Baiuvarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q82339" start="61909" end="61917" title="Clovis I" label="Clovis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q42827" start="62085" end="62102" title="Gregory the Great" label="Gregory the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087692" start="62212" end="62231" title="Anglo-Saxon mission" label="Anglo-Saxon mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q160445" start="62240" end="62254" title="Saint Boniface" label="Saint Boniface"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="62346" end="62357" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q499909" start="62395" end="62405" title="Saxon Wars" label="Saxon Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496339" start="62615" end="62620" title="Geats" label="Geats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474792" start="62654" end="62671" title="Temple at Uppsala" label="Temple at Uppsala"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63243" end="63287" title="Pre-Christian Slavic writing#Evidence from archaeology" label="earliest known writing among Slavic speakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q26752" start="63372" end="63391" title="Phoenician alphabet" label="Phoenician alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005583" start="63829" end="63842" title="Elder Futhark" label="Elder Futhark"/>
<link wikidata="Q82996" start="64750" end="64763" title="Begriffsrunen" label="Begriffsrunen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397862" start="66075" end="66093" title="alliterative verse" label="alliterative verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469316" start="66100" end="66132" title="Istaby Runestone" label="runestone D359 in Istaby, Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036775" start="66556" end="66558" title="Vé (shrine)" label="Vé"/>
<link wikidata="Q12160552" start="66578" end="66585" title="theonym" label="theonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q42952" start="66734" end="66738" title="Thor" label="Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084976" start="66832" end="66844" title="orality" label="oral culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q498766" start="66926" end="66938" title="Gothic Bible" label="Gothic Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q124610" start="67006" end="67021" title="Andreas Heusler" label="Andreas Heusler"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="67175" end="67184" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1596691" start="67310" end="67323" title="Heinrich Beck (philologist)" label="Heinrich Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030803" start="67452" end="67464" title="origo gentis" label="origo gentis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="67650" end="67663" title="Indo-European" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="67886" end="67901" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="67906" end="67917" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="67945" end="67954" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q35722" start="68011" end="68017" title="Gothic language" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q105763473" start="68150" end="68169" title="Germanic heroic legend" label="legendary tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q131192" start="68250" end="68266" title="migration period" label="migration period"/>
<link wikidata="Q209815" start="68394" end="68408" title="oral tradition" label="oral tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q131548" start="68464" end="68472" title="Jordanes" label="Jordanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q146246" start="68649" end="68656" title="Francia" label="Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q666545" start="68793" end="68812" title="Walter of Aquitaine" label="Walter of Aquitaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639236" start="69122" end="69127" title="Sippe" label="Sippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="69789" end="69798" title="Roman law" label="Roman law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084976" start="69988" end="69995" title="orality" label="orality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667133" start="70843" end="70852" title="Comitatus (warband)" label="comitatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15177520" start="71096" end="71110" title="literary topos" label="literary topos"/>
<link wikidata="Q659631" start="71854" end="71864" title="chain mail" label="chain mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q252021" start="72074" end="72089" title="villa rustica" label="villae rusticae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507961" start="72340" end="72352" title="Heiko Steuer" label="Heiko Steuer"/>
<link wikidata="Q161397" start="72836" end="72843" title="Einkorn" label="Einkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q167339" start="72848" end="72853" title="emmer" label="emmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570397" start="73243" end="73261" title="three-field system" label="three-field system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183679" start="73683" end="73690" title="Woodworking joints" label="joinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128390" start="73872" end="73891" title="potter&amp;#x27;s wheel" label="potter&amp;#x27;s wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081122" start="74865" end="74873" title="Łysogóry" label="Łysogóry"/>
<link wikidata="Q322361" start="75114" end="75118" title="Ribe" label="Ribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q10019" start="75205" end="75211" title="Heeten" label="Heeten"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="75566" end="75570" title="Lead" label="Lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q580471" start="75759" end="75769" title="Siegerland" label="Siegerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149" start="75921" end="75926" title="Soest, Germany" label="Soest"/>
<link wikidata="Q153553" start="76023" end="76040" title="Germania superior" label="Germania superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q152136" start="76045" end="76062" title="Germania inferior" label="Germania inferior"/>
<link wikidata="Q897054" start="76682" end="76698" title="polychrome style" label="polychrome style"/>
<link wikidata="Q397447" start="76899" end="76903" title="torc" label="torc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001313" start="76939" end="76947" title="filigree" label="filigree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102226" start="76952" end="76961" title="cloisonné" label="cloisonné"/>
<link wikidata="Q192784" start="77183" end="77203" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Column" label="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Column"/>
<link wikidata="Q265384" start="77212" end="77237" title="Column of Marcus Aurelius" label="Column of Marcus Aurelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092661" start="77287" end="77292" title="moorland" label="moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q201714" start="78098" end="78103" title="tunic" label="tunic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45108" start="78542" end="78546" title="flax" label="flax"/>
<link wikidata="Q42329" start="78551" end="78555" title="wool" label="wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q213761" start="78767" end="78775" title="Spindle (textiles)" label="Spindles"/>
<link wikidata="Q173056" start="78832" end="78836" title="loom" label="loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q962104" start="78842" end="78849" title="distaff" label="distaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414292" start="79264" end="79269" title="Gudme" label="Gudme"/>
<link wikidata="Q26503" start="79294" end="79299" title="Funen" label="Funen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679431" start="80395" end="80412" title="non-ferrous metal" label="non-ferrous metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18686556" start="81105" end="81116" title="Guy Halsall" label="Guy Halsall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262624" start="81196" end="81213" title="Sebastian Brather" label="Sebastian Brather"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573168" start="81215" end="81231" title="Wilhelm Heizmann" label="Wilhelm Heizmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296245" start="81237" end="81252" title="Steffen Patzold" label="Steffen Patzold"/>
<link wikidata="Q202771" start="81496" end="81501" title="Y-DNA" label="Y-DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q428853" start="81530" end="81543" title="haplogroup I1 (Y-DNA)" label="haplogroup I1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81545" end="81550" title="Haplogroup R1a#R-Z282 (R1a1a1b1a) (Eastern Europe)" label="R1a1a"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81552" end="81560" title="Haplogroup R-M269#R-P312" label="R1b-P312"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81565" end="81573" title="Haplogroup R-M269#R1b1a1a2a1a1 (R-U106)" label="R1b-U106"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="81812" end="81821" title="humanism" label="humanists"/>
<link wikidata="Q131548" start="82190" end="82198" title="Jordanes" label="Jordanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250583" start="82212" end="82218" title="Getica" label="Getica"/>
<link wikidata="Q101437" start="82242" end="82268" title="Aeneas Sylvius Piccolomini" label="Aeneas Sylvius Piccolomini"/>
<link wikidata="Q60958" start="82322" end="82338" title="Konrad Peutinger" label="Konrad Peutinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390991" start="82656" end="82665" title="Gothicism" label="Gothicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q160424" start="82772" end="82787" title="Paul the Deacon" label="Paul the Deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="83159" end="83172" title="Indo-European" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620112" start="83365" end="83383" title="Germanic philology" label="Germanic philology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6701" start="83440" end="83445" title="Jacob Grimm" label="Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714" start="83450" end="83463" title="Wilhelm Grimm" label="Wilhelm Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="83652" end="83659" title="Germans" label="Germans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="84057" end="84068" title="nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q589614" start="84085" end="84093" title="völkisch" label="völkisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="84369" end="84376" title="liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q263985" start="84449" end="84469" title="Romantic nationalism" label="Romantic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q213649" start="84511" end="84521" title="Viking Age" label="Viking Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q580296" start="84558" end="84570" title="Scandinavism" label="Scandinavism"/>
<link wikidata="Q63224" start="84599" end="84614" title="Gustaf Kossinna" label="Gustaf Kossinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="84787" end="84803" title="Neolithic period" label="Neolithic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="84937" end="84947" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q252090" start="85761" end="85791" title="List of early Germanic peoples" label="List of early Germanic peoples"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12448" wikidata="Q5089" url="?curid=12448" title="Ganges">
<text>The Ganges ( ; in India: Ganga, ; in Bangladesh: Padma, ) is a trans-boundary river of Asia which flows through India and Bangladesh. The river rises in the western Himalayas in the Indian state of Uttarakhand. It flows south and east through the Gangetic plain of North India, receiving the right-bank tributary, the Yamuna, which also rises in the western Indian Himalayas, and several left-bank tributaries from Nepal that account for the bulk of its flow. In West Bengal state, India, a feeder canal taking off from its right bank diverts 50% of its flow southwards, artificially connecting it to the Hooghly River. The Ganges continues into Bangladesh, its name changing to the Padma. It is then joined by the Jamuna, the lower stream of the Brahmaputra, and eventually the Meghna, forming the major estuary of the Ganges Delta, and emptying into the Bay of Bengal. The Ganges–Brahmaputra–Meghna system is the second-largest river on earth by discharge.

The main stem of the Ganges begins at the town of Devprayag, at the confluence of the Alaknanda, which is the source stream in hydrology on account of its greater length, and the Bhagirathi, which is considered the source stream in Hindu mythology.

The Ganges is a lifeline to hundreds of millions of people who live in its basin and depend on it for their daily needs. It has been important historically, with many former provincial or imperial capitals such as Pataliputra, Kannauj, Sonargaon, Dhaka, Bikrampur, Kara, Munger, Kashi, Patna, Hajipur, Kanpur, Delhi, Bhagalpur, Murshidabad, Baharampur, Kampilya, and Kolkata located on its banks or those of its tributaries and connected waterways. The river is home to approximately 140 species of fish, 90 species of amphibians, and also reptiles and mammals, including critically endangered species such as the gharial and South Asian river dolphin. The Ganges is the most sacred river to Hindus. It is worshipped as the goddess &quot;Ganga&quot; in Hinduism.

The Ganges is threatened by severe pollution. This not only poses a danger to humans but also to many species of animals. The levels of fecal coliform bacteria from human waste in the river near Varanasi are more than 100 times the Indian government&#x27;s official limit. The Ganga Action Plan, an environmental initiative to clean up the river, has been considered a failure which is variously attributed to corruption, a lack of will in the government, poor technical expertise, poor environmental planning, and a lack of support from religious authorities.

== Course ==



The upper phase of the river Ganges begins at the confluence of the Bhagirathi and Alaknanda rivers in the town of Devprayag in the Garhwal division of the Indian state of Uttarakhand. The Bhagirathi is considered to be the source in Hindu culture and mythology, although the Alaknanda is longer, and therefore, hydrologically the source stream. The headwaters of the Alakananda are formed by snow melt from peaks such as Nanda Devi, Trisul, and Kamet. The Bhagirathi rises at the foot of Gangotri Glacier at Gomukh, at an elevation of and was mythologically referred to as residing in the matted locks of Shiva; symbolically Tapovan, which is a meadow of ethereal beauty at the feet of Mount Shivling, just away.

Although many small streams comprise the headwaters of the Ganges, the six longest and their five confluences are considered sacred. The six headstreams are the Alaknanda, Dhauliganga, Nandakini, Pindar, Mandakini and Bhagirathi. Their confluences, known as the Panch Prayag, are all along the Alaknanda. They are, in downstream order, Vishnuprayag, where the Dhauliganga joins the Alaknanda; Nandprayag, where the Nandakini joins; Karnaprayag, where the Pindar joins; Rudraprayag, where the Mandakini joins; and finally, Devprayag, where the Bhagirathi joins the Alaknanda to form the Ganges.

After flowing for through its narrow Himalayan valley, the Ganges emerges from the mountains at Rishikesh, then debouches onto the Gangetic Plain at the pilgrimage town of Haridwar. At Haridwar, a headworks diverts some of its water into the Ganges Canal, which irrigates the &quot;Doab&quot; region of Uttar Pradesh, whereas the river, whose course has been roughly southwest until this point, now begins to flow southeast through the plains of northern India.

The Ganges river follows a arching course passing through the cities of Bijnor, Kannauj, Farukhabad, and Kanpur. Along the way it is joined by the Ramganga, which contributes an average annual flow of about to the river. The Ganges joins the long River Yamuna at the Triveni Sangam at Prayagraj (previously Allahabad), a confluence considered holy in Hinduism. At their confluence the Yamuna is larger than the Ganges contributing about 58.5% of the combined flow, with an average flow of .

Now flowing east, the river meets the long Tamsa River (also called &quot;Tons&quot;), which flows north from the Kaimur Range and contributes an average flow of about . After the Tamsa, the long Gomti River joins, flowing south from the Himalayas. The Gomti contributes an average annual flow of about . Then the long Ghaghara River (Karnali River), also flowing south from the Himalayas of Tibet through Nepal joins. The Ghaghara (Karnali), with its average annual flow of about , is the largest tributary of the Ganges by discharge. After the Ghaghara confluence, the Ganges is joined from the south by the long Son River, which contributes about . The long Gandaki River, then the long Kosi River, join from the north flowing from Nepal, contributing about and , respectively. The Kosi is the third largest tributary of the Ganges by discharge, after Ghaghara (Karnali) and Yamuna. The Kosi merges into the Ganges near Kursela in Bihar.

Along the way between Prayagraj and Malda, West Bengal, the Ganges river passes the towns of Chunar, Mirzapur, Varanasi, Ghazipur, Ara, Patna, Chapra, Hajipur, Mokama, Begusarai, Munger, Sahibganj, Rajmahal, Bhagalpur, Ballia, Buxar, Simaria, Sultanganj, and Farakka. At Bhagalpur, the river begins to flow south-southeast and at Farakka, it begins its attrition with the branching away of its first distributary, the long Bhāgirathi-Hooghly, which goes on to become the Hooghly River. Just before the border with Bangladesh the Farakka Barrage controls the flow of Ganges, diverting some of the water into a feeder canal linked to the Hooghly for the purpose of keeping it relatively silt-free. The Hooghly River is formed by the confluence of the Bhagirathi River and Ajay River at Katwa, and Hooghly has a number of tributaries of its own. The largest is the Damodar River, which is long, with a drainage basin of . The Hooghly River empties into the Bay of Bengal near Sagar Island. Between Malda and the Bay of Bengal, the Hooghly river passes the towns and cities of Murshidabad, Nabadwip, Kolkata and Howrah.

After entering Bangladesh, the main branch of the Ganges river is known as the Padma. The Padma is joined by the Jamuna River, the largest distributary of the Brahmaputra. Further downstream, the Padma joins the Meghna River, the converged flow of Surma-Meghna River System taking on the Meghna&#x27;s name as it enters the Meghna Estuary, which empties into the Bay of Bengal. Here it forms the Bengal Fan, the world&#x27;s largest submarine fan, which alone accounts for 10–20% of the global burial of organic carbon.

The Ganges Delta, formed mainly by the large, sediment-laden flows of the Ganges and Brahmaputra rivers, is the world&#x27;s largest delta, at about . It stretches along the Bay of Bengal.

Only the Amazon and Congo rivers have a greater average discharge than the combined flow of the Ganges, the Brahmaputra, and the Surma-Meghna river system. In full flood only the Amazon is larger.

==Geology==
The Indian subcontinent lies atop the Indian tectonic plate, a minor plate within the Indo-Australian Plate. Its defining geological processes commenced seventy-five million years ago, when, as a part of the southern supercontinent Gondwana, it began a northeastwards drift—lasting fifty million years—across the then unformed Indian Ocean. The subcontinent&#x27;s subsequent collision with the Eurasian Plate and subduction under it, gave rise to the Himalayas, the planet&#x27;s highest mountain ranges. In the former seabed immediately south of the emerging Himalayas, plate movement created a vast trough, which, having gradually been filled with sediment borne by the Indus and its tributaries and the Ganges and its tributaries, now forms the Indo-Gangetic Plain.

The Indo-Gangetic Plain is geologically known as a foredeep or foreland basin.

==Hydrology==

Major left-bank tributaries include the Gomti River, Ghaghara River, Gandaki River and Kosi River; major right-bank tributaries include the Yamuna River, Son River, Punpun and Damodar. The hydrology of the Ganges River is very complicated, especially in the Ganges Delta region. One result is different ways to determine the river&#x27;s length, its discharge, and the size of its drainage basin.

The name &quot;Ganges&quot; is used for the river between the confluence of the Bhagirathi and Alaknanda rivers, in the Himalayas, and the first bifurcation of the river, near the Farakka Barrage and the India-Bangladesh Border. The length of the Ganges is frequently said to be slightly over long, about , or . In these cases the river&#x27;s source is usually assumed to be the source of the Bhagirathi River, Gangotri Glacier at Gomukh and its mouth being the mouth of the Meghna River on the Bay of Bengal. Sometimes the source of the Ganges is considered to be at Haridwar, where its Himalayan headwater streams debouch onto the Gangetic Plain.

In some cases, the length of the Ganges is given by its Hooghly River distributary, which is longer than its main outlet via the Meghna River, resulting in a total length of about , if taken from the source of the Bhagirathi, or , if from Haridwar to the Hooghly&#x27;s mouth. In other cases the length is said to be about , from the source of the Bhagirathi to the Bangladesh border, where its name changes to &quot;Padma&quot;.

For similar reasons, sources differ over the size of the river&#x27;s drainage basin. The basin covers parts of four countries, India, Nepal, China, and Bangladesh; eleven Indian states, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Bihar, Jharkhand, Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan, West Bengal, and the Union Territory of Delhi. The Ganges basin, including the delta but not the Brahmaputra or Meghna basins, is about , of which is in India (about 80%), in Nepal (13%), in Bangladesh (4%), and in China (3%). Sometimes the Ganges and Brahmaputra–Meghna drainage basins are combined for a total of about or . The combined Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna basin (abbreviated GBM or GMB) drainage basin is spread across Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Nepal, and China.

The Ganges basin ranges from the Himalaya and the Transhimalaya in the north, to the northern slopes of the Vindhya range in the south, from the eastern slopes of the Aravalli in the west to the Chota Nagpur plateau and the Sunderbans delta in the east. A significant portion of the discharge from the Ganges comes from the Himalayan mountain system. Within the Himalaya, the Ganges basin spreads almost 1,200 km from the Yamuna-Satluj divide along the Simla ridge forming the boundary with the Indus basin in the west to the Singalila Ridge along the Nepal-Sikkim border forming the boundary with the Brahmaputra basin in the east. This section of the Himalaya contains 9 of the 14 highest peaks in the world over 8,000m in height, including Mount Everest which is the high point of the Ganges basin. The other peaks over 8,000m in the basin are Kangchenjunga, Lhotse, Makalu, Cho Oyu, Dhaulagiri, Manaslu, Annapurna and Shishapangma. The Himalayan portion of the basin includes the south-eastern portion of the state of Himachal Pradesh, the entire state of Uttarakhand, the entire country of Nepal and the extreme north-western portion of the state of West Bengal.

The discharge of the Ganges also differs by source. Frequently, discharge is described for the mouth of the Meghna River, thus combining the Ganges with the Brahmaputra and Meghna. This results in a total average annual discharge of about , or . In other cases the average annual discharges of the Ganges, Brahmaputra, and Meghna are given separately, at about for the Ganges, about for the Brahmaputra, and about for the Meghna.
The maximum peak discharge of the Ganges, as recorded at Hardinge Bridge in Bangladesh, exceeded . The minimum recorded at the same place was about , in 1997.

The hydrologic cycle in the Ganges basin is governed by the Southwest Monsoon. About 84% of the total rainfall occurs in the monsoon from June to September. Consequently, streamflow in the Ganges is highly seasonal. The average dry season to monsoon discharge ratio is about 1:6, as measured at Hardinge Bridge. This strong seasonal variation underlies many problems of land and water resource development in the region. The seasonality of flow is so acute it can cause both drought and floods. Bangladesh, in particular, frequently experiences drought during the dry season and regularly suffers extreme floods during the monsoon.

In the Ganges Delta, many large rivers come together, both merging and bifurcating in a complicated network of channels. The two largest rivers, the Ganges and Brahmaputra, both split into distributary channels, the largest of which merge with other large rivers before themselves joining the Bay of Bengal. But this current channel pattern was not always the case. Over time the rivers in Ganges Delta have often changed course, sometimes altering the network of channels in significant ways.

Before the late 12th century the Bhagirathi-Hooghly distributary was the main channel of the Ganges and the Padma was only a minor spill-channel. The main flow of the river reached the sea not via the modern Hooghly River but rather by the Adi Ganga. Between the 12th and 16th centuries, the Bhagirathi-Hooghly and Padma channels were more or less equally significant. After the 16th century, the Padma grew to become the main channel of the Ganges. It is thought that the Bhagirathi-Hooghly became increasingly choked with silt, causing the main flow of the Ganges to shift to the southeast and the Padma River. By the end of the 18th century, the Padma had become the main distributary of the Ganges. One result of this shift to the Padma was that the Ganges now joined the Meghna and Brahmaputra rivers before emptying into the Bay of Bengal. The present confluence of the Ganges and Meghna was formed very recently, about 150 years ago.

Also near the end of the 18th century, the course of the lower Brahmaputra changed dramatically, significantly altering its relationship with the Ganges. In 1787 there was a great flood on the Teesta River, which at the time was a tributary of the Ganges-Padma River. The flood of 1787 caused the Teesta to undergo a sudden change course, an avulsion, shifting east to join the Brahmaputra and causing the Brahmaputra to shift its course south, cutting a new channel. This new main channel of the Brahmaputra is called the Jamuna River. It flows south to join the Ganges-Padma. During ancient times, the main flow of the Brahmaputra was more easterly, passing by the city of Mymensingh and joining the Meghna River. Today this channel is a small distributary but retains the name Brahmaputra, sometimes Old Brahmaputra. The site of the old Brahmaputra-Meghna confluence, in the locality of Langalbandh, is still considered sacred by Hindus. Near the confluence is a major early historic site called Wari-Bateshwar.

In the rainy season of 1809, the lower channel of the Bhagirathi, leading to Kolkata, had been entirely shut; but in the following year it opened again and was nearly of the same size as the upper channel but both however suffered a considerable diminution, owing probably to the new communication opened below the Jalanggi on the upper channel.

==Discharge==

Discharge of the Ganges River at Farakka Barrage (period from 1998/01/01 to 2023/12/31):
==History==
The first European traveller to mention the Ganges was the Greek envoy Megasthenes (ca. 350–290 BCE). He did so several times in his work Indica: &quot;India, again, possesses many rivers both large and navigable, which, having their sources in the mountains which stretch along the northern frontier, traverse the level country, and not a few of these, after uniting with each other, fall into the river called the Ganges. Now this river, which at its source is 30 stadia broad, flows from north to south, and empties its waters into the ocean forming the eastern boundary of the Gangaridai, a nation which possesses a vast force of the largest-sized elephants.&quot; (Diodorus II.37).

In 1951 a water sharing dispute arose between India and East Pakistan (now Bangladesh) after India declared its intention to build the Farakka Barrage. The original purpose of the barrage, which was completed in 1975, was to divert up to of water from the Ganges to the Bhagirathi-Hooghly distributary to restore navigability at the Port of Kolkata. It was assumed that during the worst dry season the Ganges flow would be around , thus leaving for the then East Pakistan. East Pakistan objected and a protracted dispute ensued. In 1996 a 30-year treaty was signed with Bangladesh. The terms of the agreement are complicated, but in essence, they state that if the Ganges flow at Farakka was less than then India and Bangladesh would each receive 50% of the water, with each receiving at least for alternating ten-day periods. However, within a year the flow at Farakka fell to levels far below the historic average, making it impossible to implement the guaranteed sharing of water. In March 1997, flow of the Ganges in Bangladesh dropped to its lowest ever, . Dry season flows returned to normal levels in the years following, but efforts were made to address the problem. One plan is for another barrage to be built in Bangladesh at Pangsha, west of Dhaka. This barrage would help Bangladesh better utilize its share of the waters of the Ganges.

==Religious and cultural significance==
===Embodiment of sacredness===

The Ganges is a sacred river to Hindus along every fragment of its length. All along its course, Hindus bathe in its waters, paying homage to their ancestors and their gods by cupping the water in their hands, lifting it, and letting it fall back into the river; they offer flowers and rose petals and float shallow clay dishes filled with oil and lit with wicks (diyas). On the journey back home from the Ganges, they carry small quantities of river water with them for use in rituals; Ganga Jal, literally &quot;the water of the Ganges&quot;.

The Ganges is the embodiment of all sacred waters in Hindu mythology. Local rivers are said to be &quot;like&quot; the Ganges and are sometimes called the local Ganges. The Godavari River of Maharashtra in Western India is called the Ganges of the South or the &#x27;Dakshin Ganga&#x27;; the Godavari is the Ganges that was led by the sage Gautama to flow through Central India. The Ganges is invoked whenever water is used in Hindu ritual and is therefore present in all sacred waters. Despite this, nothing is more stirring for a Hindu than a dip in the actual river, which is thought to remit sins, especially at one of the famous tirthas such as Varanasi, Gangotri, Haridwar, or the Triveni Sangam at Prayagraj. The symbolic and religious importance of the Ganges is one of the few things that Hindus, even their skeptics, have agreed upon. Jawaharlal Nehru, a religious iconoclast himself, asked for a handful of his ashes to be thrown into the Ganges. &quot;The Ganga&quot;, he wrote in his will, &quot;is the river of India, beloved of her people, round which are intertwined her racial memories, her hopes and fears, her songs of triumph, her victories and her defeats. She has been a symbol of India&#x27;s age-long culture and civilization, ever-changing, ever-flowing, and yet ever the same Ganga.&quot;

===&quot;Avatarana&quot; – Descent of Ganges===
In late May or early June every year, Hindus celebrate the &quot;karunasiri&quot; and the rise of the Ganges from earth to heaven. The day of the celebration, &quot;Ganga Dashahara&quot;, the &quot;Dashami&quot; (tenth day) of the waxing moon of the Hindu calendar month Jyeshtha, brings throngs of bathers to the banks of the river. A dip in the Ganges on this day is said to rid the bather of ten sins (dasha = Sanskrit &quot;ten&quot;; hara = to destroy) or ten lifetimes of sins. Those who cannot journey to the river, however, can achieve the same results by bathing in any nearby body of water, which, for the true believer, takes on all the attributes of the Ganges.

The &quot;karunasiri&quot; is an old theme in Hinduism with a number of different versions of the story. In the Vedic version, Indra, the Lord of Svarga (Heaven) slays the celestial serpent, Vritra, releasing the celestial liquid, &quot;soma&quot;, or the nectar of the gods which then plunges to the earth and waters it with sustenance.

In the Vaishnava version of the myth, the heavenly waters were then a river called &quot;Vishnupadi&quot; (Sanskrit: &quot;from the foot of Vishnu&quot;). As Vishnu as the avatar Vamana completes his celebrated three strides —of earth, sky, and heaven— he stubs his toe on the vault of heaven, punches open a hole and releases the &quot;Vishnupadi&quot;, which until now had been circling the cosmic egg. Flowing out of the vault, she plummets down to Indra&#x27;s heaven, where she is received by Dhruva, once a steadfast worshipper of Vishnu, now fixed in the sky as the Pole star. Next, she streams across the sky forming the Milky Way and arrives on the moon. She then flows down earthwards to Brahma&#x27;s realm, a divine lotus atop Mount Meru, whose petals form the earthly continents. There, the divine waters break up, with one stream, the Bhagirathi, flowing down one petal into Bharatavarsha (India) as the Ganges.

It is Shiva, however, among the major deities of the Hindu pantheon, who appears in the most widely known version of the &quot;avatarana&quot; story. Told and retold in the &quot;Ramayana&quot;, the &quot;Mahabharata&quot; and several Puranas, the story begins with a sage, Kapila, whose intense meditation has been disturbed by the sixty thousand sons of King Sagara. Livid at being disturbed, Kapila sears them with his angry gaze, reduces them to ashes, and dispatches them to the netherworld. Only the waters of the Ganges, then in heaven, can bring the dead sons their salvation. A descendant of these sons, King Bhagiratha, anxious to restore his ancestors, undertakes rigorous penance and is eventually granted the prize of Ganges&#x27;s descent from heaven. However, since her turbulent force would also shatter the earth, Bhagiratha persuades Shiva in his abode on Mount Kailash to receive the Ganges in the coils of his tangled hair and break her fall. The Ganges descends, is tamed in Shiva&#x27;s locks, and arrives in the Himalayas. She is then led by the waiting Bhagiratha down into the plains at Haridwar, across the plains first to the confluence with the Yamuna at Prayag and then to Varanasi, and eventually to Ganges Sagar (Ganges delta), where she meets the ocean, sinks to the netherworld, and saves the sons of Sagara. In honour of Bhagirath&#x27;s pivotal role in the &quot;avatarana&quot;, the source stream of the Ganges in the Himalayas is named Bhagirathi, (Sanskrit, &quot;of Bhagiratha&quot;).

===Redemption of the Dead===

As the Ganges had descended from heaven to earth in the Hindu tradition, she is also considered the vehicle of &quot;ascent&quot;, from earth to heaven. As the &quot;Triloka-patha-gamini&quot;, (Sanskrit: &quot;triloka&quot; = &quot;three worlds&quot;, &quot;patha&quot; = &quot;road&quot;, &quot;gamini&quot; = &quot;one who travels&quot;) of the tradition, she flows in heaven, earth, and the netherworld, and, consequently, is a &quot;tirtha&quot; or crossing point of all beings, the living as well as the dead. It is for this reason that the story of the &quot;avatarana&quot; is told at &quot;Shraddha&quot; ceremonies for the deceased in Hinduism, and Ganges water is used in Vedic rituals after death. Among all hymns devoted to the Ganges, there are none more popular than the ones expressing the worshipper&#x27;s wish to breathe his last surrounded by her waters. The &quot;Gangashtakam&quot; expresses this longing fervently:O Mother! ... Necklace adorning the worlds!Banner rising to heaven!I ask that I may leave of this body on your banks,Drinking your water, rolling in your waves,Remembering your name, bestowing my gaze upon you.
No place along her banks is more longed for at the moment of death by Hindus than Varanasi, the Great Cremation Ground, or &quot;Mahashmshana&quot;. Those who are lucky enough to die in Varanasi, are cremated on the banks of the Ganges, and are granted instant salvation. If the death has occurred elsewhere, salvation can be achieved by immersing the ashes in the Ganges. If the ashes have been immersed in another body of water, a relative can still gain salvation for the deceased by journeying to the Ganges, if possible during the lunar &quot;fortnight of the ancestors&quot; in the Hindu calendar month of Ashwin (September or October), and performing the &quot;Shraddha&quot; rites.

Hindus also perform &quot;pinda pradana&quot;, a rite for the dead, in which balls of rice and sesame seed are offered to the Ganges while the names of the deceased relatives are recited. Every sesame seed in every ball thus offered, according to one story, assures a thousand years of heavenly salvation for each relative. Indeed, the Ganges is so important in the rituals after death that the &quot;Mahabharata&quot;, in one of its popular &quot;ślokas&quot;, says, &quot;If only (one) bone of a (deceased) person should touch the water of the Ganges, that person shall dwell honoured in heaven.&quot; As if to illustrate this truism, the &quot;Kashi Khanda&quot; (Varanasi Chapter) of the Skanda Purana recounts the remarkable story of &quot;Vahika&quot;, a profligate and unrepentant sinner, who is killed by a tiger in the forest. His soul arrives before Yama, the Lord of Death, to be judged for the afterworld. Having no compensating virtue, Vahika&#x27;s soul is at once dispatched to hell. While this is happening, his body on earth, however, is being picked at by vultures, one of whom flies away with a foot bone. Another bird comes after the vulture, and in fighting him off, the vulture accidentally drops the bone into the Ganges below. Blessed by this event, Vahika, on his way to hell, is rescued by a celestial chariot which takes him instead to heaven.

===The Purifying Ganges===

Hindus consider the waters of the Ganges to be both pure and purifying. Regardless of all scientific understanding of its waters, the Ganges is always ritually and symbolically pure in Hindu culture. Nothing reclaims order from disorder more than the waters of the Ganga. Moving water, as in a river, is considered purifying in Hindu culture because it is thought to both absorb impurities and take them away. The swiftly moving Ganga, especially in its upper reaches, where a bather has to grasp an anchored chain to not be carried away, is especially purifying. What the Ganges removes, however, is not necessarily physical dirt, but symbolic dirt; it wipes away the sins of the bather, not just of the present, but of a lifetime.

A popular paean to the Ganga is the &quot;Ganga Lahiri&quot; composed by a 17th-century poet Jagannatha who, legend has it, was turned out of his Hindu Brahmin caste for carrying on an affair with a Muslim woman. Having attempted futilely to be rehabilitated within the Hindu fold, the poet finally appeals to Ganga, the hope of the hopeless, and the comforter of last resort. Along with his beloved, Jagannatha sits at the top of the flight of steps leading to the water at the famous &quot;Panchganga&quot; Ghat in Varanasi. As he recites each verse of the poem, the water of the Ganges rises one step until in the end it envelops the lovers and carries them away. &quot;I come to you as a child to his mother&quot;, begins the &quot;Ganga Lahiri&quot;. I come as an orphan to you, moist with love.I come without refuge to you, giver of sacred rest.I come a fallen man to you, uplifter of all.I come undone by disease to you, the perfect physician.I come, my heart dry with thirst, to you, ocean of sweet wine.Do with me whatever you will.

===Consort, Shakti, and Mother===
Ganga is a consort to all three major male deities of Hinduism. As Brahma&#x27;s partner she always travels with him in the form of water in his kamandalu (water-pot). She is also Vishnu&#x27;s consort. Not only does she emanate from his foot as &quot;Vishnupadi&quot; in the &quot;avatarana&quot; story, but is also, with Sarasvati and Lakshmi, one of his co-wives. In one popular story, envious of being outdone by each other, the co-wives begin to quarrel. While Lakshmi attempts to mediate the quarrel, Ganga and Sarasvati, heap misfortune on each other. They curse each other to become rivers, and to carry within them, by washing, the sins of their human worshippers. Soon their husband, Vishnu, arrives and decides to calm the situation by separating the goddesses. He orders Sarasvati to marry Brahma, Ganga to marry Shiva, and Lakshmi, as the blameless conciliator, to remain as his own wife. Ganga and Sarasvati, however, are so distraught at this dispensation, and wail so loudly, that Vishnu is forced to take back his words. Consequently, in their lives as rivers they are still thought to be with him.
It is Shiva&#x27;s relationship with Ganga, that is the best-known in Ganges mythology. Her descent, the &quot;avatarana&quot; is not a one-time event, but a continuously occurring one in which she is forever falling from heaven into his locks and being forever tamed. Shiva, is depicted in Hindu iconography as &quot;Gangadhara&quot;, the &quot;Bearer of the Ganga&quot;, with Ganga, shown as spout of water, rising from his hair. The Shiva-Ganga relationship is both perpetual and intimate. Shiva is sometimes called &quot;Uma-Ganga-Patiswara&quot; (&quot;Husband and Lord of Uma (Parvati) and Ganga&quot;), and Ganga often arouses the jealousy of Shiva&#x27;s better-known consort.

Ganga is the &quot;shakti&quot; or the moving, restless, rolling energy in the form of which the otherwise reclusive and unapproachable Shiva appears on earth. As water, this moving energy can be felt, tasted, and absorbed. The war-god Skanda addresses the sage Agastya in the &quot;Kashi Khand&quot; of the &quot;Skanda Purana&quot; in these words: One should not be amazed ... that this Ganges is really Power, for is she not the Supreme Shakti of the Eternal Shiva, taken in the form of water?This Ganges, filled with the sweet wine of compassion, was sent out for the salvation of the world by Shiva, the Lord of the Lords.Good people should not think this Triple-Pathed River to be like the thousand other earthly rivers, filled with water.

The Ganga is also the mother, the &quot;Ganga Mata&quot; (&quot;mata&quot;=&quot;mother&quot;) of Hindu worship and culture, accepting all and forgiving all. Unlike other goddesses, she has no destructive or fearsome aspect, destructive though she might be as a river in nature. She is also a mother to other gods. She accepts Shiva&#x27;s incandescent seed from the fire-god Agni, which is too hot for this world and cools it in her waters. This union produces Skanda, or Kartikeya, the god of war. In the &quot;Mahabharata&quot;, she is married to Shantanu, and the mother of heroic warrior-patriarch, Bhishma. When Bhishma is mortally wounded in battle, Ganga comes out of the water in human form and weeps uncontrollably over his body.

The Ganges is the distilled lifeblood of the Hindu tradition, of its divinities, holy books, and enlightenment. As such, her worship does not require the usual rites of invocation (&quot;avahana&quot;) at the beginning and dismissal (&quot;visarjana&quot;) at the end, required in the worship of other gods. Her divinity is immediate and everlasting.

===Ganges in classical Indian iconography===
Early in ancient Indian culture, the river Ganges was associated with fecundity, its redeeming waters, and its rich silt providing sustenance to all who lived along its banks. A counterpoise to the dazzling heat of the Indian summer, the Ganges came to be imbued with magical qualities and to be revered in anthropomorphic form. By the 5th century CE, an elaborate mythology surrounded the Ganges, now a goddess in her own right, and a symbol for all rivers of India. Hindu temples all over India had statues and reliefs of the goddess carved at their entrances, symbolically washing the sins of arriving worshippers and guarding the gods within. As protector of the sanctum sanctorum, the goddess soon came to be depicted with several characteristic accessories: the &quot;makara&quot; (a crocodile-like undersea monster, often shown with an elephant-like trunk), the &quot;kumbha&quot; (an overfull vase), various overhead parasol-like coverings, and a gradually increasing retinue of humans.

Central to the goddess&#x27;s visual identification is the &quot;makara&quot;, which is also her &quot;vahana&quot;, or mount. An ancient symbol in India, it pre-dates all appearances of the goddess Ganga in art. The &quot;makara&quot; has a dual symbolism. On the one hand, it represents the life-affirming waters and plants of its environment; on the other, it represents fear, both fear of the unknown which it elicits by lurking in those waters, and real fear which it instils by appearing in sight. The earliest extant unambiguous pairing of the &quot;makara&quot; with Ganga is at the Udayagiri Caves in Central India (circa 400 CE). Here, in the Cave V, flanking the main figure of Vishnu shown in his boar incarnation, two river goddesses, Ganga and Yamuna appear atop their respective mounts, &quot;makara&quot; and &quot;kurma&quot; (a turtle or tortoise).

The &quot;makara&quot; is often accompanied by a &quot;gana&quot;, a small boy or child, near its mouth, as, for example, shown in the Gupta period relief from Besnagar, Central India, in the left-most frame above. The &quot;gana&quot; represents both posterity and development (&quot;udbhava&quot;). The pairing of the fearsome, life-destroying &quot;makara&quot; with the youthful, life-affirming &quot;gana&quot; speaks to two aspects of the Ganges herself. Although she has provided sustenance to millions, she has also brought hardship, injury, and death by causing major floods along her banks. The goddess Ganga is also accompanied by a dwarf attendant, who carries a cosmetic bag, and on whom she sometimes leans, as if for support. (See, for example, frames 1, 2, and 4 above.)

The &quot;purna kumbha&quot; or full pot of water is the second most discernible element of the Ganga iconography. Appearing first also in the relief in the Udayagiri Caves (5th century), it gradually appeared more frequently as the theme of the goddess matured. By the 7th century it had become an established feature, as seen, for example, in the Dashavatara temple, Deogarh, Uttar Pradesh (7th century), the Trimurti temple, Badoli, Chittorgarh, Rajasthan, and at the Lakshmaneshwar temple, Kharod, Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh, (9th or 10th century), and seen very clearly in frame 3 above and less clearly in the remaining frames. Worshipped even today, the full pot is emblematic of the formless Brahman, as well as of woman, of the womb, and of birth. Furthermore, The river goddesses Ganga and Saraswati were both born from Brahma&#x27;s pot, containing the celestial waters.

In her earliest depictions at temple entrances, the goddess Ganga appeared standing beneath the overhanging branch of a tree, as seen as well in the Udayagiri caves. However, soon the tree cover had evolved into a &quot;chatra&quot; or parasol held by an attendant, for example, in the 7th-century Dasavatara temple at Deogarh. (The parasol can be clearly seen in frame 3 above; its stem can be seen in frame 4, but the rest has broken off.) The cover undergoes another transformation in the temple at Kharod, Bilaspur (9th or 10th century), where the parasol is lotus-shaped, and yet another at the Trimurti temple at Badoli where the parasol has been replaced entirely by a lotus.

As the iconography evolved, sculptors, especially in central India, were producing animated scenes of the goddess, replete with an entourage and suggestive of a queen en route to a river to bathe. A relief similar to the depiction in frame 4 above, is described in as follows: A typical relief of about the ninth century that once stood at the entrance of a temple, the river goddess Ganga is shown as a voluptuously endowed lady with a retinue. Following the iconographic prescription, she stands gracefully on her composite &quot;makara&quot; mount and holds a water pot. The dwarf attendant carries her cosmetic bag, and a ... female holds the stem of a giant lotus leaf that serves as her mistress&#x27;s parasol. The fourth figure is a male guardian. Often in such reliefs, the &quot;makara&quot; tail is extended with great flourish into a scrolling design symbolizing both vegetation and water.

===Kumbh Mela===
Kumbh Mela is a mass Hindu pilgrimage in which Hindus gather at the Ganges River. The normal Kumbh Mela is celebrated every 3 years, the &quot;Ardh&quot; (half) Kumbh is celebrated every six years at Haridwar and Prayagraj, the &quot;Purna&quot; (complete) Kumbh takes place every twelve years at four places (Triveni Sangam (Prayagraj), Haridwar, Ujjain, and Nashik). The &quot;Maha&quot; (great) Kumbh Mela which comes after 12 &#x27;Purna Kumbh Melas&#x27;, or 144 years, is held at Prayagraj.

The major event of the festival is ritual bathing at the banks of the river. Other activities include religious discussions, devotional singing, mass feeding of holy men and women and the poor, and religious assemblies where doctrines are debated and standardized. Kumbh Mela is the most sacred of all the pilgrimages. Thousands of holy men and women attend, and the auspiciousness of the festival is in part attributable to this. The sadhus are seen clad in saffron sheets with ashes and powder dabbed on their skin per the requirements of ancient traditions. Some called &quot;naga sanyasis&quot;, may not wear any clothes.

==Irrigation==
The Ganges and its all tributaries, especially the Yamuna, have been used for irrigation since ancient times. Dams and canals were common in the Gangetic plain by the 4th century BCE. The Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna basin has a huge hydroelectric potential, on the order of 200,000 to 250,000 megawatts, nearly half of which could easily be harnessed. As of 1999, India tapped about 12% of the hydroelectric potential of the Ganges and just 1% of the vast potential of the Brahmaputra.

===Canals===
Megasthenes, a Greek ethnographer who visited India during the 3rd century BCE when Mauryans ruled India described the existence of canals in the Gangetic plain. Kautilya (also known as Chanakya), an advisor to Chandragupta Maurya, the founder of Maurya Empire, included the destruction of dams and levees as a strategy during the war. Firuz Shah Tughlaq had many canals built, the longest of which, , was built in 1356 on the Yamuna River. Now known as the Western Yamuna Canal, it has fallen into disrepair and been restored several times. The Mughal emperor Shah Jahan built an irrigation canal on the Yamuna River in the early 17th century. It fell into disuse until 1830, when it was reopened as the Eastern Yamuna Canal, under British control. The reopened canal became a model for the Upper Ganges Canal and all following canal projects.

The first British canal in India (which did not have Indian antecedents) was the Ganges Canal built between 1842 and 1854.
Contemplated first by Col. John Russell Colvin in 1836, it did not at first elicit much enthusiasm from its eventual architect Sir Proby Thomas Cautley, who balked at the idea of cutting a canal through extensive low-lying land to reach the drier upland destination. However, after the Agra famine of 1837–38, during which the East India Company&#x27;s administration spent Rs. 2,300,000 on famine relief, the idea of a canal became more attractive to the company&#x27;s budget-conscious Court of Directors. In 1839, the Governor General of India, Lord Auckland, with the Court&#x27;s assent, granted funds to Cautley for a full survey of the swath of land that underlay and fringed the projected course of the canal. The Court of Directors, moreover, considerably enlarged the scope of the projected canal, which, in consequence of the severity and geographical extent of the famine, they now deemed to be the entire Doab region.

The enthusiasm, however, proved to be short-lived. Auckland&#x27;s successor as Governor-General, Lord Ellenborough, appeared less receptive to large-scale public works, and for the duration of his tenure, withheld major funds for the project. Only in 1844, when a new Governor-General, Lord Hardinge, was appointed, did official enthusiasm and funds return to the Ganges canal project. Although the intervening impasse had seemingly affected Cautley&#x27;s health and required him to return to Britain in 1845 for recuperation, his European sojourn gave him an opportunity to study contemporary hydraulic works in the United Kingdom and Italy. By the time of his return to India even more supportive men were at the helm, both in the North-Western Provinces, with James Thomason as Lt. Governor, and in British India with Lord Dalhousie as Governor-General. Canal construction, under Cautley&#x27;s supervision, now went into full swing. A long canal, with another of branch lines, eventually stretched between the headworks in Haridwar, splitting into two branches below Aligarh, and its two confluences with the Yamuna (Jumna in map) mainstem in Etawah and the Ganges in Kanpur (Cawnpore in map). The Ganges Canal, which required a total capital outlay of £2.15 million, was officially opened in 1854 by Lord Dalhousie. According to historian Ian Stone: It was the largest canal ever attempted in the world, five times greater in its length than all the main irrigation lines of Lombardy and Egypt put together, and longer by a third than even the largest USA navigation canal, the Pennsylvania Canal.

===Dams and barrages===
A major barrage at Farakka was opened on 21 April 1975, It is located close to the point where the main flow of the river enters Bangladesh, and the tributary Hooghly (also known as Bhagirathi) continues in West Bengal past
Kolkata. This barrage, which feeds the Hooghly branch of the river by a long feeder canal, and its water flow management has been a long-lingering source of dispute with Bangladesh. Indo-Bangladesh Ganges Water Treaty signed in December 1996 addressed some of the water sharing issues between India and Bangladesh. There is Lav Khush Barrage across the River Ganges in Kanpur.

Tehri Dam was constructed on Bhagirathi River, a tributary of the Ganges. It is located 1.5 km downstream of Ganesh Prayag, the place where Bhilangana meets Bhagirathi. Bhagirathi is called the Ganges after Devprayag. Construction of the dam in an earthquake-prone area was controversial.

Bansagar Dam was built on the Sone River, a tributary of the Ganges for both irrigation and hydroelectric power generation. Ganges floodwaters along with Brahmaputra waters can be supplied to most of its right side basin area along with central and south India by constructing a coastal reservoir to store water on the Bay of Bengal sea area.

==Economy==
The Ganges Basin with its fertile soil is instrumental to the agricultural economies of India and Bangladesh. The Ganges and its tributaries provide a perennial source of irrigation to a large area. Chief crops cultivated in the area include rice, sugarcane, lentils, oil seeds, potatoes, and wheat. Along the banks of the river, the presence of swamps and lakes provides a rich growing area for crops such as legumes, chillies, mustard, sesame, sugarcane, and jute. There are also many fishing opportunities along the river, though it remains highly polluted. Also, the major industrial towns of Unnao and Kanpur, situated on the banks of the river with the predominance of tanning industries add to the pollution.

===Tourism===
Tourism is another related activity. Three towns holy to Hinduism—Haridwar, Prayagraj, and Varanasi—attract millions of pilgrims to its waters to take a dip in the Ganges, which is believed to cleanse oneself of sins and help attain salvation. The rapids of the Ganges are also popular for river rafting in the town of Rishikesh, attracting adventure seekers in the summer months. Several cities such as Kanpur, Kolkata and Patna have also developed riverfront walkways along the banks to attract tourists.

==Ecology and environment==
Human development, mostly agriculture, has replaced nearly all of the original natural vegetation of the Ganges basin. More than 95% of the upper Gangetic Plain has been degraded or converted to agriculture or urban areas. Only one large block of relatively intact habitat remains, running along the Himalayan foothills and including Rajaji National Park, Jim Corbett National Park, and Dudhwa National Park. As recently as the 16th and 17th centuries the upper Gangetic Plain harboured impressive populations of wild Asian elephants (&quot;Elephas maximus&quot;), Bengal tigers (&quot;Panthera t. tigris&quot;), Indian rhinoceros (&quot;Rhinoceros unicornis&quot;), gaurs (&quot;Bos gaurus&quot;), barasinghas (&quot;Rucervus duvaucelii&quot;), sloth bears (&quot;Melursus ursinus&quot;) and Indian lions (&quot;Panthera leo leo&quot;). In the 21st century there are few large wild animals, mostly deer, wild boars, wildcats, and small numbers of Indian wolves, golden jackals, and red and Bengal foxes. Bengal tigers survive only in the Sundarbans area of the Ganges Delta. The Sundarbands freshwater swamp ecoregion, however, is nearly extinct. The Sundarbans mangroves (&quot;Heritiera fomes&quot;) also grow in the Sundarbans area of the Ganges Delta. Threatened mammals in the upper Gangetic Plain include the tiger, elephant, sloth bear, and four-horned antelope (&quot;Tetracerus quadricornis&quot;).

Many types of birds are found throughout the basin, such as myna, &quot;Psittacula&quot; parakeets, crows, kites, partridges, and fowls. Ducks and snipes migrate across the Himalayas during the winter, attracted in large numbers to wetland areas. There are no endemic birds in the upper Gangetic Plain. The great Indian bustard (&quot;Ardeotis nigriceps&quot;) and lesser florican (&quot;Sypheotides indicus&quot;) are considered globally threatened.

The natural forest of the upper Gangetic Plain has been so thoroughly eliminated it is difficult to assign a natural vegetation type with certainty. There are a few small patches of forest left, and they suggest that much of the upper plains may have supported a tropical moist deciduous forest with sal (&quot;Shorea robusta&quot;) as a climax species.

A similar situation is found in the lower Gangetic Plain, which includes the lower Brahmaputra River. The lower plains contain more open forests, which tend to be dominated by &quot;Bombax ceiba&quot; in association with &quot;Albizzia procera&quot;, &quot;Duabanga grandiflora&quot;, and &quot;Sterculia vilosa&quot;. There are early seral forest communities that would eventually become dominated by the climax species sal (&quot;Shorea robusta&quot;) if forest succession was allowed to proceed. In most places forests fail to reach climax conditions due to human causes. The forests of the lower Gangetic Plain, despite thousands of years of human settlement, remained largely intact until the early 20th century. Today only about 3% of the ecoregion is under natural forest and only one large block, south of Varanasi, remains. There are over forty protected areas in the ecoregion, but over half of these are less than . The fauna of the lower Gangetic Plain is similar to the upper plains, with the addition of a number of other species such as the smooth-coated otter (&quot;Lutrogale perspicillata&quot;) and the large Indian civet (&quot;Viverra zibetha&quot;).

===Fish===
It has been estimated that about 350 fish species live in the entire Ganges drainage, including several endemics. In a major 2007–2009 study of fish in the Ganges basin (including the river itself and its tributaries, but excluding the Brahmaputra and Meghna basins), a total of 143 fish species were recorded, including 10 non-native introduced species. The most diverse orders are Cypriniformes (barbs and allies), Siluriformes (catfish) and Perciformes (perciform fish), each comprising about 50%, 23% and 14% of the total fish species in the drainage.

There are distinct differences between the different sections of the river basin, but Cyprinidae is the most diverse throughout. In the upper section (roughly equalling the basin parts in Uttarakhand) more than 50 species have been recorded and Cyprinidae alone accounts for almost 80% those, followed by Balitoridae (about 15.6%) and Sisoridae (about 12.2%). Sections of the Ganges basin at altitudes above above sea level are generally without fish. Typical genera approaching this altitude are &quot;Schizothorax&quot;, &quot;Tor&quot;, &quot;Barilius&quot;, &quot;Nemacheilus&quot; and &quot;Glyptothorax&quot;. About 100 species have been recorded from the middle section of the basin (roughly equalling the sections in Uttar Pradesh and parts of Bihar) and more than 55% of these are in family Cyprinidae, followed by Schilbeidae (about 10.6%) and Clupeidae (about 8.6%). The lower section (roughly equalling the basin in parts of Bihar and West Bengal) includes major floodplains and is home to almost 100 species. About 46% of these are in the family Cyprinidae, followed by Schilbeidae (about 11.4%) and Bagridae (about 9%).

The Ganges basin supports major fisheries, but these have declined in recent decades. In the Prayagraj region in the middle section of the basin, catches of carp fell from 424.91 metric tons in 1961–1968 to 38.58 metric tons in 2001–2006, and catches of catfish fell from 201.35 metric tons in 1961–1968 to 40.56 metric tons in 2001–2006. In the Patna region in the lower section of the basin, catches of carp fell from 383.2 metric tons to 118, and catfish from 373.8 metric tons to 194.48. Some of the fish commonly caught in fisheries include catla (&quot;Catla catla&quot;), golden mahseer (&quot;Tor putitora&quot;), tor mahseer (&quot;Tor tor&quot;), rohu (&quot;Labeo rohita&quot;), walking catfish (&quot;Clarias batrachus&quot;), pangas catfish (&quot;Pangasius pangasius&quot;), goonch catfish (&quot;Bagarius&quot;), snakeheads (&quot;Channa&quot;), bronze featherback (&quot;Notopterus notopterus&quot;) and milkfish (&quot;Chanos chanos&quot;).

The Ganges basin is home to about 30 fish species that are listed as threatened with the primary issues being overfishing (sometimes illegal), pollution, water abstraction, siltation and invasive species. Among the threatened species is the critically endangered Ganges shark (&quot;Glyphis gangeticus&quot;). Several fish species migrate between different sections of the river, but these movements may be prevented by the building of dams.

===Crocodilians and turtles===
The main sections of the Ganges River are home to the gharial (&quot;Gavialis gangeticus&quot;) and mugger crocodile (&quot;Crocodylus palustris&quot;), and the Ganges delta is home to the saltwater crocodile (&quot;C. porosus&quot;). Among the numerous aquatic and semi-aquatic turtles in the Ganges basin are the northern river terrapin (&quot;Batagur baska&quot;; only in the lowermost section of the basin), three-striped roofed turtle (&quot;B. dhongoka&quot;), red-crowned roofed turtle (&quot;B. kachuga&quot;), black pond turtle (&quot;Geoclemys hamiltonii&quot;), Brahminy river turtle (&quot;Hardella thurjii&quot;), Indian black turtle (&quot;Melanochelys trijuga&quot;), Indian eyed turtle (&quot;Morenia petersi&quot;), brown roofed turtle (&quot;Pangshura smithii&quot;), Indian roofed turtle (&quot;Pangshura tecta&quot;), Indian tent turtle (&quot;Pangshura tentoria&quot;), Indian flapshell turtle (&quot;Lissemys punctata&quot;), Indian narrow-headed softshell turtle (&quot;Chitra indica&quot;), Indian softshell turtle (&quot;Nilssonia gangetica&quot;), Indian peacock softshell turtle (&quot;N. hurum&quot;) and Cantor&#x27;s giant softshell turtle (&quot;Pelochelys cantorii&quot;; only in the lowermost section of Ganges basin). Most of these are seriously threatened.

===Ganges river dolphin===

The river&#x27;s most famed faunal member is the freshwater Ganges river dolphin (&quot;Platanista gangetica gangetica&quot;), which has been declared India&#x27;s national aquatic animal.

This dolphin used to exist in large schools near urban centres in both the Ganges and Brahmaputra rivers but is now seriously threatened by pollution, dam construction and improper fishing methods. Their numbers have now dwindled to a quarter of their numbers of fifteen years before, and they have become extinct in the Ganges&#x27; main tributaries. A 2012 survey by the World Wildlife Fund found only 3,000 left in the water catchment of both river systems.

The Ganges river dolphin is one of only five true freshwater dolphins in the world. The other four are the baiji (&quot;Lipotes vexillifer&quot;) of the Yangtze River in China, now likely extinct; the Indus River dolphin of the Indus River in Pakistan; the Amazon river dolphin of the Amazon River in South America; and the Araguaian river dolphin (not considered a separate species until 2014) of the Araguaia–Tocantins basin in Brazil. There are several marine dolphins whose ranges include some freshwater habitats, but these five are the only dolphins who live only in freshwater rivers and lakes.

=== Effects of climate change ===
The Tibetan Plateau contains the world&#x27;s third-largest store of ice. Qin Dahe, the former head of the China Meteorological Administration, said that the recent fast pace of melting and warmer temperatures will be good for agriculture and tourism in the short term; but issued a strong warning:

In 2007, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), in its Fourth Report, stated that the Himalayan glaciers which feed the river were at risk of melting by 2035. The IPCC has now withdrawn that prediction, as the original source admitted that it was speculative and the cited source was not a peer-reviewed finding. In its statement, the IPCC stands by its general findings relating to the Himalayan glaciers being at risk from global warming (with consequent risks to water flow into the Gangetic basin). Many studies have suggested that climate change will affect the water resources in the Ganges river basin including increased summer (monsoon) flow, and peak runoff could result in an increased risk of flooding.

==Pollution and environmental concerns==


The Ganges suffers from extreme pollution levels, caused by the 400 million people who live close to the river. Sewage from many cities along the river&#x27;s course, industrial waste and religious offerings wrapped in non-degradable plastics add large amounts of pollutants to the river as it flows through densely populated areas. The problem is exacerbated by the fact that many poorer people rely on the river on a daily basis for bathing, washing, and cooking. The World Bank estimates that the health costs of water pollution in India equal three percent of India&#x27;s GDP. It has also been suggested that eighty percent of all illnesses in India and one-third of deaths can be attributed to water-borne diseases.

Varanasi, a city of one million people that many pilgrims visit to take a &quot;holy dip&quot; in the Ganges, releases around 200 million liters of untreated human sewage into the river each day, leading to large concentrations of fecal coliform bacteria. According to official standards, water safe for bathing should not contain more than 500 fecal coliforms per 100 ml, yet upstream of Varanasi&#x27;s ghats the river water already contains 120 times as much, 60,000 fecal coliform bacteria per 100 ml.

After the cremation of the deceased at Varanasi&#x27;s ghats, the bones and ashes are immersed into the Ganges. However, in the past thousands of uncremated bodies were thrown into the Ganges during cholera epidemics, spreading the disease. Even today, holy men, pregnant women, people with leprosy or chicken pox, people who have been bitten by snakes, people who have committed suicide, the poor, and children under 5 are not cremated at the ghats but are left to float free, to decompose in the waters. In addition, those who cannot afford the large amount of wood needed to incinerate the entire body, leave behind many half-burned body parts.

After passing through Varanasi, and receiving 32 streams of raw sewage from the city, the concentration of fecal coliforms in the river&#x27;s waters rises from 60,000 to 1.5 million, with observed peak values of 100 million per 100 ml. Drinking and bathing in its waters therefore carries a high risk of infection.

Between 1985 and 2000, Rs. 10 billion, around US$226 million, or less than 4 cents per person per year, were spent on the Ganga Action Plan, an environmental initiative that was &quot;the largest single attempt to clean up a polluted river anywhere in the world&quot;. The Ganga Action Plan has been described variously as a &quot;failure&quot; and a &quot;major failure&quot;.

According to one study, 
The Ganga Action Plan, which was taken on priority and with much enthusiasm, was delayed for two years. The expenditure was almost doubled. But the result was not very appreciable. Much expenditure was done on political propaganda. The concerning governments and the related agencies were not very prompt to make it a success. The public of the areas was not taken into consideration. The release of urban and industrial wastes in the river was not controlled fully. The flowing of dirty water through drains and sewers were not adequately diverted. The continuing customs of burning dead bodies, throwing carcasses, washing of dirty clothes by washermen, and immersion of idols and cattle wallowing were not checked. Very little provision of public latrines was made and the open defecation of lakhs of people continued along the riverside. All these made the Action Plan a failure.

The failure of the Ganga Action Plan has also been variously attributed to &quot;environmental planning without proper understanding of the human-environment interactions&quot;, Indian &quot;traditions and beliefs&quot;, &quot;corruption and a lack of technical knowledge&quot; and &quot;lack of support from religious authorities&quot;.

In December 2009 the World Bank agreed to loan India US$1 billion over the next five years to help save the river. According to 2010 Planning Commission estimates, an investment of almost Rs. 70 billion (Rs. 70 billion, approximately US$1.5 billion) is needed to clean up the river.

In November 2008, the Ganges, alone among India&#x27;s rivers, was declared a &quot;National River&quot;, facilitating the formation of a National Ganga River Basin Authority that would have greater powers to plan, implement and monitor measures aimed at protecting the river.

In July 2014, the Government of India announced an integrated Ganges-development project titled &quot;Namami Gange Programme&quot; and allocated 2,037 crore for this purpose. The main objectives of the Namami Gange project is to improve the water quality by the abatement of pollution and rejuvenation of river Ganga by creating infrastructures like sewage treatment plants, river surface cleaning, biodiversity conservation, afforestation, and public awareness.

In March 2017 the High Court of Uttarakhand declared the Ganges River a legal &quot;person&quot;, in a move that according to one newspaper, &quot;could help in efforts to clean the pollution-choked rivers&quot;. , the ruling has been commented on in Indian newspapers to be hard to enforce, that experts do not anticipate immediate benefits, that the ruling is &quot;hardly game changing&quot;, that experts believe &quot;any follow-up action is unlikely&quot;, and that the &quot;judgment is deficient to the extent it acted without hearing others (in states outside Uttarakhand) who have stakes in the matter.&quot;

The incidence of water-borne and enteric diseases—such as gastrointestinal disease, cholera, dysentery, hepatitis A and typhoid—among people who use the river&#x27;s waters for bathing, washing dishes and brushing teeth is high, at an estimated 66% per year.

Recent studies by Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) say that the river is so full of killer pollutants that those living along its banks in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, and Bengal are more prone to cancer than anywhere else in the country. Conducted by the National Cancer Registry Programme under the ICMR, the study throws up shocking findings indicating that the river is thick with heavy metals and lethal chemicals that cause cancer. According to Deputy Director-General of NCRP A. Nandkumar, the incidence of cancer was highest in the country in areas drained by the Ganges and stated that the problem would be studied deeply and with the findings presented in a report to the health ministry.

Apart from that, many NGOs have come forward to rejuvenate the river Ganges. Vikrant Tongad, an Environmental specialist from SAFE Green filed a petition against Simbhaoli Sugar Mill (Hapur UP) to NGT. NGT slapped a fine of Rs. 5 crores to Sugar Mill and a fine of Rs. 25 lakhs to Gopaljee Dairy for discharging untreated effluents into the Simbhaoli drain.

===Water shortages===
Along with ever-increasing pollution, water shortages are getting noticeably worse. Some sections of the river are already completely dry. Around Varanasi, the river once had an average depth of , but in some places, it is now only .

===Mining===
Illegal mining in the Ganges river bed for stones and sand for construction work has long been a problem in Haridwar district, Uttarakhand, where it touches the plains for the first time. This is despite the fact that quarrying has been banned in Kumbh Mela area zone covering 140 km2 area in Haridwar.

==In art and literature==
* A painting of the Ganges entering the plains near Haridwar by William Purser with a poetical illustration by Letitia Elizabeth Landon in Fisher&#x27;s Drawing Room Scrap Book, 1838.
* A painting of the Ganges near Kahalgaon by J. M. W. Turner with a poetical illustration by Letitia Elizabeth Landon in Fisher&#x27;s Drawing Room Scrap Book, 1839.

==See also==

* Environmental personhood
* Fair river sharing
* Ganga Pushkaram
* Gangaputra Brahmin
* Ganga Talao
* Ganga Lake (Mongolia)
* List of most-polluted rivers
* List of rivers by discharge
* List of rivers by length
* List of rivers of India
* Mahaweli Ganga
* National Waterway 1
* Pollution of the Ganges
* River bank erosion along the Ganges in Malda and Murshidabad districts
* Sacred waters
* Sankat Mochan Foundation
* Ganga (goddess)
* Peninsular River System
==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* Christopher de Bellaigue, &quot;The River&quot; (the Ganges; review of Sunil Amrith, &quot;Unruly Waters: How Rains, Rivers, Coasts, and Seas Have Shaped Asia&#x27;s History&quot;; Sudipta Sen, &quot;Ganges: The Many Pasts of an Indian River&quot;; and Victor Mallet, &quot;River of Life, River of Death: The Ganges and India&#x27;s Future&quot;), &quot;The New York Review of Books&quot;, vol. LXVI, no. 15 (10 October 2019), pp. 34–36. &quot;[I]n 1951 the average Indian [inhabitant of India] had access annually to 5,200 cubic meters of water. The figure today is 1,400 ... and will probably fall below 1,000 cubic meters – the UN&#x27;s definition of &#x27;water scarcity&#x27; – at some point in the next few decades. Compounding the problem of lower summer rainfall ... India&#x27;s water table is in freefall [due] to an increase in the number of tube wells ... Other contributors to India&#x27;s seasonal dearth of water are canal leaks [and] the continued sowing of thirsty crops&quot; (p. 35.)
* 
* 
* 
* Tandon, S.K., and R. Sinha. The Ganga River: A Summary View of a Large River System of the Indian Sub-Continent, in Sen Singh, Dhruv (Ed.), The Indian Rivers: Scientific and Socio-Economic Aspects. Singapore: Springer Nature, 2018, pp. 61–74. ISBN 978-981-10-2983-7
==External links==
* Ganga in the Imperial Gazetteer of India, 1909
* Melting Glaciers Threaten Ganga
* The impacts of water infrastructure and climate change on the hydrology of the Upper Ganga River Basin IWMI research report
* &quot;The Ganges: A Journey into India&quot; (NPR)
* &quot;Ganga Ma: A Pilgrimage to the Source&quot; 58 min Documentary
* Earthquake 2,500 years ago abruptly changed Ganga river’s course</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="4" end="10" title="Ganges" label="Ganges"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="25" end="30" title="Ganges" label="Ganga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="49" end="54" title="Ganges" label="Padma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4366834" start="63" end="83" title="trans-boundary river" label="trans-boundary river"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="112" end="117" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="122" end="132" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="165" end="174" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131541" start="182" end="194" title="States and union territories of India" label="Indian state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499" start="198" end="209" title="Uttarakhand" label="Uttarakhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q192305" start="247" end="261" title="Gangetic Plain" label="Gangetic plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058785" start="265" end="276" title="North India" label="North India"/>
<link wikidata="Q132726" start="318" end="324" title="Yamuna" label="Yamuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="415" end="420" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="463" end="474" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q739687" start="605" end="618" title="Hooghly River" label="Hooghly River"/>
<link wikidata="Q930773" start="683" end="688" title="Padma River" label="Padma"/>
<link wikidata="Q150062" start="715" end="721" title="Jamuna River (Bangladesh)" label="Jamuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q45403" start="747" end="758" title="Brahmaputra River" label="Brahmaputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125242" start="779" end="785" title="Meghna River" label="Meghna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163759" start="820" end="832" title="Ganges Delta" label="Ganges Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="856" end="869" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394831" start="915" end="957" title="List of rivers by discharge" label="second-largest river on earth by discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q573344" start="964" end="973" title="main stem" label="main stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q27832" start="1010" end="1019" title="Devprayag" label="Devprayag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419768" start="1046" end="1055" title="Alaknanda River" label="Alaknanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376362" start="1070" end="1083" title="River source" label="source stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q42250" start="1087" end="1096" title="hydrology" label="hydrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q170218" start="1139" end="1149" title="Bhagirathi River" label="Bhagirathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q878062" start="1192" end="1207" title="Hindu mythology" label="Hindu mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q389755" start="1424" end="1435" title="Pataliputra" label="Pataliputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q614890" start="1437" end="1444" title="Kannauj" label="Kannauj"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350313" start="1446" end="1455" title="Sonargaon" label="Sonargaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354" start="1457" end="1462" title="Dhaka" label="Dhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350679" start="1464" end="1473" title="Bikrampur" label="Bikrampur"/>
<link wikidata="Q6367451" start="1475" end="1479" title="Kara (Kaushambi)" label="Kara"/>
<link wikidata="Q36796" start="1481" end="1487" title="Munger" label="Munger"/>
<link wikidata="Q79980" start="1489" end="1494" title="Varanasi" label="Kashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q80484" start="1496" end="1501" title="Patna" label="Patna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949403" start="1503" end="1510" title="Hajipur" label="Hajipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q66568" start="1512" end="1518" title="Kanpur" label="Kanpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="1520" end="1525" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q760714" start="1527" end="1536" title="Bhagalpur" label="Bhagalpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017175" start="1538" end="1549" title="Murshidabad" label="Murshidabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q633530" start="1551" end="1561" title="Baharampur" label="Baharampur"/>
<link wikidata="Q15982522" start="1563" end="1571" title="Kampilya" label="Kampilya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="1577" end="1584" title="Kolkata" label="Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="1729" end="1738" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="1750" end="1757" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="1763" end="1769" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q219127" start="1782" end="1803" title="critically endangered" label="critically endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q17134" start="1824" end="1831" title="gharial" label="gharial"/>
<link wikidata="Q950620" start="1836" end="1861" title="South Asian river dolphin" label="South Asian river dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="1902" end="1908" title="Hindus" label="Hindus"/>
<link wikidata="Q580113" start="1948" end="1953" title="Ganga in Hinduism" label="Ganga"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="1963" end="1971" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635060" start="1978" end="2018" title="Pollution of the Ganges" label="Ganges is threatened by severe pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q918223" start="2110" end="2124" title="fecal coliform" label="fecal coliform"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635060" start="2251" end="2268" title="Ganga Action Plan" label="Ganga Action Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q366" start="2384" end="2394" title="corruption" label="corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q11902944" start="2461" end="2483" title="environmental planning" label="environmental planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q723748" start="2602" end="2612" title="confluence" label="confluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376362" start="2776" end="2782" title="Source (river or stream)" label="source"/>
<link wikidata="Q213262" start="2974" end="2984" title="Nanda Devi" label="Nanda Devi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233570" start="2986" end="2992" title="Trisul" label="Trisul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141272" start="2998" end="3003" title="Kamet" label="Kamet"/>
<link wikidata="Q691557" start="3041" end="3057" title="Gangotri Glacier" label="Gangotri Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496251" start="3061" end="3067" title="Gomukh" label="Gomukh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11378" start="3158" end="3163" title="Shiva" label="Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q5269447" start="3439" end="3450" title="Dhauliganga River" label="Dhauliganga"/>
<link wikidata="Q16880134" start="3452" end="3461" title="Nandakini" label="Nandakini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195002" start="3463" end="3469" title="Pindar River" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520922" start="3471" end="3480" title="Mandakini River" label="Mandakini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668704" start="3529" end="3541" title="Panch Prayag" label="Panch Prayag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2773350" start="3603" end="3615" title="Vishnuprayag" label="Vishnuprayag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2450927" start="3660" end="3670" title="Nandprayag" label="Nandprayag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314414" start="3699" end="3710" title="Karnaprayag" label="Karnaprayag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087566" start="3736" end="3747" title="Rudraprayag" label="Rudraprayag"/>
<link wikidata="Q502141" start="3958" end="3967" title="Rishikesh" label="Rishikesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4156318" start="3974" end="3981" title="debouch" label="debouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q273030" start="4034" end="4042" title="Haridwar" label="Haridwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16945207" start="4059" end="4068" title="headworks" label="headworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671536" start="4104" end="4116" title="Ganges Canal" label="Ganges Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233094" start="4144" end="4148" title="Doab" label="Doab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498" start="4165" end="4178" title="Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q796664" start="4397" end="4403" title="Bijnor" label="Bijnor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4549" start="4414" end="4424" title="Farukhabad" label="Farukhabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q66568" start="4430" end="4436" title="Kanpur" label="Kanpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850806" start="4472" end="4480" title="Ramganga" label="Ramganga"/>
<link wikidata="Q132726" start="4578" end="4584" title="Yamuna River" label="Yamuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654257" start="4592" end="4606" title="Triveni Sangam" label="Triveni Sangam"/>
<link wikidata="Q162442" start="4610" end="4619" title="Prayagraj" label="Prayagraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q632555" start="4860" end="4871" title="Tamsa River" label="Tamsa River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721454" start="4931" end="4943" title="Kaimur Range" label="Kaimur Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q477676" start="5013" end="5024" title="Gomti River" label="Gomti River"/>
<link wikidata="Q390232" start="5136" end="5150" title="Ghaghara River" label="Ghaghara River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418174" start="5432" end="5441" title="Son River" label="Son River"/>
<link wikidata="Q849494" start="5478" end="5491" title="Gandaki River" label="Gandaki River"/>
<link wikidata="Q695610" start="5507" end="5517" title="Kosi River" label="Kosi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="5751" end="5756" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525057" start="5795" end="5800" title="Malda, West Bengal" label="Malda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="5802" end="5813" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192683" start="5852" end="5858" title="Chunar" label="Chunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q956371" start="5860" end="5868" title="Mirzapur" label="Mirzapur"/>
<link wikidata="Q79980" start="5870" end="5878" title="Varanasi" label="Varanasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006321" start="5880" end="5888" title="Ghazipur" label="Ghazipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q588587" start="5890" end="5893" title="Arrah" label="Ara"/>
<link wikidata="Q80484" start="5895" end="5900" title="Patna" label="Patna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755440" start="5902" end="5908" title="Chhapra" label="Chapra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949403" start="5910" end="5917" title="Hajipur" label="Hajipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453482" start="5919" end="5925" title="Mokama" label="Mokama"/>
<link wikidata="Q598985" start="5927" end="5936" title="Begusarai" label="Begusarai"/>
<link wikidata="Q36796" start="5938" end="5944" title="Munger" label="Munger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341439" start="5946" end="5955" title="Sahibganj" label="Sahibganj"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355927" start="5957" end="5965" title="Rajmahal" label="Rajmahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q760714" start="5967" end="5976" title="Bhagalpur" label="Bhagalpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180187" start="5978" end="5984" title="Ballia" label="Ballia"/>
<link wikidata="Q861160" start="5986" end="5991" title="Buxar" label="Buxar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7517380" start="5993" end="6000" title="Simaria" label="Simaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q721917" start="6002" end="6012" title="Sultanganj" label="Sultanganj"/>
<link wikidata="Q26789969" start="6018" end="6025" title="Farakka" label="Farakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q591942" start="6159" end="6171" title="distributary" label="distributary"/>
<link wikidata="Q739687" start="6182" end="6200" title="Hooghly River" label="Bhāgirathi-Hooghly"/>
<link wikidata="Q739687" start="6230" end="6243" title="Hooghly River" label="Hooghly River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638941" start="6288" end="6303" title="Farakka Barrage" label="Farakka Barrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350175" start="6529" end="6539" title="Ajay River" label="Ajay River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138465" start="6543" end="6548" title="Katwa" label="Katwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971511" start="6621" end="6634" title="Damodar River" label="Damodar River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518805" start="6732" end="6744" title="Sagar Island" label="Sagar Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017175" start="6832" end="6843" title="Murshidabad" label="Murshidabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006330" start="6845" end="6853" title="Nabadwip" label="Nabadwip"/>
<link wikidata="Q205697" start="6867" end="6873" title="Howrah" label="Howrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q930773" start="6955" end="6960" title="Padma River" label="Padma"/>
<link wikidata="Q150062" start="6989" end="7001" title="Jamuna River (Bangladesh)" label="Jamuna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q45403" start="7035" end="7046" title="Brahmaputra" label="Brahmaputra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125242" start="7088" end="7100" title="Meghna River" label="Meghna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4446564" start="7124" end="7149" title="Surma-Meghna River System" label="Surma-Meghna River System"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887618" start="7272" end="7282" title="Bengal Fan" label="Bengal Fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670744" start="7309" end="7322" title="submarine fan" label="submarine fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q900291" start="7380" end="7394" title="organic carbon" label="organic carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163759" start="7401" end="7413" title="Ganges Delta" label="Ganges Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q38684" start="7571" end="7584" title="Bay of Bengal" label="Bay of Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783" start="7596" end="7602" title="Amazon River" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503" start="7607" end="7612" title="Congo River" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="7801" end="7820" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q499481" start="7835" end="7856" title="Indian Plate" label="Indian tectonic plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q844163" start="7883" end="7904" title="Indo-Australian Plate" label="Indo-Australian Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q80583" start="8029" end="8037" title="Gondwana" label="Gondwana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950" start="8065" end="8070" title="Plate tectonics" label="drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q188521" start="8192" end="8206" title="Eurasian Plate" label="Eurasian Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="8211" end="8221" title="subduction" label="subduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068705" start="8399" end="8405" title="trough (geology)" label="trough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="8470" end="8475" title="Indus River" label="Indus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192305" start="8546" end="8565" title="Indo-Gangetic Plain" label="Indo-Gangetic Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978695" start="8631" end="8645" title="foreland basin" label="foreland basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260484" start="8828" end="8834" title="Punpun" label="Punpun"/>
<link wikidata="Q8737769" start="9013" end="9022" title="Discharge (hydrology)" label="discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="9044" end="9058" title="drainage basin" label="drainage basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170218" start="9141" end="9151" title="Bhagirathi" label="Bhagirathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q720349" start="9206" end="9217" title="River bifurcation" label="bifurcation"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="10278" end="10283" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="10285" end="10290" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177" start="10330" end="10346" title="Himachal Pradesh" label="Himachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168" start="10392" end="10404" title="Chhattisgarh" label="Chhattisgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184" start="10413" end="10422" title="Jharkhand" label="Jharkhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q22424" start="10424" end="10430" title="Punjab, India" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="10441" end="10450" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="10492" end="10497" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="10892" end="10898" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q593003" start="10976" end="10989" title="Transhimalaya" label="Transhimalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q271435" start="11034" end="11041" title="Vindhya" label="Vindhya"/>
<link wikidata="Q626690" start="11093" end="11101" title="Aravalli Range" label="Aravalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881042" start="11121" end="11141" title="Chota Nagpur plateau" label="Chota Nagpur plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526" start="11150" end="11160" title="Sunderbans" label="Sunderbans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="11421" end="11426" title="Indus" label="Indus"/>
<link wikidata="Q513" start="11669" end="11682" title="Mount Everest" label="Mount Everest"/>
<link wikidata="Q82019" start="11773" end="11786" title="Kangchenjunga" label="Kangchenjunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q168702" start="11788" end="11794" title="Lhotse" label="Lhotse"/>
<link wikidata="Q169986" start="11796" end="11802" title="Makalu" label="Makalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q170089" start="11804" end="11811" title="Cho Oyu" label="Cho Oyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q165440" start="11813" end="11823" title="Dhaulagiri" label="Dhaulagiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q170070" start="11825" end="11832" title="Manaslu" label="Manaslu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16466024" start="11834" end="11843" title="Annapurna" label="Annapurna"/>
<link wikidata="Q105124" start="11848" end="11860" title="Shishapangma" label="Shishapangma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656156" start="12582" end="12597" title="Hardinge Bridge" label="Hardinge Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737100" start="12745" end="12762" title="Monsoon of Indian subcontinent" label="Southwest Monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29425295" start="12856" end="12866" title="streamflow" label="streamflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5656156" start="12980" end="12995" title="Hardinge Bridge" label="Hardinge Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="13172" end="13177" title="flood" label="flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q720349" start="13389" end="13400" title="River bifurcation" label="bifurcating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210950" start="13429" end="13437" title="Channel (geography)" label="channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815472" start="13732" end="13746" title="Avulsion (river)" label="changed course"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682601" start="14053" end="14062" title="Adi Ganga" label="Adi Ganga"/>
<link wikidata="Q907883" start="14948" end="14960" title="Teesta River" label="Teesta River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815472" start="15097" end="15105" title="Avulsion (river)" label="avulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006303" start="15430" end="15440" title="Mymensingh" label="Mymensingh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485672" start="15645" end="15656" title="Langalbandh" label="Langalbandh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969421" start="15754" end="15768" title="Wari-Bateshwar ruins" label="Wari-Bateshwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638941" start="16166" end="16181" title="Farakka Barrage" label="Farakka Barrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q312548" start="16305" end="16316" title="Megasthenes" label="Megasthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q60211512" start="16372" end="16378" title="Indica (Megasthenes)" label="Indica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645966" start="16700" end="16706" title="Stadion (unit)" label="stadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q835313" start="16815" end="16825" title="Gangaridai" label="Gangaridai"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070577" start="16932" end="16953" title="Sharing the water of the Ganges" label="water sharing dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231171" start="17255" end="17270" title="Port of Kolkata" label="Port of Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q4343904" start="18158" end="18165" title="Pangsha Upazila" label="Pangsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354" start="18175" end="18180" title="Dhaka" label="Dhaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397346" start="18926" end="18939" title="sacred waters" label="sacred waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q878062" start="18943" end="18958" title="Hindu mythology" label="Hindu mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q191314" start="19063" end="19077" title="Godavari River" label="Godavari River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="19081" end="19092" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496313" start="19230" end="19237" title="Gautama Maharishi" label="Gautama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4458114" start="19524" end="19531" title="Tirtha and Kshetra" label="tirthas"/>
<link wikidata="Q79980" start="19540" end="19548" title="Varanasi" label="Varanasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q818612" start="19550" end="19558" title="Gangothri" label="Gangotri"/>
<link wikidata="Q273030" start="19560" end="19568" title="Haridwar" label="Haridwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654257" start="19577" end="19591" title="Triveni Sangam" label="Triveni Sangam"/>
<link wikidata="Q162442" start="19595" end="19604" title="Prayagraj" label="Prayagraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q26388" start="20485" end="20496" title="waxing moon" label="waxing moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q190552" start="20504" end="20518" title="Hindu calendar" label="Hindu calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394209" start="20525" end="20533" title="Jyestha" label="Jyeshtha"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="21041" end="21046" title="Vedas" label="Vedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q128335" start="21056" end="21061" title="Indra" label="Indra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725577" start="21075" end="21081" title="Svarga" label="Svarga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489450" start="21083" end="21089" title="Heaven" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q797498" start="21120" end="21126" title="Vritra" label="Vritra"/>
<link wikidata="Q64897" start="21166" end="21170" title="soma (drink)" label="soma"/>
<link wikidata="Q45584" start="21275" end="21284" title="Vaishnava" label="Vaishnava"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="21375" end="21383" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q696702" start="21447" end="21453" title="Vamana" label="Vamana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207769" start="21766" end="21772" title="Dhruva" label="Dhruva"/>
<link wikidata="Q662656" start="21841" end="21850" title="Pole star" label="Pole star"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="21897" end="21906" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q11389" start="21966" end="21972" title="Brahma" label="Brahma"/>
<link wikidata="Q652550" start="22007" end="22017" title="Mount Meru" label="Mount Meru"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087336" start="22157" end="22170" title="Names for India" label="Bharatavarsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q11378" start="22201" end="22206" title="Shiva" label="Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q37293" start="22374" end="22382" title="Ramayana" label="Ramayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="22400" end="22411" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q188602" start="22430" end="22437" title="Puranas" label="Puranas"/>
<link wikidata="Q574355" start="22469" end="22475" title="Kapila" label="Kapila"/>
<link wikidata="Q26741981" start="22556" end="22562" title="Sagara (Vedic king)" label="Sagara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426607" start="22813" end="22823" title="Bhagiratha" label="Bhagiratha"/>
<link wikidata="Q229107" start="23069" end="23082" title="Mount Kailash" label="Mount Kailash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725577" start="24122" end="24128" title="Svarga" label="heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341130" start="24130" end="24135" title="Prithvi" label="earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362004" start="24145" end="24156" title="Patala" label="netherworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526559" start="24349" end="24357" title="Śrāddha" label="Shraddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7917991" start="24433" end="24458" title="Vedic rituals after death" label="Vedic rituals after death"/>
<link wikidata="Q4525631" start="25027" end="25039" title="Shmashana" label="Mahashmshana"/>
<link wikidata="Q642123" start="25510" end="25516" title="Ashwin" label="Ashwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388643" start="25615" end="25620" title="Pinda (riceball)" label="pinda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497735" start="26281" end="26294" title="Skanda Purana" label="Skanda Purana"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616887" start="26449" end="26453" title="Yama (Hinduism)" label="Yama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595292" start="26582" end="26586" title="Naraka (Hinduism)" label="hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q47140" start="27875" end="27882" title="Brahmin" label="Brahmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010155" start="28232" end="28236" title="Ghat" label="Ghat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076974" start="28945" end="28954" title="kamandalu" label="kamandalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11380" start="28980" end="28986" title="Vishnu" label="Vishnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q58838" start="29123" end="29132" title="Sarasvati" label="Sarasvati"/>
<link wikidata="Q131443" start="29137" end="29144" title="Lakshmi" label="Lakshmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11378" start="29922" end="29927" title="Shiva" label="Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q19103" start="30621" end="30627" title="shakti" label="shakti"/>
<link wikidata="Q380817" start="30838" end="30844" title="Murugan" label="Skanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q390857" start="30864" end="30871" title="Agastya" label="Agastya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497735" start="30916" end="30929" title="Skanda Purana" label="Skanda Purana"/>
<link wikidata="Q394867" start="31725" end="31729" title="Agni" label="Agni"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="31862" end="31873" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973947" start="31899" end="31907" title="Shantanu" label="Shantanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405629" start="31953" end="31960" title="Bhishma" label="Bhishma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415734" start="33154" end="33171" title="sanctum sanctorum" label="sanctum sanctorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136842" start="33261" end="33267" title="Makara (Hindu mythology)" label="makara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3200366" start="33362" end="33368" title="kumbha" label="kumbha"/>
<link wikidata="Q167681" start="33586" end="33592" title="vahana" label="vahana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4250472" start="34074" end="34089" title="Udayagiri Caves" label="Udayagiri Caves"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34136" end="34142" title="Udaygiri Caves#Description" label="Cave V"/>
<link wikidata="Q476808" start="34314" end="34319" title="kurma" label="kurma"/>
<link wikidata="Q632279" start="34406" end="34410" title="gana" label="gana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34511" end="34519" title="Vidisha#Historic Places and Monuments" label="Besnagar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35488" end="35506" title="Deogarh, Uttar Pradesh#Dashavatara temple" label="Dashavatara temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841070" start="35550" end="35565" title="Badoli Temples" label="Trimurti temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841069" start="35567" end="35573" title="Badoli" label="Badoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695769" start="35575" end="35586" title="Chittor Fort" label="Chittorgarh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35610" end="35631" title="Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh#Tourist attractions" label="Lakshmaneshwar temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120445" start="35633" end="35639" title="Kharod" label="Kharod"/>
<link wikidata="Q860452" start="35641" end="35663" title="Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh" label="Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q746990" start="35835" end="35842" title="Brahman" label="Brahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945507" start="36238" end="36244" title="Chatra (umbrella)" label="chatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644573" start="37649" end="37659" title="pilgrimage" label="pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q15262625" start="37721" end="37725" title="Mela" label="Mela"/>
<link wikidata="Q162442" start="37835" end="37844" title="Prayagraj" label="Prayagraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654257" start="37932" end="37946" title="Triveni Sangam" label="Triveni Sangam"/>
<link wikidata="Q200119" start="37970" end="37976" title="Ujjain" label="Ujjain"/>
<link wikidata="Q200235" start="37982" end="37988" title="Nashik" label="Nashik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060201" start="38155" end="38169" title="Ritual purification" label="ritual bathing"/>
<link wikidata="Q654776" start="38555" end="38560" title="sadhu" label="sadhu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38699" end="38712" title="Dashanami Sampradaya#Naga Sadhus" label="naga sanyasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="38993" end="39006" title="Hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q9045" start="39446" end="39454" title="Chanakya" label="Chanakya"/>
<link wikidata="Q188541" start="39471" end="39490" title="Chandragupta Maurya" label="Chandragupta Maurya"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="39507" end="39520" title="Maurya Empire" label="Maurya Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q455442" start="39596" end="39614" title="Firuz Shah Tughlaq" label="Firuz Shah Tughlaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194651" start="39806" end="39820" title="Mughal emperors" label="Mughal emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q83672" start="39821" end="39831" title="Shah Jahan" label="Shah Jahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671536" start="40187" end="40199" title="Ganges Canal" label="Ganges Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256003" start="40256" end="40275" title="John Russell Colvin" label="John Russell Colvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q952421" start="40360" end="40380" title="Proby Thomas Cautley" label="Proby Thomas Cautley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693690" start="40515" end="40537" title="Agra famine of 1837–38" label="Agra famine of 1837–38"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="40556" end="40574" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q178843" start="40603" end="40606" title="Rs." label="Rs."/>
<link wikidata="Q641589" start="40750" end="40775" title="Governor General of India" label="Governor General of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q335224" start="40777" end="40790" title="George Eden, 1st Earl of Auckland" label="Lord Auckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233094" start="41147" end="41151" title="Doab" label="Doab"/>
<link wikidata="Q333207" start="41259" end="41276" title="Edward Law, 1st Earl of Ellenborough" label="Lord Ellenborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q332793" start="41448" end="41461" title="Henry Hardinge, 1st Viscount Hardinge" label="Lord Hardinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q138521" start="41896" end="41919" title="North-Western Provinces" label="North-Western Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381498" start="41926" end="41940" title="James Thomason (British colonial governor)" label="James Thomason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="41965" end="41978" title="British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q333117" start="41984" end="41998" title="James Broun-Ramsay, 1st Marquess of Dalhousie" label="Lord Dalhousie"/>
<link wikidata="Q201832" start="42234" end="42241" title="Aligarh" label="Aligarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q573344" start="42298" end="42306" title="Mainstem (hydrology)" label="mainstem"/>
<link wikidata="Q878237" start="42310" end="42316" title="Etawah" label="Etawah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="42643" end="42651" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163670" start="42746" end="42764" title="Pennsylvania Canal" label="Pennsylvania Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q350495" start="42799" end="42806" title="Barrage (dam)" label="barrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070577" start="43197" end="43232" title="Sharing the water of the Ganges" label="Indo-Bangladesh Ganges Water Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43339" end="43356" title="Lav Khush Barrage" label="Lav Khush Barrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q69091" start="43393" end="43402" title="Tehri Dam" label="Tehri Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q170218" start="43422" end="43432" title="Bhagirathi" label="Bhagirathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445871" start="43683" end="43695" title="Bansagar Dam" label="Bansagar Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418174" start="43713" end="43723" title="Sone River" label="Sone River"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="43775" end="43788" title="hydroelectric" label="hydroelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276201" start="43962" end="43979" title="coastal reservoir" label="coastal reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521121" start="44043" end="44055" title="Ganges Basin" label="Ganges Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="44287" end="44296" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q131226" start="44298" end="44304" title="lentil" label="lentil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739805" start="44307" end="44315" title="oil seed" label="oil seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q166735" start="44385" end="44390" title="swamp" label="swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q939610" start="44636" end="44641" title="Unnao" label="Unnao"/>
<link wikidata="Q207238" start="45060" end="45073" title="rafting" label="river rafting"/>
<link wikidata="Q181933" start="45640" end="45660" title="Rajaji National Park" label="Rajaji National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q949297" start="45662" end="45687" title="Jim Corbett National Park" label="Jim Corbett National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q253455" start="45693" end="45713" title="Dudhwa National Park" label="Dudhwa National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q133006" start="45824" end="45838" title="Asian elephant" label="Asian elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q80952" start="45871" end="45883" title="Bengal tiger" label="Bengal tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q47910" start="45919" end="45936" title="Indian rhinoceros" label="Indian rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q174296" start="45973" end="45977" title="gaur" label="gaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q506308" start="46005" end="46015" title="barasingha" label="barasingha"/>
<link wikidata="Q145016" start="46052" end="46062" title="sloth bear" label="sloth bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q182347" start="46099" end="46110" title="Indian lion" label="Indian lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="46211" end="46220" title="wild boar" label="wild boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q20980826" start="46223" end="46230" title="wildcat" label="wildcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q855921" start="46254" end="46267" title="Indian wolf" label="Indian wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q128098" start="46269" end="46282" title="golden jackal" label="golden jackal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="46289" end="46292" title="Red fox" label="red"/>
<link wikidata="Q214835" start="46297" end="46307" title="Bengal fox" label="Bengal fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4526" start="46345" end="46355" title="Sundarbans" label="Sundarbans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5739222" start="46458" end="46478" title="Heritiera fomes" label="Sundarbans mangroves"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197023" start="46563" end="46573" title="Threatened species" label="Threatened"/>
<link wikidata="Q273580" start="46655" end="46675" title="four-horned antelope" label="four-horned antelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295314" start="46776" end="46780" title="myna" label="myna"/>
<link wikidata="Q518087" start="46788" end="46798" title="Psittacula" label="Psittacula"/>
<link wikidata="Q388450" start="46816" end="46820" title="crow" label="crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q208342" start="46823" end="46828" title="Kite (bird)" label="kites"/>
<link wikidata="Q732775" start="46830" end="46839" title="partridge" label="partridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q853058" start="46846" end="46850" title="fowl" label="fowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736439" start="46853" end="46857" title="Duck" label="Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3469018" start="46863" end="46868" title="snipe" label="snipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="46976" end="46983" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q864359" start="47023" end="47043" title="great Indian bustard" label="great Indian bustard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273465" start="47081" end="47096" title="lesser florican" label="lesser florican"/>
<link wikidata="Q158579" start="47431" end="47462" title="Tropical and subtropical moist broadleaf forests" label="tropical moist deciduous forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q909828" start="47479" end="47493" title="Shorea robusta" label="Shorea robusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133650" start="47506" end="47520" title="climax species" label="climax species"/>
<link wikidata="Q13399160" start="47705" end="47717" title="Bombax ceiba" label="Bombax ceiba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47750" end="47766" title="Albizzia procera" label="Albizzia procera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714919" start="47780" end="47800" title="Duabanga grandiflora" label="Duabanga grandiflora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47818" end="47834" title="Sterculia vilosa" label="Sterculia vilosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452661" start="47858" end="47863" title="seral" label="seral"/>
<link wikidata="Q754737" start="48579" end="48598" title="smooth-coated otter" label="smooth-coated otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q757265" start="48645" end="48663" title="large Indian civet" label="large Indian civet"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="48811" end="48819" title="Endemism" label="endemics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065449" start="49042" end="49060" title="introduced species" label="introduced species"/>
<link wikidata="Q177879" start="49090" end="49103" title="Cypriniformes" label="Cypriniformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q59576" start="49124" end="49136" title="Siluriformes" label="Siluriformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q127595" start="49151" end="49162" title="Perciformes" label="Perciformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35047" start="49350" end="49360" title="Cyprinidae" label="Cyprinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q210528" start="49569" end="49580" title="Balitoridae" label="Balitoridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497081" start="49599" end="49608" title="Sisoridae" label="Sisoridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q310753" start="49767" end="49779" title="Schizothorax" label="Schizothorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607656" start="49793" end="49796" title="Tor (fish)" label="Tor"/>
<link wikidata="Q142694" start="49810" end="49818" title="Barilius" label="Barilius"/>
<link wikidata="Q588593" start="49832" end="49843" title="Nemacheilus" label="Nemacheilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154962" start="49860" end="49872" title="Glyptothorax" label="Glyptothorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529827" start="50088" end="50099" title="Schilbeidae" label="Schilbeidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q27141" start="50118" end="50127" title="Clupeidae" label="Clupeidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q533709" start="50377" end="50385" title="Bagridae" label="Bagridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q162442" start="50492" end="50501" title="Prayagraj" label="Prayagraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q80484" start="50745" end="50750" title="Patna" label="Patna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051224" start="50945" end="50950" title="catla" label="catla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741221" start="50978" end="50992" title="golden mahseer" label="golden mahseer"/>
<link wikidata="Q147660" start="51021" end="51032" title="tor mahseer" label="tor mahseer"/>
<link wikidata="Q311727" start="51056" end="51060" title="rohu" label="rohu"/>
<link wikidata="Q852229" start="51089" end="51104" title="walking catfish" label="walking catfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682886" start="51138" end="51152" title="pangas catfish" label="pangas catfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850503" start="51188" end="51202" title="Bagarius" label="goonch catfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q503788" start="51227" end="51237" title="Snakehead (fish)" label="snakeheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q728564" start="51260" end="51278" title="bronze featherback" label="bronze featherback"/>
<link wikidata="Q465261" start="51319" end="51327" title="milkfish" label="milkfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q331828" start="51468" end="51479" title="overfishing" label="overfishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408124" start="51531" end="51540" title="siltation" label="siltation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="51545" end="51561" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q219127" start="51599" end="51620" title="critically endangered" label="critically endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471147" start="51621" end="51633" title="Ganges shark" label="Ganges shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q852569" start="51689" end="51696" title="Fish migration" label="migrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17134" start="51886" end="51893" title="gharial" label="gharial"/>
<link wikidata="Q81207" start="51932" end="51948" title="mugger crocodile" label="mugger crocodile"/>
<link wikidata="Q182599" start="52021" end="52040" title="saltwater crocodile" label="saltwater crocodile"/>
<link wikidata="Q810705" start="52147" end="52170" title="northern river terrapin" label="northern river terrapin"/>
<link wikidata="Q306321" start="52244" end="52271" title="three-striped roofed turtle" label="three-striped roofed turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q306355" start="52299" end="52324" title="red-crowned roofed turtle" label="red-crowned roofed turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345661" start="52351" end="52368" title="black pond turtle" label="black pond turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q596348" start="52405" end="52426" title="Brahminy river turtle" label="Brahminy river turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704304" start="52459" end="52478" title="Indian black turtle" label="Indian black turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109464" start="52515" end="52533" title="Indian eyed turtle" label="Indian eyed turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634989" start="52565" end="52584" title="brown roofed turtle" label="brown roofed turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993237" start="52618" end="52638" title="Indian roofed turtle" label="Indian roofed turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700440" start="52670" end="52688" title="Indian tent turtle" label="Indian tent turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q784190" start="52723" end="52746" title="Indian flapshell turtle" label="Indian flapshell turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078104" start="52780" end="52817" title="Indian narrow-headed softshell turtle" label="Indian narrow-headed softshell turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q262416" start="52847" end="52870" title="Indian softshell turtle" label="Indian softshell turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893257" start="52906" end="52937" title="Indian peacock softshell turtle" label="Indian peacock softshell turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006609" start="52965" end="53001" title="Cantor&amp;#x27;s giant softshell turtle" label="Cantor&amp;#x27;s giant softshell turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q210872" start="53213" end="53233" title="Ganges river dolphin" label="Ganges river dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245895" start="53317" end="53340" title="List of national animals" label="national aquatic animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q117892" start="53716" end="53735" title="World Wildlife Fund" label="World Wildlife Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q22312407" start="53855" end="53873" title="freshwater dolphin" label="freshwater dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188130" start="53912" end="53917" title="baiji" label="baiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="53958" end="53971" title="Yangtze River" label="Yangtze River"/>
<link wikidata="Q260018" start="54006" end="54025" title="Indus River dolphin" label="Indus River dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q205329" start="54062" end="54082" title="Amazon river dolphin" label="Amazon river dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15640675" start="54129" end="54152" title="Araguaian river dolphin" label="Araguaian river dolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q156054" start="54207" end="54225" title="Tocantins River" label="Araguaia–Tocantins"/>
<link wikidata="Q179842" start="54446" end="54461" title="Tibetan Plateau" label="Tibetan Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q171183" start="54755" end="54796" title="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change" label="Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="55293" end="55307" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="55986" end="55996" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973580" start="56032" end="56056" title="water pollution in India" label="water pollution in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q918223" start="56470" end="56484" title="fecal coliform" label="fecal coliform"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555933" start="56628" end="56649" title="Ghats in Varanasi" label="Varanasi&amp;#x27;s ghats"/>
<link wikidata="Q207315" start="56756" end="56765" title="cremation" label="cremation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="56945" end="56952" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="57037" end="57044" title="leprosy" label="leprosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44727" start="57048" end="57059" title="chicken pox" label="chicken pox"/>
<link wikidata="Q80524" start="57735" end="57738" title="Indian rupee" label="Rs."/>
<link wikidata="Q3635060" start="57834" end="57851" title="Ganga Action Plan" label="Ganga Action Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q949243" start="58911" end="58915" title="lakh" label="lakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972852" start="59762" end="59798" title="National Ganga River Basin Authority" label="National Ganga River Basin Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137675" start="60053" end="60058" title="crore" label="crore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532381" start="60384" end="60409" title="High Court of Uttarakhand" label="High Court of Uttarakhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q889137" start="60438" end="60462" title="Legal personality" label="legal &amp;quot;person&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="61019" end="61026" title="enteric" label="enteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300099" start="61044" end="61068" title="gastrointestinal disease" label="gastrointestinal disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="61079" end="61088" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q157661" start="61090" end="61101" title="hepatitis A" label="hepatitis A"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="61106" end="61113" title="typhoid" label="typhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q291019" start="61264" end="61298" title="Indian Council of Medical Research" label="Indian Council of Medical Research"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62577" end="62615" title="Illegal mining in India#Illegal mining and stone crushing in the Ganges river bed" label="Illegal mining in the Ganges river bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270438" start="62685" end="62702" title="Haridwar district" label="Haridwar district"/>
<link wikidata="Q10283" start="62824" end="62834" title="Kumbh Mela" label="Kumbh Mela"/>
<link wikidata="Q273030" start="62959" end="62967" title="Haridwar" label="Haridwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760518" start="63018" end="63042" title="Letitia Elizabeth Landon" label="Letitia Elizabeth Landon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190209" start="63123" end="63132" title="Kahalgaon" label="Kahalgaon"/>
<link wikidata="Q159758" start="63136" end="63151" title="J. M. W. Turner" label="J. M. W. Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760518" start="63184" end="63208" title="Letitia Elizabeth Landon" label="Letitia Elizabeth Landon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42377878" start="63274" end="63298" title="Environmental personhood" label="Environmental personhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324285" start="63301" end="63319" title="Fair river sharing" label="Fair river sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908572" start="63322" end="63337" title="Ganga Pushkaram" label="Ganga Pushkaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521060" start="63340" end="63358" title="Gangaputra Brahmin" label="Gangaputra Brahmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338515" start="63361" end="63372" title="Ganga Talao" label="Ganga Talao"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520992" start="63375" end="63396" title="Ganga Lake (Mongolia)" label="Ganga Lake (Mongolia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q131544096" start="63399" end="63427" title="List of most-polluted rivers" label="List of most-polluted rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394831" start="63430" end="63457" title="List of rivers by discharge" label="List of rivers by discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q486047" start="63460" end="63484" title="List of rivers by length" label="List of rivers by length"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365517" start="63487" end="63510" title="List of rivers of India" label="List of rivers of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518007" start="63513" end="63527" title="Mahaweli Ganga" label="Mahaweli Ganga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979355" start="63530" end="63549" title="National Waterway 1" label="National Waterway 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635060" start="63552" end="63575" title="Pollution of the Ganges" label="Pollution of the Ganges"/>
<link wikidata="Q39091381" start="63578" end="63648" title="River bank erosion along the Ganges in Malda and Murshidabad districts" label="River bank erosion along the Ganges in Malda and Murshidabad districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397346" start="63651" end="63664" title="Sacred waters" label="Sacred waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418684" start="63667" end="63691" title="Sankat Mochan Foundation" label="Sankat Mochan Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q580113" start="63694" end="63709" title="Ganga (goddess)" label="Ganga (goddess)"/>
<link wikidata="Q112316662" start="63712" end="63735" title="Peninsular River System" label="Peninsular River System"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113489" start="63873" end="63897" title="Christopher de Bellaigue" label="Christopher de Bellaigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q64840921" start="63944" end="63956" title="Sunil Amrith" label="Sunil Amrith"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64054" end="64065" title="Sudipta Sen" label="Sudipta Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426223" start="64227" end="64255" title="The New York Review of Books" label="The New York Review of Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="64504" end="64506" title="UN" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376358" start="64534" end="64548" title="water scarcity" label="water scarcity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342272" start="64662" end="64673" title="water table" label="water table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426365" start="64727" end="64736" title="tube well" label="tube well"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="64806" end="64811" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="65430" end="65433" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12449" wikidata="Q711148" url="?curid=12449" title="Mobile Suit Gundam Wing">
<text>Mobile Suit Gundam Wing, also known in Japan as , is a 1995 Japanese mecha anime series directed by Masashi Ikeda and written by Katsuyuki Sumizawa. It is the sixth installment in the &quot;Gundam&quot; franchise, taking place in the &quot;After Colony&quot; timeline. As with the original series, the plot of &quot;Gundam Wing&quot; centers on a war in the future (specifically, the year After Colony 195) between Earth and its orbital colonies in the Earth-Moon system.

The series aired in Japan on the terrestrial TV Asahi network. It ran for 49 episodes, beginning on April 7, 1995, and ending on March 29, 1996. It received multiple manga adaptations, as well as video games. Four original video animation (OVA) episodes were produced including a retelling of the series, &quot;Operation Meteor&quot;, and a direct sequel, &quot;Endless Waltz&quot;. In 2010, Sumizawa started writing the novel &quot;Frozen Teardrop&quot;, another sequel to the series. While the series fared modestly well in Japan, it found greater success in the United States and single-handedly popularized the &quot;Gundam&quot; franchise in the West.

==Plot==

In the distant future, Mankind has colonized space, with clusters of space colonies at each of the five Earth-Moon Lagrange points. Down on the Earth, the nations have come together to form the United Earth Sphere Alliance. This Alliance oppresses the colonies with its vast military might. The colonies wishing to be free, joined in a movement headed by the pacifist Heero Yuy. In the year After Colony 175, Yuy is shot dead by an assassin, forcing the colonies to search for other paths to peace. The assassination prompts five disaffected scientists from the Organization of the Zodiac, more commonly referred to as OZ, to turn rogue upon the completion of the mobile suit prototype Tallgeese.

The story of &quot;Gundam Wing&quot; begins in the year After Colony 195, with the start of &quot;Operation Meteor&quot;: the scientists&#x27; plan for revenge against OZ. The operation involves five teenage boys, who have each been chosen and trained by each of the five scientists, then sent to Earth independently in extremely advanced mobile suits (one designed by each of the scientists) known as &quot;Gundams&quot; (called such because they are constructed from a rare and astonishingly durable material called Gundanium alloy, which can only be created in outer space). Each Gundam is sent from a different colony, and the pilots are initially unaware of each other&#x27;s existence.

The series focuses primarily on the five Gundam pilots: Heero Yuy (an alias, not to be confused with the martyred pacifist), Duo Maxwell, Trowa Barton, Quatre Raberba Winner and Chang Wufei. Their mission is to use their Gundams to attack OZ directly, to rid the Alliance of its weapons, and to free the colonies from its oppressive rule. The series also focuses on Relena Peacecraft, heir to the pacifist Sanc Kingdom, who becomes an important political ally to the Gundam pilots (particularly Heero) throughout the series. In addition to these six heroic and antiheroic characters, the series makes use of a large supporting cast of protagonists and antagonists with complex, interconnected storylines.

==Production==
The making of &quot;Gundam Wing&quot; was influenced by &quot;Mobile Fighter G Gundam&quot; with the idea of having five main characters. Originally, the series was meant to be titled &quot;Gundam Meteor&quot; after &quot;Operation Meteor.&quot; Bandai suggested having a Gundam with the ability of transforming into a plane-like form (which led to the creation of the Wing Gundam and its &quot;Bird Mode&quot;). The writers worked together for one week conceptualizing the characters, mobile suits and first 40 episodes. Director Masashi Ikeda reacted to their work comparing it to the first &quot;Gundam&quot; series, &quot;Zeta&quot; and &quot;G&quot; all at once. The series was more focused on drama than mecha, which the staff credits as one of the reasons for the show&#x27;s popularity within the female demographic.

Writer Katsuyuki Sumizawa expressed difficulties in the making of the story as opposed to his work in novels due to the fact he relayed duties to other members. However, the handling of the five characters was made easy due to the setting. Early sketches of the protagonists by Ikeda were handled by character designer Shuko Murase. He was cast due to his work with Ikeda in &quot;Samurai Troopers&quot;. The director wanted the designs to appeal to the female demographic. Originally, Duo Maxwell was set as the protagonist but was replaced by Heero Yuy. The staff members noted Heero was too different from previous Gundam protagonists and were afraid he would be unpopular. The voice casting was more difficult to do than the ones from previous series due to the different atmosphere.

Following the series&#x27; ending, the staff members were asked by the studio to make a sequel due to its popularity. Neither Ikeda nor executive producer Hideyuki Tomioka intended to make a sequel for &quot;Gundam Wing&quot;. However, Sumizawa was bothered by the finale as he felt the series ended abruptly. Tomioka asked Sumizawa if he could write a continuation, which he agreed to do.

==Media==

===Anime===

&quot;Gundam Wing&quot; was not the first series in the &quot;Gundam&quot; franchise to be dubbed and distributed in the U.S. (the compilation film version of the original &quot;Mobile Suit Gundam&quot;, as well as the OVAs &quot;War in the Pocket&quot; and &quot;Stardust Memory&quot;, preceded it by about two years), but it is well known as the first &quot;Gundam&quot; series to be aired on American television. This dub was licensed by Sunrise and the voice work was done by Ocean Productions. The series aired on Cartoon Network&#x27;s weekday afternoon after-school programming block Toonami, premiering on March 6, 2000. In the first extended promo leading up to the series&#x27; premiere, voice actor Peter Cullen narrated the back story, evoking memories of &quot;Voltron&#x27;s&quot; opening credits. The promo was said to be so riveting that Bandai decided to use it as the official promo for the series. &quot;Gundam Wing&quot; was a huge ratings winner for Toonami (often outperforming veteran series such as &quot;Dragon Ball Z&quot; and &quot;Sailor Moon&quot;) and became, for a time, not only the highest rated series on Toonami but on all of Cartoon Network.

It was broadcast in two formats: an edited version shown in the daytime on Toonami and an uncut version shown past midnight as part of Toonami&#x27;s &quot;Midnight Run.&quot; Examples of the edits included the removal of blood, profanity, atheism, and the word &quot;kill&quot; being replaced with the word &quot;destroy&quot; (this was extended to Duo&#x27;s nickname, &quot;The God of Death,&quot; changed to &quot;The Great Destroyer,&quot; forcing the alteration of two episode titles), though the word &quot;death&quot; was mostly left intact. All &quot;Gundam Wing&quot; episodes have been released to VHS and DVD in the U.S. Differences between the two video systems is that the VHS episodes contain the edited version while the DVD episodes contain the uncut version.

Due to the closure of Bandai Entertainment, the series was out-of-print for some time. On October 11, 2014, at their 2014 New York Comic Con panel, Sunrise announced they will be releasing all of the &quot;Gundam&quot; franchise, including &quot;Gundam Wing&quot; in North America though distribution from Right Stuf Inc., beginning in Spring 2015. Right Stuf released the series on Blu-ray and DVD in two sets in November 2017. In addition, a collector&#x27;s edition set containing the complete series, &quot;Endless Waltz&quot;, &quot;Operation Meteor&quot; and the &quot;Frozen Teardrop&quot; picture drama was released in December 2017.

&quot;Gundam Wing&quot; was also the first &quot;Gundam&quot; series to air on Philippine television and dubbed in Filipino on GMA Network in 1999.

===OVAs===
After the series ended, four original video animation (OVA) episodes, compiling various scenes from the series along with a few minutes of new footage, were released in 1996 as &quot;Gundam Wing: Operation Meteor&quot; I and II.

A three-part OVA titled &quot;Gundam Wing: Endless Waltz&quot; was produced in 1997 as a sequel to the TV series; plot-wise, it brought the &quot;After Colony&quot; timeline to a close. The OVA was also notable for its massive redesigns of all the Gundams by Hajime Katoki, such as the Wing Gundam Zero&#x27;s new &quot;angel-winged&quot; appearance. A compilation film version of &quot;Endless Waltz&quot; (featuring additional footage, alterations of the music score and a different ending theme) was later released in Japan on August 1, 1998. &quot;Endless Waltz&quot; premiered on Cartoon Network in the U.S. on November 10, 2000. Both the OVA and film versions of &quot;Endless Waltz&quot; were later released together on DVD. Right Stuf released both OVAs on Blu-ray and DVD in December 2017 (though &quot;Operation Meteor&quot; remains un-dubbed).

===Manga===
In addition to manga adaptations of the series and &quot;Endless Waltz&quot;, several manga sidestories have also been produced. &quot;Episode Zero&quot; is a prequel, detailing the events leading up to series; the stories have been collected in a volume that also contains one brief open-ended interlude, &quot;Preventer 5&quot;, that details an operation that occurs after &quot;Endless Waltz&quot;. A coincident storyline to the series is presented in &quot;Last Outpost (G-Unit)&quot;. Several sequel manga, occurring between &quot;Gundam Wing&quot; and &quot;Endless Waltz&quot;, have also been written: &quot;Blind Target&quot;, &quot;Ground Zero&quot; and &quot;Battlefield of Pacifists&quot;.

The &quot;Gundam Wing&quot;, &quot;Battlefield of Pacifists&quot; and &quot;Endless Waltz&quot; manga series were published in English by Tokyopop, while &quot;Blind Target&quot;, &quot;Ground Zero&quot; and &quot;Episode Zero&quot; were published by Viz Communications. Another sequel manga detailing the future of the colonies entitled &quot;Tiel&#x27;s Impulse&quot; was printed in 1998 and has not been published in the United States.

In September 2010, &quot;Gundam Ace&quot; magazine began serializing a manga titled &quot;New Mobile Report Gundam Wing Endless Waltz: The Glory of Losers&quot; that retells the events of the anime while incorporating facts from &quot;Episode Zero&quot; and the novel &quot;Frozen Teardrop&quot;. The manga ended in November 2017 and was compiled into fourteen volumes. The manga also uses Hajime Katoki&#x27;s Gundam redesigns from &quot;Endless Waltz&quot; and other subsequent media, instead of the original Kunio Okawara designs featured in the anime. Vertical published English editions of the manga volumes under the title &quot;Mobile Suit Gundam Wing Endless Waltz: Glory of the Losers&quot; from July 2017 to November 2019.

===Novel sequel===
In early 2010, &quot;Gundam Ace&quot; magazine announced they would serialize a &quot;New &quot;Gundam Wing&quot; Project&quot;. The project was eventually revealed to be a novel, titled &quot;New Mobile Report Gundam Wing: Frozen Teardrop&quot;. Written by Katsuyuki Sumizawa, the novel begins a new timeline, following the &quot;Mars Century&quot; calendar (&quot;MC&quot;) which was the successor of the previous &quot;After Colony&quot; calendar. According to an interview with the author, the novel spans backwards into the AC century and the Gundam pilots, Relena, and their children make appearances.

===Other media===
A fighting video game titled &quot;Shin Kidō Senki Gundam Wing: Endless Duel&quot; was developed by Natsume Co., Ltd. and released for the Super Famicom in Japan on March 29, 1996. A second fighting game titled &quot;Shin Kidō Senki Gundam Wing: The Battle&quot; was developed by Natsume Co., Ltd. and released for the PlayStation in Japan on October 11, 2002, as the 13th volume of the Simple Characters 2000 series. &quot;Gundam Wing&quot; characters and mecha have also appeared in several other video game series including &quot;Super Robot Wars&quot;, &quot;Gundam Battle Assault&quot;, &quot;Another Century&#x27;s Episode&quot;, &quot;Mobile Suit Gundam: Extreme Vs.&quot; and &quot;Dynasty Warriors: Gundam&quot;.

Upon the series&#x27; debut in North America, &quot;Gundam Wing&quot; received a large roster of licensees for merchandise including wallscrolls, apparel, school supplies, skateboards, trading cards, model kits and action figures.

==Soundtracks==

;Openings:
*&quot;Just Communication&quot; by Two-Mix (ep. 1–40) (YTV Broadcast: 1–49)
*&quot;Rhythm Emotion&quot; by Two-Mix (ep. 41–49)

;Ending:
*&quot;It&#x27;s Just Love!&quot; by Rumi Ohishi (ep. 1–49)
*&quot;Just Communication&quot; (Instrumental Version) by Kow Otani (Toonami Broadcast, ep. 1–49; the credits aired over a shortened version of the show&#x27;s first opening animation)

;Insert songs:
*&quot;Just Communication&quot; by Two-Mix (eps. 3 &amp; 49)
*&quot;Rhythm Emotion&quot; by Two-Mix (eps. 36, 38, 39, and 41)

==Reception and international broadcasters==
&quot;Gundam Wing&quot; was only a modest success in Japan during its initial run; it, along with &quot;G Gundam&quot;, was the only &quot;Gundam&quot; series of the 1990s that managed an average television rating over four percent. It was ranked number two in &quot;Animage&quot; magazine&#x27;s Anime Grand Prix in 1996 and was also ranked number 76 in the publication&#x27;s list of the 100 most important anime of all time. The series is infamous within &quot;dōjinshi&quot; where authors tend to depict romantic relationships between several of the protagonists.

&quot;Gundam Wing&quot; was a greater success in North America, however, and is credited by John Oppliger on &quot;Animation Anime News Blog&quot; with single-handedly popularizing the &quot;Gundam&quot; franchise among American audiences. Just over a week after its premiere on Cartoon Network on March 6, 2000, the series was the top rated program in all age groups. During the summer of 2000, it remained as the first or second top-rated show among kids and teens during its twelve airings per week on the Toonami block. &quot;Gundam Wing&quot; was ranked the 73rd best animated series by IGN, calling the series &quot;so good that even those opposed to anime have to give the show its due credit&quot;.

&quot;Mobile Suit Gundam Wing&quot; was also the first-ever Gundam-franchise to broadcast internationally in Indonesia by then-Salim Group-owned television station Indosiar from mid-2001 until mid-2002.

== See also ==

==Footnotes==


==External links==
*Official Website: Anime
*Kodansha USA publishing page: Mobile Suit Gundam WING (Mobile Suit GUNDAM WING Endless Waltz: Glory of the Losers)
*

 
 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="60" end="65" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q858784" start="69" end="74" title="mecha" label="mecha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="75" end="80" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q732120" start="190" end="196" title="Gundam" label="Gundam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134906" start="281" end="296" title="Mobile Suit Gundam" label="original series"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="493" end="498" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q908436" start="518" end="526" title="TV Asahi" label="TV Asahi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="639" end="644" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q220898" start="687" end="711" title="original video animation" label="original video animation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="835" end="848" title="Gundam Wing: Endless Waltz" label="Endless Waltz"/>
<link wikidata="" start="906" end="921" title="New Mobile Report Gundam Wing: Frozen Teardrop" label="Frozen Teardrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q190463" start="1256" end="1271" title="Lagrangian point" label="Lagrange points"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2588" end="2597" title="List of Mobile Suit Gundam Wing characters#Heero Yuy" label="Heero Yuy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2657" end="2668" title="List of Mobile Suit Gundam Wing characters#Duo Maxwell" label="Duo Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2670" end="2682" title="List of Mobile Suit Gundam Wing characters#Trowa Barton" label="Trowa Barton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2684" end="2705" title="List of Mobile Suit Gundam Wing characters#Quatre Raberba Winner" label="Quatre Raberba Winner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2710" end="2721" title="List of Mobile Suit Gundam Wing characters#Chang Wufei" label="Chang Wufei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2898" end="2915" title="List of Mobile Suit Gundam Wing characters#Relena Peacecraft" label="Relena Peacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q716172" start="3315" end="3338" title="Mobile Fighter G Gundam" label="Mobile Fighter G Gundam"/>
<link wikidata="Q806252" start="3499" end="3505" title="Bandai Entertainment" label="Bandai"/>
<link wikidata="Q698745" start="3879" end="3883" title="Mobile Suit Zeta Gundam" label="Zeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452412" start="4460" end="4476" title="Samurai Troopers" label="Samurai Troopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q187657" start="5374" end="5380" title="Dubbing (filmmaking)" label="dubbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q220898" start="5502" end="5506" title="Original video animation" label="OVAs"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5513" end="5530" title="Mobile Suit Gundam 0080: War in the Pocket" label="War in the Pocket"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5547" end="5562" title="Mobile Suit Gundam 0083: Stardust Memory" label="Stardust Memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q854654" start="5724" end="5731" title="Sunrise (company)" label="Sunrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076053" start="5763" end="5780" title="Ocean Productions" label="Ocean Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q708290" start="5802" end="5817" title="Cartoon Network" label="Cartoon Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q938658" start="5874" end="5881" title="Toonami" label="Toonami"/>
<link wikidata="Q910625" start="5993" end="6005" title="Peter Cullen" label="Peter Cullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q69801428" start="6057" end="6064" title="Voltron" label="Voltron"/>
<link wikidata="Q806252" start="6137" end="6143" title="Bandai Entertainment" label="Bandai"/>
<link wikidata="Q477916" start="6312" end="6325" title="Dragon Ball Z" label="Dragon Ball Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643098" start="6342" end="6353" title="Sailor Moon" label="Sailor Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q938658" start="6537" end="6544" title="Toonami" label="Toonami"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="7071" end="7074" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="7079" end="7082" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723696" start="7362" end="7380" title="New York Comic Con" label="New York Comic Con"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333573" start="7546" end="7561" title="Right Stuf Inc." label="Right Stuf Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q7697077" start="7962" end="7983" title="Television in the Philippines" label="Philippine television"/>
<link wikidata="Q33298" start="7998" end="8006" title="Filipino language" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q399643" start="8010" end="8021" title="GMA Network" label="GMA Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q220898" start="8072" end="8096" title="original video animation" label="original video animation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8303" end="8329" title="Gundam Wing: Endless Waltz" label="Gundam Wing: Endless Waltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213467" start="8532" end="8545" title="Hajime Katoki" label="Hajime Katoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="9227" end="9232" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052496" start="9233" end="9244" title="Side story" label="sidestories"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9276" end="9288" title="Mobile Suit Gundam Wing: Episode Zero" label="Episode Zero"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9602" end="9623" title="Mobile Suit Gundam: The Last Outpost" label="Last Outpost (G-Unit)"/>
<link wikidata="Q315736" start="9981" end="9989" title="Tokyopop" label="Tokyopop"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10057" end="10069" title="Mobile Suit Gundam Wing: Episode Zero" label="Episode Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q660288" start="10094" end="10112" title="Viz Communications" label="Viz Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q603376" start="10308" end="10318" title="Gundam Ace" label="Gundam Ace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213467" start="10673" end="10686" title="Hajime Katoki" label="Hajime Katoki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518414" start="10794" end="10807" title="Kunio Okawara" label="Kunio Okawara"/>
<link wikidata="Q10851321" start="10839" end="10847" title="Vertical (company)" label="Vertical"/>
<link wikidata="Q603376" start="11057" end="11067" title="Gundam Ace" label="Gundam Ace"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11229" end="11275" title="New Mobile Report Gundam Wing: Frozen Teardrop" label="New Mobile Report Gundam Wing: Frozen Teardrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q846224" start="11665" end="11684" title="fighting game" label="fighting video game"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11698" end="11739" title="Shin Kidō Senki Gundam Wing: Endless Duel" label="Shin Kidō Senki Gundam Wing: Endless Duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772556" start="11763" end="11780" title="Natsume Co., Ltd." label="Natsume Co., Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="11802" end="11815" title="Super Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Super Famicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q10677" start="11982" end="11993" title="PlayStation (console)" label="PlayStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q842985" start="12050" end="12072" title="Simple series" label="Simple Characters 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504286" start="12196" end="12212" title="Super Robot Wars" label="Super Robot Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120814" start="12226" end="12247" title="Gundam Battle Assault" label="Gundam Battle Assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632099" start="12261" end="12291" title="Another Century&amp;#x27;s Episode" label="Another Century&amp;#x27;s Episode"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12305" end="12336" title="Mobile Suit Gundam: Extreme Vs." label="Mobile Suit Gundam: Extreme Vs."/>
<link wikidata="" start="12353" end="12377" title="Dynasty Warriors: Gundam" label="Dynasty Warriors: Gundam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146096" start="12653" end="12671" title="Just Communication" label="Just Communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145307" start="12681" end="12688" title="Two-Mix" label="Two-Mix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789910" start="12701" end="12704" title="YTV (TV channel)" label="YTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q10854794" start="12729" end="12743" title="Rhythm Emotion" label="Rhythm Emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145307" start="12753" end="12760" title="Two-Mix" label="Two-Mix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578353" start="12901" end="12910" title="Kow Otani" label="Kow Otani"/>
<link wikidata="Q938658" start="12912" end="12919" title="Toonami" label="Toonami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145307" start="13079" end="13086" title="Two-Mix" label="Two-Mix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145307" start="13136" end="13143" title="Two-Mix" label="Two-Mix"/>
<link wikidata="Q847520" start="13412" end="13429" title="Audience measurement" label="television rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201306" start="13483" end="13490" title="Animage" label="Animage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850077" start="13513" end="13529" title="Anime Grand Prix" label="Anime Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q668711" start="13680" end="13688" title="dōjinshi" label="dōjinshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075191" start="13724" end="13782" title="Slash fiction" label="romantic relationships between several of the protagonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q708290" start="14064" end="14079" title="Cartoon Network" label="Cartoon Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q938658" start="14294" end="14301" title="Toonami" label="Toonami"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="14377" end="14380" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q732120" start="14553" end="14559" title="Gundam" label="Gundam"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="14602" end="14611" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q905963" start="14620" end="14631" title="Salim Group" label="Salim Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484603" start="14657" end="14665" title="Indosiar" label="Indosiar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12450" wikidata="Q902052" url="?curid=12450" title="Gödel's completeness theorem">
<text>Gödel&#x27;s completeness theorem is a fundamental theorem in mathematical logic that establishes a correspondence between semantic truth and syntactic provability in first-order logic.

The completeness theorem applies to any first-order theory: If &quot;T&quot; is such a theory, and φ is a sentence (in the same language) and every model of &quot;T&quot; is a model of φ, then there is a (first-order) proof of φ using the statements of &quot;T&quot; as axioms. One sometimes says this as &quot;anything true in all models is provable&quot;. (This does not contradict Gödel&#x27;s incompleteness theorem, which is about a formula φu that is unprovable in a certain theory &quot;T&quot; but true in the &quot;standard&quot; model of the natural numbers: φu is false in some other, &quot;non-standard&quot; models of &quot;T&quot;.)

The completeness theorem makes a close link between model theory, which deals with what is true in different models, and proof theory, which studies what can be formally proven in particular formal systems.

It was first proved by Kurt Gödel in 1929. It was then simplified when Leon Henkin observed in his Ph.D. thesis that the hard part of the proof can be presented as the Model Existence Theorem (published in 1949). Henkin&#x27;s proof was simplified by Gisbert Hasenjaeger in 1953.

==Preliminaries==
There are numerous deductive systems for first-order logic, including systems of natural deduction and Hilbert-style systems. Common to all deductive systems is the notion of a &quot;formal deduction&quot;. This is a sequence (or, in some cases, a finite tree) of formulae with a specially designated &quot;conclusion&quot;. The definition of a deduction is such that it is finite and that it is possible to verify algorithmically (by a computer, for example, or by hand) that a given sequence (or tree) of formulae is indeed a deduction.

A first-order formula is called &quot;logically valid&quot; if it is true in every structure for the language of the formula (i.e. for any assignment of values to the variables of the formula). To formally state, and then prove, the completeness theorem, it is necessary to also define a deductive system. A deductive system is called &quot;complete&quot; if every logically valid formula is the conclusion of some formal deduction, and the completeness theorem for a particular deductive system is the theorem that it is complete in this sense. Thus, in a sense, there is a different completeness theorem for each deductive system. A converse to completeness is &quot;soundness&quot;, the fact that only logically valid formulas are provable in the deductive system.

If some specific deductive system of first-order logic is sound and complete, then it is &quot;perfect&quot; (a formula is provable if and only if it is logically valid), thus equivalent to any other deductive system with the same quality (any proof in one system can be converted into the other).

==Statement==

We first fix a deductive system of first-order predicate calculus, choosing any of the well-known equivalent systems. Gödel&#x27;s original proof assumed the Hilbert-Ackermann proof system.

===Gödel&#x27;s original formulation===

The completeness theorem says that if a formula is logically valid then there is a finite deduction (a formal proof) of the formula.

Thus, the deductive system is &quot;complete&quot; in the sense that no additional inference rules are required to prove all the logically valid formulae. A converse to completeness is &quot;soundness&quot;, the fact that only logically valid formulae are provable in the deductive system. Together with soundness (whose verification is easy), this theorem implies that a formula is logically valid if and only if it is the conclusion of a formal deduction.

===More general form===

The theorem can be expressed more generally in terms of logical consequence. We say that a sentence &quot;s&quot; is a &quot;syntactic consequence&quot; of a theory &quot;T&quot;, denoted formula_1, if &quot;s&quot; is provable from &quot;T&quot; in our deductive system. We say that &quot;s&quot; is a &quot;semantic consequence&quot; of &quot;T&quot;, denoted formula_2, if &quot;s&quot; holds in every model of &quot;T&quot;. The completeness theorem then says that for any first-order theory &quot;T&quot; with a well-orderable language, and any sentence &quot;s&quot; in the language of &quot;T&quot;,

Since the converse (soundness) also holds, it follows that formula_2 if and only if formula_1, and thus that syntactic and semantic consequence are equivalent for first-order logic.

This more general theorem is used implicitly, for example, when a sentence is shown to be provable from the axioms of group theory by considering an arbitrary group and showing that the sentence is satisfied by that group.

Gödel&#x27;s original formulation is deduced by taking the particular case of a theory without any axiom.

===Model existence theorem===

The completeness theorem can also be understood in terms of consistency, as a consequence of Henkin&#x27;s model existence theorem. We say that a theory &quot;T&quot; is &quot;syntactically consistent&quot; if there is no sentence &quot;s&quot; such that both &quot;s&quot; and its negation ¬&quot;s&quot; are provable from &quot;T&quot; in our deductive system. The model existence theorem says that for any first-order theory &quot;T&quot; with a well-orderable language,

Another version, with connections to the Löwenheim–Skolem theorem, says:

Given Henkin&#x27;s theorem, the completeness theorem can be proved as follows: If formula_5, then formula_6 does not have models. By the contrapositive of Henkin&#x27;s theorem, then formula_6 is syntactically inconsistent. So a contradiction (formula_8) is provable from formula_6 in the deductive system. Hence formula_10, and then by the properties of the deductive system, formula_1.

===As a theorem of arithmetic===

The model existence theorem and its proof can be formalized in the framework of Peano arithmetic. Precisely, we can systematically define a model of any consistent effective first-order theory &quot;T&quot; in Peano arithmetic by interpreting each symbol of &quot;T&quot; by an arithmetical formula whose free variables are the arguments of the symbol. (In many cases, we will need to assume, as a hypothesis of the construction, that &quot;T&quot; is consistent, since Peano arithmetic may not prove that fact.) However, the definition expressed by this formula is not recursive (but is, in general, Δ2).

==Consequences==
An important consequence of the completeness theorem is that it is possible to recursively enumerate the semantic consequences of any effective first-order theory, by enumerating all the possible formal deductions from the axioms of the theory, and use this to produce an enumeration of their conclusions.

This comes in contrast with the direct meaning of the notion of semantic consequence, that quantifies over all structures in a particular language, which is clearly not a recursive definition.

Also, it makes the concept of &quot;provability&quot;, and thus of &quot;theorem&quot;, a clear concept that only depends on the chosen system of axioms of the theory, and not on the choice of a proof system.

==Relationship to the incompleteness theorems==

Gödel&#x27;s incompleteness theorems show that there are inherent limitations to what can be proven within any given first-order theory in mathematics. The &quot;incompleteness&quot; in their name refers to another meaning of &quot;complete&quot; (see model theory – Using the compactness and completeness theorems): A theory formula_12 is complete (or decidable) if every sentence formula_13 in the language of formula_12 is either provable (formula_15) or disprovable (formula_16).

The first incompleteness theorem states that any formula_12 which is consistent, effective and contains Robinson arithmetic (&quot;Q&quot;) must be incomplete in this sense, by explicitly constructing a sentence formula_18 which is demonstrably neither provable nor disprovable within formula_12. The second incompleteness theorem extends this result by showing that formula_18 can be chosen so that it expresses the consistency of formula_12 itself.

Since formula_18 cannot be proven in formula_12, the completeness theorem implies the existence of a model of formula_12 in which formula_18 is false. In fact, formula_18 is a Π1 sentence, i.e. it states that some finitistic property is true of all natural numbers; so if it is false, then some natural number is a counterexample. If this counterexample existed within the standard natural numbers, its existence would disprove formula_18 within formula_12; but the incompleteness theorem showed this to be impossible, so the counterexample must not be a standard number, and thus any model of formula_12 in which formula_18 is false must include non-standard numbers.

In fact, the model of &quot;any&quot; theory containing &quot;Q&quot; obtained by the systematic construction of the arithmetical model existence theorem, is &quot;always&quot; non-standard with a non-equivalent provability predicate and a non-equivalent way to interpret its own construction, so that this construction is non-recursive (as recursive definitions would be unambiguous).

Also, if formula_12 is at least slightly stronger than &quot;Q&quot; (e.g. if it includes induction for bounded existential formulas), then Tennenbaum&#x27;s theorem shows that it has no recursive non-standard models.

==Relationship to the compactness theorem==
The completeness theorem and the compactness theorem are two cornerstones of first-order logic. While neither of these theorems can be proven in a completely effective manner, each one can be effectively obtained from the other.

The compactness theorem says that if a formula φ is a logical consequence of a (possibly infinite) set of formulas Γ then it is a logical consequence of a finite subset of Γ. This is an immediate consequence of the completeness theorem, because only a finite number of axioms from Γ can be mentioned in a formal deduction of φ, and the soundness of the deductive system then implies φ is a logical consequence of this finite set. This proof of the compactness theorem is originally due to Gödel.

Conversely, for many deductive systems, it is possible to prove the completeness theorem as an effective consequence of the compactness theorem.

The ineffectiveness of the completeness theorem can be measured along the lines of reverse mathematics. When considered over a countable language, the completeness and compactness theorems are equivalent to each other and equivalent to a weak form of choice known as weak Kőnig&#x27;s lemma, with the equivalence provable in RCA0 (a second-order variant of Peano arithmetic restricted to induction over Σ01 formulas). Weak Kőnig&#x27;s lemma is provable in ZF, the system of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory without axiom of choice, and thus the completeness and compactness theorems for countable languages are provable in ZF. However the situation is different when the language is of arbitrary large cardinality since then, though the completeness and compactness theorems remain provably equivalent to each other in ZF, they are also provably equivalent to a weak form of the axiom of choice known as the ultrafilter lemma. In particular, no theory extending ZF can prove either the completeness or compactness theorems over arbitrary (possibly uncountable) languages without also proving the ultrafilter lemma on a set of the same cardinality.

==Completeness in other logics==
The completeness theorem is a central property of first-order logic that does not hold for all logics. Second-order logic, for example, does not have a completeness theorem for its standard semantics (though does have the completeness property for Henkin semantics), and the set of logically valid formulas in second-order logic is not recursively enumerable. The same is true of all higher-order logics. It is possible to produce sound deductive systems for higher-order logics, but no such system can be complete.

Lindström&#x27;s theorem states that first-order logic is the strongest (subject to certain constraints) logic satisfying both compactness and completeness.

A completeness theorem can be proved for modal logic or intuitionistic logic with respect to Kripke semantics.

==Proofs==
Gödel&#x27;s original proof of the theorem proceeded by reducing the problem to a special case for formulas in a certain syntactic form, and then handling this form with an &quot;ad hoc&quot; argument.

In modern logic texts, Gödel&#x27;s completeness theorem is usually proved with Henkin&#x27;s proof, rather than with Gödel&#x27;s original proof. Henkin&#x27;s proof directly constructs a term model for any consistent first-order theory. James Margetson (2004) developed a computerized formal proof using the Isabelle theorem prover. Other proofs are also known.

==See also==
* Original proof of Gödel&#x27;s completeness theorem
* Trakhtenbrot&#x27;s theorem

==References==
==Further reading==
* The first proof of the completeness theorem.
* The same material as the dissertation, except with briefer proofs, more succinct explanations, and omitting the lengthy introduction.
* Chapter 5: &quot;Gödel&#x27;s completeness theorem&quot;.

==External links==
* Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: &quot;Kurt Gödel&quot;—by Juliette Kennedy.
* MacTutor biography: Kurt Gödel. 
* Detlovs, Vilnis, and Podnieks, Karlis, &quot;Introduction to mathematical logic.&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q902052" start="0" end="33" title="Gödel&amp;#x27;s completeness theorem" label="Gödel&amp;#x27;s completeness theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166618" start="62" end="80" title="mathematical logic" label="mathematical logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="123" end="131" title="semantics" label="semantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q260168" start="152" end="163" title="Provability logic" label="provability"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055684" start="167" end="184" title="first-order logic" label="first-order logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859910" start="239" end="245" title="Theory (mathematical logic)" label="theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q200787" start="571" end="606" title="Gödel&amp;#x27;s incompleteness theorem" label="Gödel&amp;#x27;s incompleteness theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q467606" start="887" end="899" title="model theory" label="model theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q852732" start="956" end="968" title="proof theory" label="proof theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q649732" start="1026" end="1039" title="formal system" label="formal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q41390" start="1066" end="1076" title="Kurt Gödel" label="Kurt Gödel"/>
<link wikidata="Q111637" start="1114" end="1125" title="Leon Henkin" label="Leon Henkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266946" start="1142" end="1154" title="Ph.D. thesis" label="Ph.D. thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527182" start="1294" end="1313" title="Gisbert Hasenjaeger" label="Gisbert Hasenjaeger"/>
<link wikidata="Q649732" start="1361" end="1377" title="deductive system" label="deductive system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572108" start="1423" end="1440" title="natural deduction" label="natural deduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q910361" start="1445" end="1466" title="Hilbert-style deduction system" label="Hilbert-style systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067937" start="1597" end="1601" title="tree structure" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="1757" end="1766" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="1779" end="1787" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047000" start="1920" end="1935" title="Validity (logic)" label="logically valid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851710" start="1965" end="1974" title="structure (mathematical logic)" label="structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q693083" start="2551" end="2560" title="soundness theorem" label="soundness"/>
<link wikidata="Q693083" start="3522" end="3531" title="soundness theorem" label="soundness"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="3730" end="3744" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q374182" start="3871" end="3890" title="logical consequence" label="logical consequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851710" start="4220" end="4225" title="model (mathematical logic)" label="model"/>
<link wikidata="Q659746" start="4332" end="4342" title="well-order" label="well-order"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="4492" end="4506" title="if and only if" label="if and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q874429" start="4724" end="4736" title="group theory" label="group theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319773" start="5028" end="5039" title="consistency" label="consistency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5075" end="5098" title="Consistency#Henkin&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="model existence theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068283" start="5484" end="5508" title="Löwenheim–Skolem theorem" label="Löwenheim–Skolem theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q842755" start="6021" end="6037" title="Peano arithmetic" label="Peano arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6542" end="6544" title="arithmetical hierarchy#The arithmetical hierarchy of sets of natural numbers" label="Δ2"/>
<link wikidata="Q676835" start="6644" end="6665" title="enumerable set" label="recursively enumerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148456" start="6699" end="6708" title="effectively computable" label="effective"/>
<link wikidata="Q200787" start="7325" end="7361" title="Gödel&amp;#x27;s incompleteness theorems" label="Gödel&amp;#x27;s incompleteness theorems"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7577" end="7639" title="Model theory#Using the compactness and completeness theorems" label="model theory – Using the compactness and completeness theorems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319773" start="7879" end="7889" title="consistent" label="consistent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148456" start="7891" end="7900" title="effectively computable" label="effective"/>
<link wikidata="Q928884" start="7914" end="7933" title="Robinson arithmetic" label="Robinson arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q669094" start="8438" end="8449" title="Arithmetical hierarchy" label="Π1 sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3318130" start="8909" end="8929" title="Non-standard model of arithmetic" label="non-standard numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226803" start="9459" end="9484" title="Tennenbaum&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Tennenbaum&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149458" start="9615" end="9634" title="compactness theorem" label="compactness theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148456" start="9740" end="9749" title="effectively computable" label="effective"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005236" start="10538" end="10557" title="reverse mathematics" label="reverse mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005236" start="10722" end="10745" title="weak Kőnig&amp;#x27;s lemma" label="weak Kőnig&amp;#x27;s lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q842755" start="10812" end="10828" title="Peano arithmetic" label="Peano arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191849" start="10930" end="10957" title="Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory" label="Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q179692" start="11330" end="11345" title="axiom of choice" label="axiom of choice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11355" end="11376" title="Boolean prime ideal theorem#The ultrafilter lemma" label="the ultrafilter lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055684" start="11683" end="11700" title="first-order logic" label="first-order logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548746" start="11736" end="11754" title="Second-order logic" label="Second-order logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548746" start="11881" end="11897" title="Henkin semantics" label="Henkin semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379128" start="12150" end="12174" title="Lindström&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Lindström&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q210841" start="12349" end="12360" title="modal logic" label="modal logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q176786" start="12364" end="12384" title="intuitionistic logic" label="intuitionistic logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462350" start="12401" end="12417" title="Kripke semantics" label="Kripke semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102603" start="12444" end="12473" title="Original proof of Gödel&amp;#x27;s completeness theorem" label="original proof of the theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q111637" start="12714" end="12720" title="Leon Henkin" label="Henkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609475" start="12823" end="12833" title="term model" label="term model"/>
<link wikidata="Q460340" start="12944" end="12952" title="Isabelle (theorem prover)" label="Isabelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102603" start="13014" end="13065" title="Original proof of Gödel&amp;#x27;s completeness theorem" label="Original proof of Gödel&amp;#x27;s completeness theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q10965882" start="13068" end="13095" title="Trakhtenbrot&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Trakhtenbrot&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q824553" start="13397" end="13432" title="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy" label="Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q62389029" start="13460" end="13476" title="Juliette Kennedy" label="Juliette Kennedy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12451" wikidata="Q37402" url="?curid=12451" title="Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point">
<text>A Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP), sometimes referred to as a golden spike, is an internationally agreed upon reference point on a stratigraphic section which defines the lower boundary of a stage on the geologic time scale. The effort to define GSSPs is conducted by the International Commission on Stratigraphy, a part of the International Union of Geological Sciences. Most, but not all, GSSPs are based on paleontological changes. Hence GSSPs are usually described in terms of transitions between different faunal stages, though far more faunal stages have been described than GSSPs. The GSSP definition effort commenced in 1977. As of 2024, 79 of the 101 stages that need a GSSP have a ratified GSSP.

==Rules==
A geologic section has to fulfill a set of criteria to be adapted as a GSSP by the ICS. The following list summarizes the criteria:

* A GSSP has to define the lower boundary of a geologic stage.
* The lower boundary has to be defined using a primary marker (usually first appearance datum of a fossil species).
** There should also be secondary markers (other fossils, chemical, geomagnetic reversal).
** The horizon in which the marker appears should have minerals that can be radiometrically dated.
** The marker has to have regional and global correlation in outcrops of the same age.
** The marker should be independent of facies.
* The outcrop has to have an adequate thickness.
* Sedimentation has to be continuous without any changes in facies.
* The outcrop should be unaffected by tectonic and sedimentary movements, and metamorphism.
* The outcrop has to be accessible to research and free to access.
** This includes that the outcrop has to be located where it can be visited quickly (International airport and good roads), has to be kept in good condition (ideally a national reserve), in accessible terrain, extensive enough to allow repeated sampling and open to researchers of all nationalities.

==Agreed-upon Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Points==


Once a GSSP boundary has been agreed upon, a &#x27;golden spike&#x27; is driven into the geologic section to mark the precise boundary for future geologists (though in practice the &#x27;spike&#x27; need neither be golden nor an actual spike). As such, GSSPs are also sometimes referred to as &quot;golden spikes&quot;. The first stratigraphic boundary was defined in 1972 by identifying the Silurian-Devonian boundary with a bronze plaque at a locality called Klonk, northeast of the village of Suchomasty in the Czech Republic. 

===Fortune Head GSSP===
The Precambrian-Cambrian boundary GSSP at Fortune Head, Newfoundland is a typical GSSP. It is accessible by paved road and is set aside as a nature preserve. A continuous section is available from beds that are clearly Precambrian into beds that are clearly Cambrian. The boundary is set at the first appearance of a complex trace fossil &quot;Treptichnus pedum&quot; that is found worldwide. The Fortune Head GSSP is unlikely to be washed away or built over. Nonetheless, &quot;Treptichnus pedum&quot; is less than ideal as a marker fossil as it is not found in every Cambrian sequence, and it is not assured that it is found at the same level in every exposure. In fact, further eroding its value as a boundary marker, it has since been identified in strata 4m &quot;below&quot; the GSSP.
However, no other fossil is known that would be preferable. There is no radiometrically datable bed at the boundary at Fortune Head, but there is one slightly above the boundary in similar beds nearby.
These factors have led some geologists to suggest that this GSSP is in need of reassigning.

==Global Standard Stratigraphic Ages==

Because defining a GSSP depends on finding well-preserved geologic sections and identifying key events, this task becomes more difficult as one goes farther back in time. Before 630 million years ago, boundaries on the geologic timescale are defined simply by reference to fixed dates, known as &quot;Global Standard Stratigraphic Ages&quot; (GSSAs).

==See also==

*Body plan
*MN zonation
*Fauna
*Geologic time scale
**New Zealand geologic time scale
*North American land mammal age
*Type locality

==Notes==

==References==
* Hedberg, H.D., (editor), &quot;International stratigraphic guide: A guide to stratigraphic classification, terminology, and procedure&quot;, New York, John Wiley and Sons, 1976
* 
* 
* , 

==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37402" start="2" end="46" title="Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point" label="Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q37402" start="48" end="52" title="Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point" label="GSSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q37402" start="82" end="94" title="Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point" label="golden spike"/>
<link wikidata="Q644757" start="151" end="172" title="stratigraphic section" label="stratigraphic section"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123245" start="211" end="216" title="stage (stratigraphy)" label="stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="224" end="243" title="geologic time scale" label="geologic time scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q402104" start="292" end="332" title="International Commission on Stratigraphy" label="International Commission on Stratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q579663" start="348" end="390" title="International Union of Geological Sciences" label="International Union of Geological Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="430" end="445" title="paleontology" label="paleontological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123245" start="531" end="543" title="faunal stage" label="faunal stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q402104" start="820" end="823" title="International Commission on Stratigraphy" label="ICS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123245" start="926" end="931" title="Stage (stratigraphy)" label="stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454123" start="1004" end="1026" title="first appearance datum" label="first appearance datum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729912" start="1107" end="1115" title="Chemostratigraphy" label="chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059740" start="1117" end="1137" title="geomagnetic reversal" label="geomagnetic reversal"/>
<link wikidata="Q214753" start="1216" end="1237" title="Radiometric dating" label="radiometrically dated"/>
<link wikidata="Q742139" start="1365" end="1371" title="facies" label="facies"/>
<link wikidata="Q62412" start="2406" end="2414" title="Silurian" label="Silurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="2415" end="2423" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131298" start="2475" end="2480" title="Klonk" label="Klonk"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="2528" end="2542" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q103910" start="2574" end="2585" title="Precambrian" label="Precambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="2586" end="2594" title="Cambrian" label="Cambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q22494755" start="2612" end="2624" title="Fortune Head" label="Fortune Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q48335" start="2626" end="2638" title="Newfoundland (island)" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="2711" end="2726" title="nature preserve" label="nature preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q841634" start="2914" end="2931" title="Treptichnus pedum" label="Treptichnus pedum"/>
<link wikidata="Q214753" start="3433" end="3456" title="radiometric dating" label="radiometrically datable"/>
<link wikidata="Q32831" start="4063" end="4072" title="Body plan" label="Body plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6716938" start="4074" end="4085" title="MN zonation" label="MN zonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q104021" start="4087" end="4092" title="Fauna" label="Fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="4094" end="4113" title="Geologic time scale" label="Geologic time scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016419" start="4116" end="4147" title="New Zealand geologic time scale" label="New Zealand geologic time scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920925" start="4149" end="4179" title="North American land mammal age" label="North American land mammal age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973416" start="4181" end="4194" title="Type locality (geology)" label="Type locality"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12454" wikidata="Q23333" url="?curid=12454" title="Gough Whitlam">
<text>Edward Gough Whitlam (11 July 191621 October 2014) was the 21st prime minister of Australia, serving from December 1972 to November 1975. To date the longest-serving federal leader of the Australian Labor Party (ALP), he was notable for being the head of a reformist and socially progressive government that ended with his controversial dismissal by the then-governor-general of Australia, Sir John Kerr, at the climax of the 1975 constitutional crisis. Whitlam remains the only Australian prime minister to have been removed from office by a governor-general.

Whitlam was an air navigator in the Royal Australian Air Force for four years during World War II, and worked as a barrister following the war. He was first elected to the Australian House of Representatives in 1952, becoming a member of parliament (MP) for the division of Werriwa. Whitlam became deputy leader of the Labor Party in 1960, and in 1967, after the retirement of Arthur Calwell, was elected leader of the party and became the Leader of the Opposition. After narrowly losing the 1969 federal election to John Gorton, Whitlam led Labor to victory at the 1972 election, after 23 years of Coalition government.

In its first term, the Whitlam government introduced numerous socially progressive and reformist policies and initiatives, including the termination of military conscription and the end of Australian involvement in the Vietnam War, institution of universal health care and free university education, and the implementation of legal aid programmes. With the opposition-controlled Australian Senate delaying passage of bills, Whitlam called a snap double dissolution election in May 1974 in which he won a slightly reduced majority in the House of Representatives, and picked up three Senate seats to hold equal Senate numbers to the opposition. The Whitlam government then instituted the first and only joint sitting enabled under section 57 of the Australian constitution as part of the double dissolution process. His government&#x27;s second term was dominated by a declining economy suffering from the 1973 oil crisis and the 1970s global recession, as well as a political scandal known as the Loans affair, which led to the removal of two government ministers. The opposition continued to obstruct Whitlam&#x27;s agenda in the Senate.

In late 1975, the opposition senators refused to allow a vote on the government&#x27;s appropriation bills, returning them to the House of Representatives with a demand that the government go to an election. Whitlam argued that his government, which held a clear majority in the House of Representatives, was being held to ransom by the Senate. The crisis ended in mid-November, when governor-general Sir John Kerr dismissed him from office and commissioned the opposition leader, Malcolm Fraser, as caretaker prime minister. Labor lost the subsequent election by a landslide. Whitlam stepped down as leader of the party after losing again at the 1977 election, and retired from parliament the following year. Upon the election of the Hawke government in 1983, he was appointed as Ambassador to UNESCO, a position he filled with distinction, and was elected a member of the UNESCO Executive Board. He remained active into his nineties. The propriety and circumstances of his dismissal and the legacy of his government have been frequently debated in the decades since he left office. Whitlam is often ranked in the upper-tier of Australian prime ministers by political experts and academics, with political journalist Paul Kelly writing in 1994 that &quot;there is no doubt that in three years his government was responsible for more reforms and innovations than any other government in Australian history&quot;.

==Early life==

Edward Gough Whitlam was born on 11 July 1916 at the family home &#x27;Ngara&#x27;, 46 Rowland Street, Kew, a suburb of Melbourne, the elder of two children (his sister, Freda, was born four years after him), to Martha (née Maddocks) and Fred Whitlam. His father was a federal public servant who later was Commonwealth Crown Solicitor, and Whitlam senior&#x27;s involvement in human rights issues was a powerful influence on his son. Since his maternal grandfather was also named Edward, from early childhood he was called by his middle name, Gough, which had come from his paternal grandfather who had been named after the British soldier Field-Marshal Hugh Gough, 1st Viscount Gough.

In 1918, Fred Whitlam was promoted to deputy Crown solicitor and transferred to Sydney. The family lived first in the North Shore suburb of Mosman and then in Turramurra. At age six, Gough began his education at Chatswood Church of England Girls&#x27; School (early primary schooling at a girls&#x27; school was not unusual for small boys at the time). After a year there, he attended Mowbray House School and Knox Grammar School in the suburbs of Sydney.

Fred Whitlam was promoted again in 1927, this time to Assistant Crown Solicitor. The position was located in the new national capital of Canberra, and the Whitlam family moved there. As of 2008, Whitlam was the only prime minister to have spent his formative years in Canberra. At the time, conditions remained primitive in what was dubbed &quot;the bush capital&quot; and &quot;the land of the blowflies&quot;. Gough attended the government Telopea Park School. In 1932, Whitlam&#x27;s father transferred him to Canberra Grammar School where, at the Speech Day ceremony that year, he was awarded a prize by the Governor-General, Sir Isaac Isaacs.

Whitlam enrolled at St Paul&#x27;s College at the University of Sydney at the age of 18. He earned his first wages by appearing, with several other &quot;Paulines&quot;, in a cabaret scene in the film &quot;The Broken Melody&quot;the students were chosen because St Paul&#x27;s required formal wear at dinner, and they could therefore supply their own costumes. After receiving a Bachelor of Arts degree with second-class honours in classics, Whitlam remained at St Paul&#x27;s to study law. He had originally contemplated an academic career, but his lacklustre marks made that unlikely. Dropping out of Greek classes, he professed himself unable to care for the &quot;dry as dust&quot; lectures of Enoch Powell.

==Military service==

Soon after the outbreak of World War II in 1939, Whitlam enlisted in the Sydney University Regiment, part of the Militia. In late 1941, following the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, and with a year remaining in his legal studies, he volunteered for the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF). In 1942, while awaiting entry into the service, Whitlam met and married Margaret Elaine Dovey, who had swum for Australia in the 1938 British Empire Games and was the daughter of barrister and future New South Wales Supreme Court judge Bill Dovey. He entered the RAAF on 20 June 1942.

Whitlam trained as a navigator and bomb aimer, before serving with No. 13 Squadron RAAF, based mainly on the Gove Peninsula, Northern Territory, flying Lockheed Ventura bombers. He reached the rank of Flight Lieutenant. While in the service, he began his political activities, distributing literature for the Australian Labor Party during the 1943 federal election and urging the passage of the 1944 &quot;Fourteen Powers&quot; referendum, which would have expanded the powers of the federal government. Although the party was victorious, the referendum it advocated was defeated. In 1961, Whitlam said of the referendum defeat, &quot;My hopes were dashed by the outcome and from that moment I determined to do all I could do to modernise the Australian Constitution.&quot; While still in uniform, Whitlam joined the ALP in Sydney in 1945. He was discharged from the RAAF on 17 October 1945, and continued to use Air Force log books to record all the flights he took until 2007. After the war, he obtained his Bachelor of Laws; he was admitted to the federal and New South Wales bars in 1947.

==Early political career, 1952–1967==
===Member of Parliament, 1952–1960===

With his war service loan, Whitlam built a house in seaside Cronulla. He also bought the block of land next door, using the prize money (£1,000 in security bonds) he received for winning the Australian National Quiz Championship in 1948 and 1949 (he was runner-up in 1950). He sought to make a career in the ALP there, but local Labor supporters were sceptical of Whitlam&#x27;s loyalties, given his privileged background. In the postwar years, he practised law, concentrating on landlord/tenant matters, and sought to build his bona fides in the party. He ran twiceunsuccessfullyfor the local council, once (also unsuccessfully) for the New South Wales Legislative Assembly, and campaigned for other candidates. In 1951, Bert Lazzarini, the Labor member for the Federal electorate of Werriwa, announced that he would stand down at the next election. Whitlam won the preselection as ALP candidate. Lazzarini died in 1952 before completing his term and Whitlam was elected to the House of Representatives in the ensuing by-election on 29 November 1952. Whitlam trebled Lazzarini&#x27;s majority in a 12 per cent swing to Labor.

Whitlam joined the ALP minority in the House of Representatives. His maiden speech provoked an interruption by a future prime minister, John McEwen, who was then told by the Speaker that maiden speeches are traditionally heard in silence. Whitlam responded to McEwen by saying Benjamin Disraeli had been heckled in his maiden speech and had responded, &quot;The time will come when you shall hear me.&quot; He told McEwen, &quot;The time will come when you may interrupt me.&quot; According to early Whitlam biographers Laurie Oakes and David Solomon, this cool response put the Coalition government on notice that he would be a force to be reckoned with.

In the rough and tumble debate in the House of Representatives, Whitlam called fellow MHR Bill Bourke &quot;this grizzling Quisling&quot;, Garfield Barwick (who, as High Court Chief Justice, played a role in Whitlam&#x27;s downfall) a &quot;bumptious bastard&quot;, and he said Bill Wentworth exhibited a &quot;hereditary streak of insanity&quot;. After calling future prime minister William McMahon a &quot;quean&quot;, he apologised.

The ALP had been out of office since the Chifley Government&#x27;s defeat in 1949 and, since 1951, had been under the leadership of Bert Evatt, whom Whitlam greatly admired. In 1954, the ALP seemed likely to return to power. The Prime Minister, Robert Menzies, adroitly used the defection of a Soviet official to his advantage, and his coalition of the Liberal and Country parties was returned in the 1954 election with a seven-seat majority. After the election, Evatt attempted to purge the party of industrial groupers, who had long dissented from party policy, and who were predominantly Catholic and anti-communist. The ensuing division in the ALP, which came to be known as &quot;The Split&quot;, sparked the birth of the Democratic Labor Party (DLP). The conflict helped to keep Labor out of power for a generation, since DLP supporters chose the Liberal Party in preferential voting. Whitlam supported Evatt throughout this period.

In 1955, a redistribution divided Whitlam&#x27;s electorate of Werriwa in two, with his Cronulla home located in the new electorate of Hughes. Although Whitlam would have received ALP support in either division, he chose to continue standing for Werriwa and moved from Cronulla to Cabramatta. This meant even longer journeys for his older children to attend school, since neither electorate had a high school at the time; they attended school in Sydney.

Whitlam was appointed to the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Constitutional Review in 1956. Biographer Jenny Hocking calls his service on the committee, which included members from all parties in both chambers of Parliament, one of the &quot;great influences in his political development&quot;. According to Hocking, service on the committee caused Whitlam to focus not on internal conflicts consuming the ALP, but on Labor goals which were possible and worthwhile in the constitutional framework. Many Labor goals, such as nationalisation, ran contrary to the Constitution. Whitlam came to believe the Constitutionand especially Section 96 (which allowed the federal government to make grants to the states)could be used to advance a worthwhile Labor programme.

===Deputy Leader, 1960–1967===
By the late 1950s Whitlam was seen as a leadership contender once the existing Labor leaders exited the scene. Most of the party&#x27;s major figures, including Evatt, Deputy Leader Arthur Calwell, Eddie Ward, and Reg Pollard, were in their sixties, twenty years older than Whitlam. In 1960, after losing three elections, Evatt resigned and was replaced by Calwell, with Whitlam defeating Ward for deputy leader. Calwell came within a handful of votes of winning the cliffhanger 1961 election. He had not wanted Whitlam as deputy leader, and believed Labor would have won if Ward had been in the position.

Soon after the 1961 election, events began to turn against Labor. When President Sukarno of Indonesia announced that he intended to take over West New Guinea as the colonial Dutch departed, Calwell responded by declaring that Indonesia must be stopped by force. Calwell&#x27;s statement was called &quot;crazy and irresponsible&quot; by Prime Minister Menzies, and the incident reduced public support for the ALP. At that time, the Federal Conference of the Labor Party, which dictated policy to parliamentary members, consisted of six members from each state, but not Calwell or Whitlam. In early 1963 a special conference met in a Canberra hotel to determine Labor policy regarding a proposed US base in northern Australia; Calwell and Whitlam were photographed by &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot; peering in through the doors, waiting for the verdict. In an accompanying story, Alan Reid of the &quot;Telegraph&quot; wrote that Labor was ruled by &quot;36 faceless men&quot;. The Liberals seized on it, issuing a leaflet called &quot;Mr Calwell and the Faceless Men&quot; which accused Calwell and Whitlam of taking direction from &quot;36 unknown men, not elected to Parliament nor responsible to the people&quot;.

Menzies manipulated the Opposition on issues that bitterly divided it, such as direct aid to the states for private schools, and the proposed base. He called an early election for November 1963, standing in support of those two issues. The Prime Minister performed better than Calwell on television and received an unexpected boost after the assassination of US President John F. Kennedy. As a result, the Coalition easily defeated Labor on a 10-seat swing. Whitlam had hoped Calwell would step down after 1963, but he remained, reasoning that Evatt had been given three opportunities to win, and that he should be allowed a third try. Calwell dismissed proposals that the ALP leader and deputy leader should be entitled to membership of the party&#x27;s conference (or on its governing 12-person Federal Executive, which had two representatives from each state), and instead ran successfully for one of the conference&#x27;s Victoria seats. Labor did badly in a 1964 by-election in the Tasmanian electorate of Denison, and lost seats in the 1964 half-Senate election. The party was also defeated in the state elections in the most populous state, New South Wales, surrendering control of the state government for the first time since 1941.

Whitlam&#x27;s relationship with Calwell, never good, deteriorated further after publication of a 1965 article in &quot;The Australian&quot; reporting off-the-record comments Whitlam had made that his leader was &quot;too old and weak&quot; to win office, and that the party might be gravely damaged by an &quot;old-fashioned&quot; 70-year-old Calwell seeking his first term as prime minister. Later that year, at Whitlam&#x27;s and Don Dunstan&#x27;s urging, and over Calwell&#x27;s objection, the biennial party conference made major changes to the party&#x27;s platform: deleting support for the White Australia policy and making the ALP&#x27;s leader and deputy leader &quot;ex officio&quot; members of the conference and executive, along with the party&#x27;s leader and deputy leader in the Senate. As Whitlam considered the Senate unrepresentative, he opposed the admission of its ALP leaders to the party&#x27;s governing bodies.

Menzies retired in January 1966, and was succeeded as prime minister by the new Liberal Party leader, Harold Holt. After years of politics being dominated by the elderly Menzies and Calwell, the younger Holt was seen as a breath of fresh air, and attracted public interest and support in the run-up to the November election.

In early 1966, the 36-member conference, with Calwell&#x27;s assent, banned any ALP parliamentarian from supporting federal assistance to the states for spending on both government and private schools, commonly called &quot;state aid&quot;. Whitlam broke with the party on the issue, and was charged with gross disloyalty by the executive, an offence which carried the penalty of expulsion from the party. Before the matter could be heard, Whitlam left for Queensland, where he campaigned intensively for the ALP candidate Rex Patterson in the Dawson by-election. The ALP won, dealing the government its first by-election defeat since 1952. Whitlam survived the expulsion vote by a margin of only two, gaining both Queensland votes. At the end of April, Whitlam challenged Calwell for the leadership; though Calwell received two-thirds of the vote, he announced that if the party lost the upcoming election, he would not stand again for the leadership.

Holt called an election for November 1966, in which Australia&#x27;s involvement in the Vietnam War was a major issue. Calwell called for an &quot;immediate and unconditional withdrawal&quot; of Australian troops from Vietnam. Whitlam, however, said this would deprive Australia of any voice in a settlement, and that regular troops, rather than conscripts, should remain under some circumstances. Calwell considered Whitlam&#x27;s remark disastrous, disputing the party line just five days before the election. The ALP suffered a crushing defeat; the party was reduced to 41 seats in the House of Representatives. Shortly after the election, Whitlam faced another expulsion vote for his stance on Vietnam, and survived. True to his word, Calwell resigned two months after the election. At the caucus meeting on 8February 1967, Whitlam was elected party leader, defeating leading left-wing candidate Jim Cairns.

==Leader of the Opposition, 1967–1972==
===Reforming the ALP===

Whitlam believed the Labor Party had little chance of being elected unless it could expand its appeal from the traditional working-class base to include the suburban middle class. He sought to shift control of the ALP from union officials to the parliamentary party, and hoped even rank-and-file party members could be given a voice in the conference. In 1968, controversy erupted within the party when the executive refused to seat new Tasmanian delegate Brian Harradine, a Whitlam supporter who was considered a right-wing extremist. Whitlam resigned the leadership, demanding a vote of confidence from caucus. He defeated Cairns for the leadership in an unexpectedly close 38–32 vote. Despite the vote, the executive refused to seat Harradine.

With the ALP&#x27;s governing bodies unwilling to reform themselves, Whitlam worked to build support for change among ordinary party members. He successfully reduced union influence in the party, though he was never able to give the rank and file a direct vote in selecting the executive. The Victoria branch of the party had long been a problem; its executive was far to the left of the rest of the ALP, and had little electoral success. Whitlam was able to reconstruct the Victoria party organisation against the will of its leaders, and the reconstituted state party proved essential to victory in the 1972 election.

By the time of the 1969 party conference, Whitlam had gained considerable control over the ALP. That conference passed 61 resolutions, including broad changes to party policy and procedures. It called for the establishment of an Australian Schools Commission to consider the proper level of state aid for schools and universities, recognition of Aboriginal land claims, and expanded party policy on universal health care. The conference also called for increased federal involvement in urban planning, and formed the basis of &quot;The Program&quot; of modern socialism which Whitlam and the ALP presented to voters in 1972.

Since 1918, Labor had called for the abolition of the existing Australian Constitution, and the vesting of all political power in Parliament, a plan which would turn the states into powerless geographic regions. Beginning in 1965, Whitlam sought to change this goal. He finally succeeded at the 1971 ALP Conference in Launceston, Tasmania, which called for Parliament to receive &quot;such plenary powers as are necessary and desirable&quot; to achieve the ALP&#x27;s goals in domestic and international affairs. Labor also pledged to abolish the Senate; this goal was not erased from the party platform until 1979, after Whitlam had stepped down as leader.

===Leader of the Opposition===

Soon after taking the leadership, Whitlam reorganised the ALP caucus, assigning portfolios and turning the Labor frontbench into a shadow cabinet. While the Liberal-Country Coalition had a huge majority in the House of Representatives, Whitlam energised the party by campaigning intensively to win two by-elections in 1967: first in Corio in Victoria, and later that year in Capricornia in Queensland. The November half-Senate election saw a moderate swing to Labor and against the Coalition, compared with the general election the previous year. These federal victories, in which both Whitlam and Holt campaigned, helped give Whitlam the leverage he needed to carry out party reforms.

At the end of 1967, Holt vanished while swimming in rough seas near Melbourne; his body was never recovered. John McEwen, as leader of the junior Coalition partner, the Country Party, took over as prime minister for three weeks until the Liberals could elect a new leader. Senator John Gorton won the vote and became prime minister. The leadership campaign was conducted mostly by television, and Gorton appeared to have the visual appeal needed to keep Whitlam out of office. Gorton resigned his seat in the Senate, and in February 1968 won the by-election for Holt&#x27;s seat of Higgins in Victoria. For the remainder of the year, Gorton appeared to have the better of Whitlam in the House of Representatives. In his chronicle of the Whitlam years, however, speechwriter Graham Freudenberg asserts that Gorton&#x27;s erratic behaviour, Whitlam&#x27;s strengthening of his party, and events outside Australia (such as the Vietnam War) ate away at Liberal dominance.

Gorton called an election for October 1969. Whitlam and the ALP, with little internal dissension, stood on a platform calling for domestic reform, an end to conscription, and the withdrawal of Australian troops from Vietnam by 1July 1970. Whitlam knew that, given the ALP&#x27;s poor position after the 1966 election, victory was unlikely. Nevertheless, Whitlam scored an 18-seat swing, Labor&#x27;s best performance since losing government in 1949. It also scored a 7.1 per cent two-party swing, the largest to not result in a change of government. Although the Coalition was returned for an eighth term in government, it was with a slim majority of three seats, down from 19 prior to the election. Labor actually won a bare majority of the two-party vote and only DLP preferences, especially in Melbourne-area seats, kept Whitlam from becoming prime minister. The 1970 half-Senate election brought little change to Coalition control, but the Coalition vote fell below 40 per cent for the first time, representing a severe threat to Gorton&#x27;s leadership.

In March 1971, the resentment against Gorton came to a head when a confidence vote in the Liberal caucus resulted in a tie. Declaring that this was a sign he no longer had the confidence of the party, Gorton resigned, and William McMahon was elected his successor. With the Liberals in turmoil, Whitlam and the ALP sought to gain public trust as a credible government-in-waiting. The party&#x27;s actions, such as its abandonment of the White Australia policy, gained favourable media attention. The Labor leader flew to Papua New Guinea and pledged himself to the independence of what was then under Australian trusteeship. In 1971, Whitlam flew to Beijing and met with Chinese officials, including Zhou Enlai. McMahon attacked Whitlam for the visit and claimed that the Chinese had manipulated him. This attack backfired when US President Richard Nixon announced that he would visit China the following year. His National Security Advisor, Henry Kissinger, visited Beijing between 9–11 July (less than a week after Whitlam&#x27;s visit), and, unknown to Whitlam, some of Kissinger&#x27;s staff had been in Beijing at the same time as the Labor delegation. According to Whitlam biographer Jenny Hocking, the incident transformed Whitlam into an international statesman, while McMahon was seen as reacting defensively to Whitlam&#x27;s foreign policy ventures. Other errors by McMahon, such as a confused ad-lib speech while visiting Washington, and a statement to Indonesia&#x27;s President Suharto that Australia was a &quot;west European nation&quot;, also damaged the government.

By early 1972, Labor had established a clear lead in the polls; indeed, for the first time since 1955 its support was greater than the combined vote for the Coalition and DLP. Unemployment was at a ten-year peak, rising to 2.14 per cent in August (though the unemployment rate was calculated differently compared to the present, and did not include thousands of rural workers on Commonwealth-financed relief work). Inflation was also at its highest rate since the early 1950s. The government recovered slightly in the August Budget session of Parliament, proposing income tax cuts and increased spending. The Labor strategy for the run-up to the election was to sit back and allow the Coalition to make mistakes. Whitlam controversially stated in March &quot;draft-dodging is not a crime&quot; and that he would be open to a revaluation of the Australian dollar. With the Coalition sinking in the polls and his own personal approval ratings down as low as 28 per cent, McMahon waited as long as he could, finally calling an election for the House of Representatives for 2December. Whitlam noted that the polling day was the anniversary of the Battle of Austerlitz at which another &quot;ramshackle, reactionary coalition&quot; had been given a &quot;crushing defeat&quot;.

Labor campaigned under the slogan &quot;It&#x27;s Time&quot;, an echo of Menzies&#x27; successful 1949 slogan, &quot;It&#x27;s Time for a Change&quot;. Surveys showed that even Liberal voters approved of the Labor slogan. Whitlam pledged an end to conscription and the release of individuals who had refused the draft; an income tax surcharge to pay for universal health insurance; free dental care for students; and renovation of ageing urban infrastructure. The party pledged to eliminate university tuition fees and establish a schools commission to evaluate educational needs. The party benefited from the support of the proprietor of News Limited, Rupert Murdoch, who preferred Whitlam over McMahon. Labor was so dominant in the campaign that some of Whitlam&#x27;s advisers urged him to stop joking about McMahon; people were feeling sorry for him. The election saw the ALP increase its tally by 12 seats, mostly in suburban Sydney and Melbourne, for a majority of nine in the House of Representatives. The ALP gained little beyond the suburban belts, however, losing a seat in South Australia and two in Western Australia.

==Prime Minister, 1972–1975==
===First term===
====Duumvirate====

Whitlam took office with a majority in the House of Representatives, but without control of the Senate (elected in the 1967 and 1970 half-elections). The Senate at that time consisted of ten members from each of the six states, elected by single transferable vote. Historically, when Labor won government, the parliamentary caucus chose the ministers, with the party leader having the power only to assign portfolios. However, the new Labor caucus would not meet until after the final results came in on 15 December.

With Labor&#x27;s win beyond doubt even though counting was still underway, McMahon advised the Governor-General, Sir Paul Hasluck, that he was no longer in a position to govern. Soon afterward, Whitlam advised Hasluck that he could form a government with his new majority. This was in accordance with longstanding Australian constitutional practice. Convention also held that McMahon would stay on as caretaker prime minister until the full results were in. However, Whitlam was unwilling to wait that long. On 5December, per Whitlam&#x27;s request, Hasluck swore Whitlam and Labor&#x27;s deputy leader, Lance Barnard, as an interim two-man government, with Whitlam as prime minister and Barnard as deputy prime minister. The two men held 27 portfolios during the two weeks before a full cabinet could be determined.

During the two weeks the so-called &quot;duumvirate&quot; held office, Whitlam sought to fulfill those campaign promises that did not require legislation. Whitlam ordered negotiations to establish full relations with the People&#x27;s Republic of China, and broke those with Taiwan. The diplomatic relations were established in 1972 and an embassy opened in Beijing in 1973. Legislation allowed the defence minister to grant exemptions from conscription. Barnard held this office, and exempted everyone. Seven men were at that time incarcerated for refusing conscription; Whitlam arranged for their liberation. The Whitlam government in its first days reopened the equal pay case pending before the Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, and appointed a woman, Elizabeth Evatt, to the commission. Whitlam and Barnard eliminated sales tax on contraceptive pills, announced major grants for the arts, and appointed an interim schools commission. The duumvirate barred racially discriminatory sports teams from Australia, and instructed the Australian delegation at the United Nations to vote in favour of sanctions on apartheid South Africa and Rhodesia. It also ordered the Australian Army Training Team home from Vietnam, ending Australia&#x27;s involvement in the war; most troops, including all conscripts, had been withdrawn by McMahon. According to Whitlam&#x27;s speechwriter Graham Freudenberg, the duumvirate was a success, as it showed that the Labor government could manipulate the machinery of government, despite almost a quarter-century in opposition. However, Freudenberg noted that the rapid pace and public excitement caused by the duumvirate&#x27;s actions caused the Opposition to be wary of giving Labor too easy a time, and gave rise to one post-mortem assessment of the Whitlam government: &quot;We did too much too soon.&quot;

====Enacting a program====

The McMahon government had consisted of 27 ministers, twelve of whom comprised the Cabinet. In the run-up to the election, the Labor caucus had decided that if the party took power all 27 ministers were to be Cabinet members. Intense canvassing took place amongst ALP parliamentarians as the duumvirate did its work, and on 18 December the caucus elected the Cabinet. The results were generally acceptable to Whitlam, and within three hours, he had announced the portfolios of the Cabinet members. To give himself greater control over the Cabinet, in January 1973 Whitlam established five Cabinet committees (with the members appointed by himself, not the caucus) and took full control of the Cabinet agenda.

Whitlam, prime minister for fewer than three years between 1972 and 1975, pushed through a raft of reforms that radically changed Australia&#x27;s economic, legal and cultural landscape.

The Whitlam government abolished the death penalty for federal crimes. Legal aid was established, with offices in each state capital. It abolished university fees, and established the Schools Commission to allocate funds to schools. Whitlam founded the Department of Urban Development and, having lived in developing Cabramatta, most of which lacked sewage facilities, established the National Sewerage Program, which set a goal to leave no urban home unsewered. The Whitlam government gave grants directly to local government units for urban renewal, flood prevention, and the promotion of tourism. Other federal grants financed highways linking the state capitals, and paid for standard-gauge rail lines between the states. The government attempted to set up a new city at Albury–Wodonga on the Victoria–New South Wales border. The process was started for &quot;Advance Australia Fair&quot; to become the country&#x27;s national anthem in place of &quot;God Save the Queen&quot;. The Order of Australia replaced the British honours system in early 1975.

In 1973, the National Gallery of Australia, then called the Australian National Gallery, bought the painting &quot;Blue Poles&quot; by contemporary artist Jackson Pollock for US$2million (A$1.3million at the time of payment), which was about a third of its annual budget. This required Whitlam&#x27;s personal permission, which he gave on the condition the price was publicised. The purchase created a political and media scandal, and was said to symbolise, alternatively, Whitlam&#x27;s foresight and vision or his profligate spending.

Whitlam travelled extensively as prime minister, and was the first Australian prime minister to visit China while in office. He was criticised for making this visit, especially after Cyclone Tracy struck Darwin; he interrupted an extensive tour of Europe for 48 hours (deemed too brief a period by many) to view the devastation.
In keeping with Labor&#x27;s social commitments, Whitlam&#x27;s time in office witnessed significant increases in government spending. In one year, for instance, real government spending increased by 20% followed by 16% the following year. During Whitlam&#x27;s three years in office, social spending (including education) as a percentage of total Commonwealth budget outlays rose from 36.9% to 50.4.% From 1972–73 to 1975–76, spending on education as a percentage of total Commonwealth budget outlays went up from 4.3% to 8.5%, urban development from 0.5% to 1.9,% housing from 2.3% to 2.6%, social security from 20.6% to 23.2%, and health from 7.7% to 13.5%. In 1975, Whitlam justified the big increases in government spending by arguing that when Labor returned to office 1972 they had “the task of redressing many years of neglect by previous Governments in almost every field of national life.”

====Early troubles====
From the start of the Whitlam government, the Opposition, led by Billy Snedden, who replaced McMahon as Liberal leader in December 1972, sought to use control of the Senate to baulk Whitlam. It did not seek to block all government legislation; the Coalition senators, led by Senate Liberal leader Reg Withers, sought to block government legislation only when the obstruction would advance the Opposition&#x27;s agenda. The Whitlam government also had troubles in relations with the states. New South Wales refused the government&#x27;s request to close the Rhodesian Information Centre in Sydney. The Queensland premier, Joh Bjelke-Petersen refused to consider any adjustment in Queensland&#x27;s border with Papua New Guinea, which, due to the state&#x27;s ownership of islands in the Torres Strait, came within half a kilometre of the Papuan mainland. Liberal state governments in New South Wales and Victoria were re-elected by large margins in 1973. Whitlam and his majority in the House of Representatives proposed a constitutional referendum in December 1973, transferring control of wages and prices from the states to the federal government. The two propositions failed to attract a majority of voters in any state, and were rejected by over 800,000 votes nationwide.

In 1974, the Senate refused to pass six bills after they were passed twice by the House of Representatives. With the Opposition threatening to disrupt money supply to government, Whitlam used the Senate&#x27;s recalcitrance to trigger a double dissolution election, holding it instead of the half-Senate election. After a campaign featuring the Labor slogan &quot;Give Gough a fair go&quot;, the Whitlam government was returned, with its majority in the House of Representatives cut from seven to five and its Senate seats increased by three. It was only the second time since Federation that a Labor government had been elected to a second full term. The government and the opposition each had 29 Senators with two seats held by independents. The deadlock over the twice-rejected bills was broken, uniquely in Australian history, with a special joint sitting of the two houses of Parliament under Section 57 of the Constitution. This session, authorised by the new governor-general, John Kerr, passed bills providing for universal health insurance (known then as Medibank, today as Medicare) and providing the Northern Territory and Australian Capital Territory with representation in the Senate, effective at the next election.

====Murphy raids====
In February 1973, the Attorney General, Senator Lionel Murphy, led a police raid on the Melbourne office of the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation, which was under his ministerial responsibility. Murphy believed that ASIO might have files relating to threats against Yugoslav Prime Minister Džemal Bijedić, who was about to visit Australia, and feared ASIO might conceal or destroy them. The Opposition attacked the Government over the raid, terming Murphy a &quot;loose cannon&quot;. A Senate investigation of the incident was cut short when Parliament was dissolved in 1974. According to journalist and author Wallace Brown, the controversy continued to dog the Whitlam government throughout its term, because the incident was &quot;so silly&quot;.

====Gair Affair====

By early 1974, the Senate had rejected nineteen government bills, ten of them twice. With a half-Senate election due by mid-year, Whitlam looked for ways to shore up support in that body. Queensland senator and former DLP leader Vince Gair signalled his willingness to leave the Senate for a diplomatic post. Gair&#x27;s term would not expire until the following half-Senate election or upon a double dissolution election. With five Queensland seats at stake in the half-Senate election, the ALP was expected to win only two, but if six (including Gair&#x27;s) were at stake, the party would be likely to win a third. Possible control of the Senate was therefore at stake; Whitlam agreed to Gair&#x27;s request and had Governor-General Sir Paul Hasluck appoint him ambassador to Ireland. Word leaked of Gair&#x27;s pending resignation, and Whitlam&#x27;s opponents attempted to counteract his manoeuvre. On what became known as the &quot;Night of the Long Prawns&quot;, Country Party members secreted Gair at a small party in a legislative office as the ALP searched for him to secure his written resignation. As Gair enjoyed beer and prawns, Bjelke-Petersen advised the Queensland governor, Colin Hannah, to issue writs for only the usual five vacancies, since Gair&#x27;s seat was not yet vacant, effectively countering Whitlam&#x27;s plan.

===Second term===
By mid-1974, Australia was in an economic slump, suffering from the 1973 oil crisis and 1973–1975 recession. The 1973 oil crisis had caused prices to spike and, according to government figures, inflation topped 13 per cent for over a year between 1973 and 1974. Part of the inflation was due to Whitlam&#x27;s desire to increase wages and conditions of the Commonwealth Public Service as a pacesetter for the private sector. The Whitlam government had cut tariffs by 25 per cent in 1973; 1974 saw an increase in imports of 30 per cent and a $1.5billion increase in the trade deficit. Primary producers of commodities such as beef were caught in a credit squeeze as short-term rates rose to extremely high levels. Unemployment also rose significantly. Unease within the ALP led to Barnard&#x27;s defeat when Jim Cairns challenged him for his deputy leadership. Whitlam gave little help to his embattled deputy.

Despite these economic indicators, the Budget presented in August 1974 saw large increases in spending, especially in education. Treasury officials had advised a series of tax and fee increases, ranging from excise taxes to the cost of posting a letter; their advice was mostly rejected by Cabinet. The Budget was unsuccessful in dealing with the inflation and unemployment, and Whitlam introduced large tax cuts in November. He also announced additional spending to help the private sector.

Beginning in October 1974, the Whitlam government sought overseas loans to finance its development plans, with the newly enriched oil nations a likely target. Whitlam attempted to secure financing before informing the Loan Council which included state officials hostile to Whitlam. His government empowered Pakistani financier Tirath Khemlani as an intermediary in the hope of securing US$4billion in loans. While the Loans Affair did not result in a loan, according to author and Whitlam speechwriter Graham Freudenberg, &quot;The only cost involved was the cost to the reputation of the Government. That cost was to be immenseit was government itself.&quot;

Whitlam appointed Senator Murphy to the High Court, even though Murphy&#x27;s Senate seat would not be up for election if a half-Senate election were held. Labor then held three of the five short-term New South Wales Senate seats. Under proportional representation, Labor could hold its three short-term seats in the next half-Senate election but, if Murphy&#x27;s seat were also contested, Labor was unlikely to win four out of six. Thus, a Murphy appointment meant the almost certain loss of a seat in the closely divided Senate at the next election. Whitlam appointed Murphy anyway. By convention, senators appointed by the state legislature to fill casual vacancies were from the same political party as the former senator. The New South Wales premier, Tom Lewis, felt that this convention applied only to vacancies caused by deaths or ill-health, and arranged for the legislature to elect Cleaver Bunton, former mayor of Albury and an independent. By March 1975, many Liberal parliamentarians felt Snedden was doing an inadequate job as leader of the Opposition, and that Whitlam was dominating him in the House of Representatives. Malcolm Fraser challenged Snedden for the leadership, and defeated him on 21 March.

Soon after Fraser&#x27;s accession, controversy arose over the Whitlam government&#x27;s actions in trying to restart peace talks in Vietnam. As the North prepared to end the civil war, Whitlam sent cables to both Vietnamese governments, telling Parliament both cables were substantially the same. The Opposition contended he had misled Parliament, and a motion to censure Whitlam was defeated along party lines. The Opposition also attacked Whitlam for not allowing enough South Vietnamese refugees into Australia, with Fraser calling for the entry of 50,000. Freudenberg alleges that 1,026 Vietnamese refugees entered Australia in the final eight months of the Whitlam government, and only 399 in 1976 under Fraser. However, by 1977, Australia had accepted more than five thousand refugees.

As the political situation deteriorated, Whitlam and his government continued to enact legislation: The Family Law Act 1975 provided for no-fault divorce while the Racial Discrimination Act 1975 caused Australia to ratify the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination that Australia had signed under Holt, but which had never been ratified. In August 1975, Whitlam gave the Gurindji people of the Northern Territory title deeds to part of their traditional lands, beginning the process of Aboriginal land reform. The next month, Australia granted independence to Papua New Guinea.
Following the 1974 Carnation Revolution, Portugal began a process of decolonisation and began a withdrawal from Portuguese Timor (later East Timor). Australians had long taken an interest in the colony; the nation had sent troops to the region during World WarII. In September 1974, Whitlam met with President Suharto in Indonesia and indicated that he would support Indonesia if it annexed East Timor. At the height of the Cold War, and in the context of the American retreat from Indo-China, he felt that incorporation of East Timor into Indonesia would enhance the stability of the region, and reduce the risk of the East Timorese FRETILIN movement, which many feared was communist, coming to power.

Whitlam had offered Barnard a diplomatic post and in early 1975 Barnard accepted, triggering a by-election in his Tasmanian electorate of Bass. The election on 28 June proved a disaster for Labor, which lost the seat with a swing against it of 17 per cent. The next week, Whitlam removed deputy prime minister Cairns, who had misled Parliament about the Loans Affair amid controversy about his relationship with his office manager, Junie Morosi. At the time of Cairns&#x27;s dismissal, one Senate seat was vacant, following the death on 30 June of Queensland ALP Senator Bertie Milliner. The state Labor party nominated Mal Colston, resulting in a deadlock. The unicameral Queensland legislature twice voted against Colston, and the party refused to submit any alternatives. Bjelke-Petersen finally convinced the legislature to elect a low-level union official, Albert Field. In interviews, Field made it clear he would not support Whitlam. Field was expelled from the ALP for standing against Colston, and Labor senators boycotted his swearing-in. Whitlam argued that, because of the manner of filling vacancies, the Senate was &quot;corrupted&quot; and &quot;tainted&quot;, with the Opposition enjoying a majority they did not win at the ballot box.

==Dismissal==

In October 1975, the Opposition, led by Malcolm Fraser, determined to withhold supply by deferring consideration of appropriation bills. With Field on leave (his Senate appointment having been challenged), the Coalition had an effective majority of 30–29 in the Senate. The Coalition believed that if Whitlam could not deliver supply, and would not advise new elections, Kerr would have to dismiss him. Supply would run out on 30 November.

The stakes were raised on 10 October, when the High Court declared valid the Act granting the territories two senators each. In a half-Senate election, most successful candidates would not take their places until 1July 1976, but the territories&#x27; senators, and those filling Field&#x27;s and Bunton&#x27;s seats, would assume their seats immediately. This gave Labor an outside chance of controlling the Senate, at least until 1July 1976.

On 14 October, Labor minister Rex Connor, mastermind of the loans scheme, was forced to resign when Khemlani released documents showing that Connor had made misleading statements. The continuing scandal bolstered the Coalition in their stance that they would not concede supply. Whitlam, convinced that he would win the battle, was glad of the distraction from the Loans Affair, and believed he would &quot;smash&quot; not only the Senate, but Fraser&#x27;s leadership.

Whitlam told the House of Representatives on 21 October,
Whitlam and his ministers repeatedly claimed that the Opposition was damaging not only the constitution, but the economy as well. The Coalition senators remained united, though several became increasingly concerned about the tactic of blocking supply. As the crisis dragged into November, Whitlam attempted to make arrangements for public servants and suppliers to be able to cash cheques at banks. These transactions would be temporary loans which the government would repay once supply was restored. This plan to prolong government without supply was presented to Kerr unsigned on 6November, under the title &quot;Draft Joint Opinion&quot; (ostensibly of solicitor-general Maurice Byers and attorney-general Kep Enderby). It proposed that public employees, including members of the armed forces and police, &quot;could assign arrears of pay by way of mortgage&quot;. The government&#x27;s refusal to formalise this and other &quot;advice&quot; was a factor justifying Kerr&#x27;s resort to advice from elsewhere.

Kerr was following the crisis closely. At a luncheon with Whitlam and several of his ministers on 30 October, Kerr suggested a compromise: if Fraser conceded supply, Whitlam would agree not to call the half-Senate election until May or June 1976, or alternatively would agree not to call the Senate into session until after 1July. Whitlam rejected the idea, seeking to end the Senate&#x27;s right to deny supply. On 3November, after a meeting with Kerr, Fraser proposed that if the government agreed to hold a House of Representatives election at the same time as the half-Senate election, the Coalition would concede supply. Whitlam rejected this offer, stating that he had no intention of advising a House election for at least a year.

With the crisis unresolved, Kerr decided to dismiss Whitlam as prime minister. Fearing that Whitlam would go to the Queen and potentially have him removed, the Governor-General gave Whitlam no prior hint. Against Whitlam&#x27;s advice, he conferred with High Court Chief Justice Sir Garfield Barwick, who agreed that he had the power to dismiss Whitlam.

A meeting among the party leaders, including Whitlam and Fraser, to resolve the crisis on the morning of 11 November came to nothing. Kerr and Whitlam met at the Governor-General&#x27;s office that afternoon at 1:00pm. Unknown to Whitlam, Fraser was waiting in an ante-room; Whitlam later said he would not have set foot in the building if he had known Fraser was there. Whitlam, as he had told Kerr by phone earlier that day, came prepared to advise a half-Senate election, to be held on 13 December. Kerr instead told Whitlam he had terminated his commission as prime minister, and handed him a letter to that effect. After the conversation, Whitlam returned to the Prime Minister&#x27;s residence, The Lodge, had lunch and conferred with his advisers. Immediately after his meeting with Whitlam, Kerr commissioned Fraser as caretaker Prime Minister, on the assurance he could obtain supply and would then advise Kerr to dissolve both houses for election.

In the confusion, Whitlam and his advisers did not immediately tell any Senate members of the dismissal, with the result that when the Senate convened at 2:00pm, the appropriation bills were rapidly passed, with the ALP senators assuming the Opposition had given in. The bills were soon sent to Kerr to receive Royal Assent. At 2:34pm, ten minutes after supply had been secured, Fraser rose in the House and announced he was prime minister. Whitlam immediately moved a successful no confidence motion against Fraser. The Speaker, Gordon Scholes, was instructed to advise Kerr to reinstate Whitlam.

Kerr refused to receive Scholes, keeping him waiting for more than an hour. In that time Kerr rang Justice Anthony Mason to ask for advice. Mason told him the no confidence motion in the House was &quot;irrelevant&quot;. Kerr then dissolved Parliament by proclamation: his Official Secretary, David Smith, came to Parliament House to proclaim the dissolution from the front steps. A large, angry crowd had gathered, and Smith was nearly drowned out by their noise. He concluded by taking the unilateral step of re-instating the traditional ending for a royal proclamation &quot;God save the Queen&quot;, a practice the Whitlam government had abolished. Whitlam, who had been standing behind Smith, then addressed the crowd:

Well may we say &quot;God save the Queen&quot;, because nothing will save the Governor-General! The Proclamation which you have just heard read by the Governor-General&#x27;s Official Secretary was countersigned Malcolm Fraser, who will undoubtedly go down in Australian history from Remembrance Day 1975 as Kerr&#x27;s cur. They won&#x27;t silence the outskirts of Parliament House, even if the inside has been silenced for a few weeks... Maintain your rage and enthusiasm for the campaign for the election now to be held and until polling day.
===Alleged CIA involvement===
Kerr had been involved with a number of CIA fronts. In the 1950s, Kerr had joined the Association for Cultural Freedom, a conservative group which had been established by, and received funding from, the CIA through the Congress for Cultural Freedom. Kerr was on its executive board and wrote for its magazine &quot;Quadrant&quot;. In 1966, Kerr helped to found Lawasia (or Law Asia), an organization of lawyers with offices in all the major capitals of Asia. It was funded by The Asia Foundation, a prominent CIA front.

Christopher Boyce, who was convicted of spying for the Soviet Union while an employee of a CIA contractor, said the CIA wanted Whitlam removed from office because he threatened to close US military bases in Australia, including Pine Gap. Boyce said Kerr was described by the CIA as &quot;our man Kerr&quot;. Former ASIO chief Sir Edward Woodward has dismissed the notion of CIA involvement, as has journalist Paul Kelly.

Whitlam later wrote that Kerr did not need any encouragement from the CIA. However, he also said that in 1977 United States Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher made a special trip to Sydney to meet with him and told him, on behalf of US President Jimmy Carter, of his willingness to work with whatever government Australians elected, and that the US would never again interfere with Australia&#x27;s democratic processes.

==Return to Opposition, 1975–1978==

As the ALP began the 1975 campaign, it seemed that its supporters would maintain their rage. Early rallies drew huge crowds, with attendees handing Whitlam money to pay election expenses. The crowds greatly exceeded those in any of Whitlam&#x27;s earlier campaigns; in The Domain, Sydney, 30,000 people gathered for an ALP rally below a banner: &quot;Shame Fraser Shame&quot;. Fraser&#x27;s appearances drew protests, and a letter bomb sent to Kerr was defused by authorities. Instead of making a policy speech to keynote his campaign, Whitlam made a speech attacking his opponents and calling 11 November &quot;a day which will live in infamy&quot;.

Polls from the first week of campaigning showed a nine-point swing against Labor. Whitlam&#x27;s campaign team disbelieved the results at first, but additional polling returns clearly showed that the electorate had turned against Labor. The Coalition attacked Labor for economic conditions, and released television commercials with the title &quot;The Three Dark Years&quot; showing images from Whitlam government scandals. The ALP campaign concentrated on the issue of Whitlam&#x27;s dismissal and did not address the economy until its final days. By that time Fraser was confident of victory and content to sit back, avoid specifics and make no mistakes. In the election, the Coalition won the largest majority government in Australian history, winning 91 seats to Labor&#x27;s 36. Labor suffered a 6.5 per cent swing against it and its caucus was cut almost in half, suffering a 30-seat swing. Labor was left with five fewer seats than it had when Whitlam took the leadership. The Coalition also won a 37–25 majority in the Senate.

Whitlam stayed on as Opposition leader, surviving a leadership challenge. In early 1976, an additional controversy broke when it was reported that Whitlam had been involved in ALP attempts to raise $500,000 during the election from the Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr government of Iraq. No money had actually been paid, and no charges were filed.
The Whitlams were visiting China at the time of the Tangshan earthquake in July 1976, though they were staying in Tianjin, away from the epicentre. &quot;The Age&quot; printed a cartoon by Peter Nicholson showing the Whitlams huddled together in bed with Margaret Whitlam saying, &quot;Did the earth move for you too, dear?&quot; This cartoon prompted a page full of outraged letters from Labor partisans and a telegram from Gough Whitlam, safe in Tokyo, requesting the original of the cartoon.

In early 1977 Whitlam faced a leadership challenge from Bill Hayden, the last treasurer in the Whitlam government, with Whitlam remaining leader of the ALP by a two-vote margin. Fraser called an election for 10 December. Although Labor managed to pick up five seats, the Coalition still enjoyed a majority of 48. According to Freudenberg, &quot;The meaning and the message were unmistakable. It was the Australian people&#x27;s rejection of Edward Gough Whitlam.&quot; Whitlam&#x27;s son Tony, who had joined his father in the House of Representatives at the 1975 election, was defeated. Shortly after the election, Whitlam resigned as party leader and was succeeded by Hayden.
==Later years and death, 1978–2014==

Whitlam was made a Companion of the Order of Australia in June 1978, and resigned from Parliament on 31 July of the same year. He then held various academic positions. When Labor returned to power under Bob Hawke in 1983, Whitlam was appointed as Australia&#x27;s ambassador to UNESCO, based in Paris. He served for three years in this post, defending UNESCO against allegations of corruption. At the end of his term as ambassador Whitlam was elected to the executive board of UNESCO for a three-year term, until 1989. In 1985, he was appointed to Australia&#x27;s Constitutional Commission.

Whitlam was appointed chairman of the National Gallery of Australia in 1987 after his son Nick, who was then managing director of the State Bank of New South Wales, turned down the position. He and Margaret Whitlam were part of the bid team that in 1993 persuaded the International Olympic Committee to award Sydney the 2000 Summer Olympics.

Sir John Kerr died in 1991. He and Whitlam never reconciled; indeed, Whitlam always saw his dismissal from office as a &quot;constitutional coup d&#x27;état&quot;. Whitlam and Fraser became friends during the 1980s, though they never discussed the events of 1975. The two subsequently campaigned together in support of the 1999 Australian republic referendum. In March 2010, Fraser visited Whitlam at his Sydney office while on a book tour to promote his memoirs. Whitlam accepted an autographed copy of the book and presented Fraser with a copy of his 1979 book about the dismissal, &quot;The Truth of the Matter&quot;.

During the 1990s Labor government, Whitlam used the Australian Greens as a &quot;decoy questioner&quot; in parliament. According to Dee Margetts, Whitlam &quot;didn&#x27;t like what Keating and Hawke had done&quot; and regularly sent the Greens questions to ask the government about policies he disagreed with.

Whitlam initially had a close relationship with Labor leader Mark Latham, who held his old seat of Werriwa. However, by 2005 he had called for Latham&#x27;s resignation from parliament. Whitlam called his support of Latham to enter federal politics as one of his &quot;lingering regrets&quot;.

Whitlam supported fixed four-year terms for both houses of Parliament. In 2006, he accused the ALP of failing to press for this change. In April 2007, he and Margaret Whitlam were both made life members of the Australian Labor Party. This was the first time anyone had been made a life member of the party organisation at the national level.

In 2007, Whitlam testified at an inquest into the death of Brian Peters, one of five Australia-based TV personnel killed in East Timor in October 1975. Whitlam indicated he had warned Peters&#x27; colleague, Greg Shackleton, who was also killed, that the Australian government could not protect them in East Timor and that they should not go there. He also said Shackleton was &quot;culpable&quot; if he had not passed on Whitlam&#x27;s warning.

Whitlam joined three other former prime ministers in February 2008 in returning to Parliament to witness the Federal Government apology to the Aboriginal Stolen Generations by the then prime minister Kevin Rudd. On 21 January 2009, Whitlam achieved a greater age () than any other Australian prime minister, surpassing the previous record holder Frank Forde. On the 60th anniversary of his marriage to Margaret Whitlam, he called it &quot;very satisfactory&quot; and claimed a record for &quot;matrimonial endurance&quot;. In 2010, it was reported that Whitlam had moved into an aged care facility in Sydney&#x27;s inner east in 2007. Despite this, he continued to go to his office three days a week. Margaret Whitlam remained in the couple&#x27;s nearby apartment. In early 2012, she suffered a fall there, leading to her death in hospital at the age of 92 on 17 March of that year, a month short of the Whitlams&#x27; 70th wedding anniversary.

Whitlam died on the morning of 21 October 2014. His family announced that there would be a private cremation and a public memorial service. He was the longest-lived Australian Prime Minister, dying at the age of 98 years and 102 days. He predeceased his successor Malcolm Fraser by just under five months.

==Memorials==
A state memorial service was held on 5November 2014 in the Sydney Town Hall and was led by Kerry O&#x27;Brien. The Welcome to Country was given by Auntie Millie Ingram and eulogies were delivered by Graham Freudenberg, Cate Blanchett, Noel Pearson, John Faulkner and Antony Whitlam. Pearson&#x27;s contribution was hailed as &quot;one of the best political speeches of our time&quot;. Musical performances were delivered by William Barton (a didgeridoo improvisation), Paul Kelly and Kev Carmody (their land rights protest song &quot;From Little Things Big Things Grow&quot;), as well as the Sydney Philharmonia Choir and the Sydney Symphony Orchestra, conducted by Benjamin Northey. In accordance with Whitlam&#x27;s wishes, the orchestra performed &quot;In Tears of Grief&quot; from Bach&#x27;s &quot;St Matthew Passion&quot;, &quot;Va, pensiero&quot; from Verdi&#x27;s &quot;Nabucco&quot;, &quot;Un Bal&quot; from &quot;Symphonie fantastique&quot; by Berlioz and, as the final piece, &quot;Jerusalem&quot; by Parry. &quot;Jerusalem&quot; was followed by a flypast of four RAAF F/A-18 Hornets in missing man formation. Those attending the memorial included the current and some former governors-general, the current and all living former prime ministers, and members of the family of Vincent Lingiari. The two-hour service, attended by 1,000 invited guests and 900 others, was screened to thousands outside the Hall, as well as in Cabramatta and Melbourne, and broadcast live by ABC television.

In honour of Whitlam, the Australian Electoral Commission created the Division of Whitlam in the House of Representatives in place of the Division of Throsby, with effect from the 2016 election. ACT Chief Minister Katy Gallagher announced that a future Canberra suburb will be named for Whitlam, and that his family would be consulted about other potential memorials. Gough Whitlam Park in Earlwood, New South Wales, is named after him.

In January 2021, the Whitlams&#x27; purpose-built home from 1956 to 1978 at 32 Albert Street, Cabramatta, designed by architect Roy Higson Dell Appleton, came up for sale. It was eventually sold at for $1.15 million to a group of Labor supporters, including former NSW Premier Barrie Unsworth, with the intention of restoring the house as a museum. The work is supported by a Commonwealth government national heritage grant of $1.3 million, and is to be managed by the Whitlam Institute of Western Sydney University. The house was proposed to be listed as a local heritage item. Following renovations and restoration works, the &quot;Whitlam Prime Ministerial Home&quot; was officially opened by Prime Minister Anthony Albanese on 2 December 2022.

==Legacy and historical evaluation==

Whitlam is remembered for the circumstances of his dismissal. It is a legacy he did little to efface; he wrote a 1979 book, &quot;The Truth of the Matter&quot; (the title is a play on Kerr&#x27;s 1978 memoir &quot;Matters for Judgment&quot;), and devoted part of his subsequent book, &quot;Abiding Interests&quot;, to his removal. According to journalist and author Paul Kelly, who penned two books on the crisis, Whitlam &quot;achieved a paradoxical triumph: the shadow of the dismissal has obscured the sins of his government&quot;.

More books have been written about Whitlam, including his own writings, than about any other Australian prime minister. According to Whitlam biographer Jenny Hocking, for a period of at least a decade, the Whitlam era was viewed almost entirely negatively, but that has changed. Still, she feels Australians take for granted programmes and policies initiated by the Whitlam government, such as recognition of China, legal aid, and Medicare. Ross McMullin, who wrote an official history of the ALP, notes that Whitlam remains greatly admired by many Labor supporters because of his reform efforts and inspiring leadership. Some rankings have put Whitlam high on the list of Australia&#x27;s better prime ministers. Economist and writer Ross Gittins evaluates opinions on the Whitlam government&#x27;s responses to the economic challenges of the time:

Wallace Brown describes Whitlam in his book about his experiences covering Australian prime ministers as a journalist:

Whitlam&#x27;s last words in the documentary film &quot;Gough WhitlamIn His Own Words&quot; (2002) were in response to a question about his status as an icon and elder statesman. He said:

==Published works==

* &quot;On Australia&#x27;s Constitution&quot; (Melbourne: Widescope, 1977).
* &quot;The Truth of the Matter&quot; (Melbourne: Melbourne University Press, 1979).
* &quot;The Whitlam Government&quot; (Ringwood: Viking, 1985).
* &quot;Abiding Interests&quot; (Brisbane: University of Queensland Press, 1997).
* &quot;My Italian Notebook: The Story of an Enduring Love Affair&quot; (Sydney: Allen &amp; Unwin, 2002)

==See also==
* &quot;The Hon E.G. Whitlam&quot;, painting by Clifton Pugh
* Whitlam government
* First Whitlam Ministry
* Second Whitlam Ministry
* Third Whitlam Ministry
==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* Gough WhitlamAustralia&#x27;s Prime Ministers / National Archives of Australia
* The Whitlam Institute
* The Whitlam Dismissal11 November 1975
* Dismissal letterCopy of dismissal letter
* Gurindji Land Ceremony Speechtranscript and audio from August 1975
* Listen to an excerpt of Gough Whitlam&#x27;s &#x27;Kerr&#x27;s Cur&#x27; speech from the National Film and Sound Archive
* &quot;It&#x27;s Time&quot; speechtranscript
* Whitlam Labor Rally 14 November 1975- Speech held three days after dismissal in King George Square, Brisbane. State Library of Queensland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23333" start="0" end="20" title="Gough Whitlam" label="Edward Gough Whitlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="64" end="91" title="prime minister of Australia" label="prime minister of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="188" end="210" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Australian Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q878445" start="257" end="266" title="reformist" label="reformist"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="271" end="291" title="socially progressive" label="socially progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="359" end="388" title="governor-general of Australia" label="governor-general of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354851" start="390" end="403" title="Sir John Kerr" label="Sir John Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q575834" start="426" end="452" title="1975 Australian constitutional crisis" label="1975 constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="577" end="590" title="Navigator#In aviation" label="air navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="598" end="624" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324493" start="640" end="659" title="Military history of Australia during World War II" label="during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="677" end="686" title="barrister" label="barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q783401" start="734" end="769" title="Australian House of Representatives" label="Australian House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q783401" start="790" end="810" title="Member of Parliament (Australia)" label="member of parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973901" start="824" end="843" title="division of Werriwa" label="division of Werriwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q708887" start="939" end="953" title="Arthur Calwell" label="Arthur Calwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460433" start="1002" end="1026" title="Leader of the Opposition (Australia)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q281200" start="1054" end="1075" title="1969 Australian federal election" label="1969 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q356411" start="1079" end="1090" title="John Gorton" label="John Gorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15709634" start="1100" end="1109" title="It&amp;#x27;s Time (Australian campaign)" label="led Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q427994" start="1128" end="1141" title="1972 Australian federal election" label="1972 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065320" start="1161" end="1170" title="Coalition (Australia)" label="Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996534" start="1207" end="1225" title="Whitlam government" label="Whitlam government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554670" start="1336" end="1357" title="Conscription in Australia" label="military conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054228" start="1373" end="1414" title="Australian involvement in the Vietnam War" label="Australian involvement in the Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="1431" end="1452" title="universal health care" label="universal health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="1462" end="1482" title="university education" label="university education"/>
<link wikidata="Q707748" start="1510" end="1519" title="legal aid" label="legal aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q783330" start="1563" end="1580" title="Australian Senate" label="Australian Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300018" start="1630" end="1648" title="double dissolution" label="double dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586899" start="1661" end="1669" title="1974 Australian federal election" label="May 1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269386" start="1886" end="1899" title="Joint Sitting of the Australian Parliament of 1974" label="joint sitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144614" start="1932" end="1955" title="Australian constitution" label="Australian constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="2089" end="2104" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560230" start="2113" end="2135" title="1973–1975 recession" label="1970s global recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663495" start="2181" end="2193" title="Loans affair" label="Loans affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591172" start="2411" end="2429" title="appropriation bill" label="appropriation bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q315979" start="2805" end="2819" title="Malcolm Fraser" label="Malcolm Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q609541" start="2865" end="2884" title="1975 Australian federal election" label="subsequent election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586900" start="2971" end="2984" title="1977 Australian federal election" label="1977 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684915" start="3059" end="3075" title="Hawke government" label="Hawke government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="3119" end="3125" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774361" start="3425" end="3479" title="Historical rankings of prime ministers of Australia" label="ranked in the upper-tier of Australian prime ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151732" start="3542" end="3552" title="Paul Kelly (journalist)" label="Paul Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q24090126" start="3819" end="3836" title="Gough Whitlam&amp;#x27;s birthplace" label="&amp;#x27;Ngara&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q72216" start="3857" end="3860" title="Kew, Victoria" label="Kew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="3874" end="3883" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q56433757" start="3924" end="3929" title="Freda Whitlam" label="Freda"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496547" start="3992" end="4004" title="Fred Whitlam" label="Fred Whitlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480102" start="4060" end="4088" title="Commonwealth Crown Solicitor" label="Commonwealth Crown Solicitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q335994" start="4408" end="4438" title="Hugh Gough, 1st Viscount Gough" label="Hugh Gough, 1st Viscount Gough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535327" start="4581" end="4587" title="Mosman, New South Wales" label="Mosman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856211" start="4600" end="4610" title="Turramurra, New South Wales" label="Turramurra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6927238" start="4826" end="4846" title="Mowbray House School" label="Mowbray House School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423563" start="4851" end="4870" title="Knox Grammar School" label="Knox Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="5035" end="5043" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697820" start="5340" end="5359" title="Telopea Park School" label="Telopea Park School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031258" start="5411" end="5434" title="Canberra Grammar School" label="Canberra Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="5510" end="5526" title="Governor-General of Australia" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673410" start="5532" end="5544" title="Isaac Isaacs" label="Isaac Isaacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595160" start="5567" end="5589" title="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s College, Sydney" label="St Paul&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q487556" start="5597" end="5617" title="University of Sydney" label="University of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104370" start="5754" end="5771" title="The Broken Melody (1937 film)" label="The Broken Melody"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="5980" end="5988" title="classics" label="classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q333028" start="6246" end="6258" title="Enoch Powell" label="Enoch Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660204" start="6356" end="6382" title="Sydney University Regiment" label="Sydney University Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862909" start="6396" end="6403" title="Australian Army Reserve" label="Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="6442" end="6464" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="attack on Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="6537" end="6563" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760022" start="6644" end="6665" title="Margaret Whitlam" label="Margaret Elaine Dovey"/>
<link wikidata="Q919154" start="6701" end="6726" title="1938 British Empire Games" label="1938 British Empire Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908817" start="6808" end="6818" title="Bill Dovey" label="Bill Dovey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4305267" start="6893" end="6903" title="bomb aimer" label="bomb aimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064216" start="6925" end="6945" title="No. 13 Squadron RAAF" label="No. 13 Squadron RAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298088" start="6967" end="6981" title="Gove Peninsula" label="Gove Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867622" start="7010" end="7026" title="Lockheed Ventura" label="Lockheed Ventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013228" start="7059" end="7076" title="Flight Lieutenant" label="Flight Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="7167" end="7189" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Australian Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586889" start="7201" end="7222" title="1943 Australian federal election" label="1943 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825121" start="7253" end="7296" title="1944 Australian referendum" label="1944 &amp;quot;Fourteen Powers&amp;quot; referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733536" start="8089" end="8097" title="Cronulla, New South Wales" label="Cronulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085073" start="8220" end="8257" title="Australian Quiz Champion" label="Australian National Quiz Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q9390783" start="8667" end="8703" title="New South Wales Legislative Assembly" label="New South Wales Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5927438" start="8751" end="8765" title="Bert Lazzarini" label="Bert Lazzarini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973901" start="8814" end="8821" title="Division of Werriwa" label="Werriwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240907" start="8896" end="8908" title="preselection" label="preselection"/>
<link wikidata="Q783401" start="9008" end="9032" title="House of Representatives (Australia)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7983595" start="9048" end="9079" title="1952 Werriwa by-election" label="by-election on 29 November 1952"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735422" start="9226" end="9239" title="maiden speech" label="maiden speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q23386" start="9293" end="9304" title="John McEwen" label="John McEwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574256" start="9331" end="9338" title="Speaker of the Australian House of Representatives" label="Speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="9434" end="9451" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Benjamin Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501682" start="9677" end="9689" title="Laurie Oakes" label="Laurie Oakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908208" start="9904" end="9915" title="Bill Bourke (politician)" label="Bill Bourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546863" start="9937" end="9945" title="Quisling" label="Quisling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445155" start="9953" end="9969" title="Garfield Barwick" label="Garfield Barwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6236225" start="10092" end="10106" title="Bill Wentworth" label="Bill Wentworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q356261" start="10198" end="10213" title="William McMahon" label="William McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="10222" end="10227" title="quean" label="quean"/>
<link wikidata="Q23379" start="10292" end="10299" title="Ben Chifley" label="Chifley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388459" start="10383" end="10393" title="H. V. Evatt" label="Bert Evatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q214438" start="10496" end="10510" title="Robert Menzies" label="Robert Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q379266" start="10530" end="10560" title="Petrov Affair" label="defection of a Soviet official"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065320" start="10583" end="10596" title="Coalition (Australia)" label="his coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q946040" start="10616" end="10623" title="National Party of Australia" label="Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586893" start="10652" end="10665" title="1954 Australian federal election" label="1954 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6027634" start="10752" end="10771" title="Industrial Groups" label="industrial groupers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824371" start="10936" end="10945" title="Australian Labor Party split of 1955" label="The Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q673339" start="10978" end="11000" title="Democratic Labor Party (Australia, 1955)" label="Democratic Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491219" start="11121" end="11140" title="Instant-runoff voting" label="preferential voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973656" start="11326" end="11332" title="Division of Hughes" label="Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320799" start="11472" end="11482" title="Cabramatta, New South Wales" label="Cabramatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6179312" start="11750" end="11763" title="Jenny Hocking" label="Jenny Hocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q708887" start="12624" end="12638" title="Arthur Calwell" label="Arthur Calwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336555" start="12640" end="12650" title="Eddie Ward" label="Eddie Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307841" start="12656" end="12667" title="Reg Pollard (politician)" label="Reg Pollard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586896" start="12921" end="12934" title="1961 Australian federal election" label="1961 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q76127" start="13130" end="13137" title="Sukarno" label="Sukarno"/>
<link wikidata="Q3845" start="13191" end="13206" title="West New Guinea" label="West New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819581" start="13822" end="13841" title="The Daily Telegraph (Sydney)" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707606" start="13929" end="13938" title="Alan Reid (journalist)" label="Alan Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428471" start="14007" end="14019" title="faceless men" label="faceless men"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586897" start="14429" end="14443" title="1963 Australian federal election" label="early election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="14640" end="14655" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q784520" start="15265" end="15286" title="Division of Denison" label="electorate of Denison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478700" start="15630" end="15644" title="The Australian" label="The Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q515924" start="15943" end="15954" title="Don Dunstan" label="Don Dunstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077496" start="16109" end="16131" title="White Australia policy" label="White Australia policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q312722" start="16551" end="16562" title="Harold Holt" label="Harold Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586898" start="16755" end="16772" title="1966 Australian federal election" label="November election"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="17232" end="17242" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319274" start="17298" end="17311" title="Rex Patterson" label="Rex Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242689" start="17319" end="17337" title="1966 Dawson by-election" label="Dawson by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q47005934" start="17537" end="17547" title="1966 Australian Labor Party leadership spill" label="challenged"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="17817" end="17828" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824362" start="18523" end="18529" title="Australian Labor Party Caucus" label="caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689055" start="18629" end="18639" title="Jim Cairns" label="Jim Cairns"/>
<link wikidata="Q15516927" start="19163" end="19178" title="Brian Harradine" label="Brian Harradine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="20475" end="20496" title="universal health care" label="universal health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q339527" start="21020" end="21040" title="Launceston, Tasmania" label="Launceston, Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q303329" start="21524" end="21538" title="shadow cabinet" label="shadow cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973504" start="21726" end="21731" title="Division of Corio" label="Corio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973486" start="21768" end="21779" title="Division of Capricornia" label="Capricornia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467939" start="21799" end="21828" title="1967 Australian Senate election" label="November half-Senate election"/>
<link wikidata="Q47654909" start="22105" end="22142" title="Disappearance of Harold Holt" label="vanished while swimming in rough seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q356411" start="22361" end="22372" title="John Gorton" label="John Gorton"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006578" start="22622" end="22637" title="1968 Higgins by-election" label="the by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973648" start="22662" end="22669" title="Division of Higgins" label="Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592839" start="22854" end="22872" title="Graham Freudenberg" label="Graham Freudenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q281200" start="23063" end="23091" title="1969 Australian federal election" label="an election for October 1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467753" start="23915" end="23940" title="1970 Australian Senate election" label="1970 half-Senate election"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="24631" end="24647" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="24810" end="24820" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Zhou Enlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="24951" end="24964" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q862054" start="24980" end="25000" title="1972 Nixon visit to China" label="he would visit China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414246" start="25025" end="25050" title="National Security Advisor (United States)" label="National Security Advisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="25052" end="25067" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q44819" start="25602" end="25609" title="Suharto" label="Suharto"/>
<link wikidata="Q427994" start="26716" end="26727" title="1972 Australian federal election" label="an election"/>
<link wikidata="Q134114" start="26838" end="26858" title="Battle of Austerlitz" label="Battle of Austerlitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q15709634" start="27009" end="27023" title="It&amp;#x27;s Time (Australian campaign)" label="It&amp;#x27;s Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339152" start="27608" end="27620" title="News Limited" label="News Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q53944" start="27622" end="27636" title="Rupert Murdoch" label="Rupert Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="28053" end="28068" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="28080" end="28097" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q115807" start="28406" end="28430" title="single transferable vote" label="single transferable vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q356261" start="28761" end="28768" title="William McMahon" label="McMahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382174" start="28799" end="28815" title="Paul Hasluck" label="Sir Paul Hasluck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216921" start="29290" end="29303" title="Lance Barnard" label="Lance Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454079" start="29308" end="29337" title="First Whitlam Ministry" label="an interim two-man government"/>
<link wikidata="Q936648" start="29545" end="29555" title="duumvirate" label="duumvirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824284" start="30203" end="30255" title="Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Commission" label="Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362737" start="30280" end="30295" title="Elizabeth Evatt" label="Elizabeth Evatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q817281" start="30360" end="30379" title="Combined oral contraceptive pill" label="contraceptive pills"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="30635" end="30644" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q217169" start="30662" end="30670" title="Rhodesia" label="Rhodesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4823842" start="30692" end="30721" title="Australian Army Training Team" label="Australian Army Training Team"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32365" end="32374" title="Legal Aid#Australia" label="Legal aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="32441" end="32451" title="Higher education" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q85846754" start="32679" end="32704" title="National Sewerage Program" label="National Sewerage Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712855" start="33069" end="33083" title="Albury–Wodonga" label="Albury–Wodonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q170601" start="33158" end="33180" title="Advance Australia Fair" label="Advance Australia Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q40807" start="33250" end="33268" title="God Save the Queen" label="God Save the Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="33280" end="33298" title="Order of Australia" label="Order of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q795228" start="33364" end="33393" title="National Gallery of Australia" label="National Gallery of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907210" start="33466" end="33476" title="Blue Poles" label="Blue Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q37571" start="33506" end="33521" title="Jackson Pollock" label="Jackson Pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q245544" start="34072" end="34085" title="Cyclone Tracy" label="Cyclone Tracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11568" start="34093" end="34099" title="Darwin, Northern Territory" label="Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q863220" start="35207" end="35220" title="Billy Snedden" label="Billy Snedden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307885" start="35439" end="35450" title="Reg Withers" label="Reg Withers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528405" start="35763" end="35782" title="Joh Bjelke-Petersen" label="Joh Bjelke-Petersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q179188" start="35928" end="35941" title="Torres Strait" label="Torres Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825135" start="36164" end="36189" title="1973 Australian referendum" label="constitutional referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q21406588" start="36576" end="36582" title="confidence and supply" label="supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300018" start="36656" end="36674" title="double dissolution" label="double dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586899" start="36815" end="36846" title="1974 Australian federal election" label="Whitlam government was returned"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269386" start="37257" end="37264" title="Joint Sitting of the Australian Parliament of 1974" label="special"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269530" start="37265" end="37278" title="Joint meetings of the Australian Parliament" label="joint sitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354851" start="37403" end="37412" title="John Kerr (governor-general)" label="John Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590113" start="37502" end="37510" title="Medicare (Australia)" label="Medicare"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258" start="37553" end="37581" title="Australian Capital Territory" label="Australian Capital Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470610" start="37719" end="37732" title="Lionel Murphy" label="Lionel Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q782740" start="37783" end="37828" title="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation" label="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q965595" start="37973" end="37987" title="Džemal Bijedić" label="Džemal Bijedić"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931495" start="38684" end="38694" title="Vince Gair" label="Vince Gair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108493" start="39647" end="39659" title="Colin Hannah" label="Colin Hannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="39885" end="39900" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560230" start="39905" end="39924" title="1973–1975 recession" label="1973–1975 recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q192796" start="40386" end="40399" title="trade deficit" label="trade deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q590998" start="40464" end="40478" title="credit squeeze" label="credit squeeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663449" start="41439" end="41451" title="Loan Council" label="Loan Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663495" start="41548" end="41563" title="Tirath Khemlani" label="Tirath Khemlani"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663495" start="41639" end="41651" title="Loans Affair" label="Loans Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050861" start="42535" end="42551" title="casual vacancies in the Australian Parliament" label="casual vacancies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525352" start="42639" end="42648" title="Tom Lewis (Australian politician)" label="Tom Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131003" start="42776" end="42790" title="Cleaver Bunton" label="Cleaver Bunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q331764" start="42808" end="42814" title="Albury" label="Albury"/>
<link wikidata="Q315979" start="43019" end="43033" title="Malcolm Fraser" label="Malcolm Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433166" start="44002" end="44021" title="Family Law Act 1975" label="Family Law Act 1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525477" start="44062" end="44092" title="Racial Discrimination Act 1975" label="Racial Discrimination Act 1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q743306" start="44124" end="44205" title="International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination" label="International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555188" start="44312" end="44327" title="Gurindji people" label="Gurindji people"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668373" start="44427" end="44449" title="Aboriginal land rights in Australia" label="Aboriginal land reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q193245" start="44538" end="44558" title="Carnation Revolution" label="Carnation Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q142965" start="44631" end="44647" title="Portuguese Timor" label="Portuguese Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="44655" end="44665" title="East Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440764" start="44770" end="44781" title="Battle of Timor" label="World WarII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665403" start="44902" end="44920" title="Indonesian occupation of East Timor" label="annexed East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="44943" end="44951" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q935996" start="45153" end="45161" title="FRETILIN" label="FRETILIN"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867979" start="45318" end="45329" title="1975 Bass by-election" label="by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887271" start="45361" end="45365" title="Division of Bass" label="Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q15527013" start="45655" end="45667" title="Junie Morosi" label="Junie Morosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895653" start="45794" end="45809" title="Bertie Milliner" label="Bertie Milliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q15506241" start="45843" end="45854" title="Mal Colston" label="Mal Colston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710194" start="46085" end="46097" title="Albert Field" label="Albert Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308979" start="46840" end="46846" title="advice (constitutional)" label="advise"/>
<link wikidata="Q15501534" start="47406" end="47416" title="Rex Connor" label="Rex Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663495" start="47436" end="47448" title="Loans affair" label="loans scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792926" start="48579" end="48592" title="Maurice Byers" label="Maurice Byers"/>
<link wikidata="Q20886" start="48614" end="48625" title="Kep Enderby" label="Kep Enderby"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="49771" end="49780" title="Elizabeth II" label="the Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q493955" start="50715" end="50724" title="The Lodge (Australia)" label="The Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="51284" end="51296" title="Royal Assent" label="Royal Assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585795" start="51503" end="51517" title="Gordon Scholes" label="Gordon Scholes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239905" start="51865" end="51876" title="David Smith (Australian public servant)" label="David Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467835" start="51886" end="51902" title="Old Parliament House, Canberra" label="Parliament House"/>
<link wikidata="Q524475" start="52959" end="52991" title="Association for Cultural Freedom" label="Association for Cultural Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q524475" start="53092" end="53121" title="Congress for Cultural Freedom" label="Congress for Cultural Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268323" start="53188" end="53196" title="Quadrant (magazine)" label="Quadrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537534" start="53349" end="53368" title="The Asia Foundation" label="The Asia Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911432" start="53394" end="53411" title="Christopher John Boyce" label="Christopher Boyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="53449" end="53461" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754535" start="53622" end="53630" title="Pine Gap" label="Pine Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q782740" start="53709" end="53713" title="Australian Security Intelligence Organisation" label="ASIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345987" start="53720" end="53739" title="Edward Woodward (judge)" label="Sir Edward Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151732" start="53803" end="53813" title="Paul Kelly (journalist)" label="Paul Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301213" start="53926" end="53965" title="United States Deputy Secretary of State" label="United States Deputy Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q294358" start="53966" end="53984" title="Warren Christopher" label="Warren Christopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="54072" end="54084" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q844407" start="54554" end="54564" title="The Domain, Sydney" label="The Domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q238046" start="56209" end="56229" title="Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr" label="Ahmed Hassan al-Bakr"/>
<link wikidata="Q462195" start="56362" end="56381" title="1976 Tangshan earthquake" label="Tangshan earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q11736" start="56424" end="56431" title="Tianjin" label="Tianjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q631893" start="56464" end="56471" title="The Age" label="The Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176099" start="56499" end="56514" title="Peter Nicholson (cartoonist)" label="Peter Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q250087" start="56862" end="56873" title="Bill Hayden" label="Bill Hayden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586900" start="56998" end="57025" title="1977 Australian federal election" label="an election for 10 December"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823675" start="57294" end="57298" title="Tony Whitlam" label="Tony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141149" start="57541" end="57576" title="Companion of the Order of Australia" label="Companion of the Order of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q269372" start="57725" end="57734" title="Bob Hawke" label="Bob Hawke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="57800" end="57806" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58087" end="58112" title="Constitutional Commission#Australia" label="Constitutional Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q795228" start="58153" end="58182" title="National Gallery of Australia" label="National Gallery of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603069" start="58249" end="58278" title="State Bank of New South Wales" label="State Bank of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="58383" end="58414" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8544" start="58435" end="58455" title="2000 Summer Olympics" label="2000 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559142" start="58781" end="58816" title="1999 Australian republic referendum" label="1999 Australian republic referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q131686215" start="59048" end="59071" title="The Truth of the Matter" label="The Truth of the Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q781486" start="59132" end="59149" title="Australian Greens" label="Australian Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249930" start="59212" end="59224" title="Dee Margetts" label="Dee Margetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q982227" start="59453" end="59464" title="Mark Latham" label="Mark Latham"/>
<link wikidata="Q804958" start="60110" end="60143" title="Balibo Five" label="five Australia-based TV personnel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60586" end="60612" title="Stolen Generations#Australian federal parliament apology" label="Federal Government apology"/>
<link wikidata="Q639836" start="60631" end="60649" title="Stolen Generations" label="Stolen Generations"/>
<link wikidata="Q43135" start="60677" end="60687" title="Kevin Rudd" label="Kevin Rudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q459146" start="60823" end="60834" title="Frank Forde" label="Frank Forde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192985" start="61804" end="61820" title="Sydney Town Hall" label="Sydney Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394610" start="61836" end="61854" title="Kerry O&amp;#x27;Brien (journalist)" label="Kerry O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980672" start="61860" end="61878" title="Welcome to Country" label="Welcome to Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592839" start="61944" end="61962" title="Graham Freudenberg" label="Graham Freudenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q80966" start="61964" end="61978" title="Cate Blanchett" label="Cate Blanchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553698" start="61980" end="61992" title="Noel Pearson" label="Noel Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q466003" start="61994" end="62007" title="John Faulkner" label="John Faulkner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823675" start="62012" end="62026" title="Antony Whitlam" label="Antony Whitlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q15459146" start="62169" end="62183" title="William Barton (musician)" label="William Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q189388" start="62187" end="62197" title="didgeridoo" label="didgeridoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q952656" start="62214" end="62224" title="Paul Kelly (Australian musician)" label="Paul Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395640" start="62229" end="62240" title="Kev Carmody" label="Kev Carmody"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505453" start="62279" end="62313" title="From Little Things Big Things Grow" label="From Little Things Big Things Grow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660091" start="62337" end="62362" title="Sydney Philharmonia Choir" label="Sydney Philharmonia Choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506501" start="62371" end="62396" title="Sydney Symphony Orchestra" label="Sydney Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876377" start="62411" end="62427" title="Benjamin Northey" label="Benjamin Northey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="62530" end="62541" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Bach&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q379111" start="62548" end="62566" title="St Matthew Passion" label="St Matthew Passion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352178" start="62580" end="62592" title="Va, pensiero" label="Va, pensiero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317" start="62604" end="62616" title="Giuseppe Verdi" label="Verdi&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q202230" start="62623" end="62630" title="Nabucco" label="Nabucco"/>
<link wikidata="Q462313" start="62668" end="62689" title="Symphonie fantastique" label="Symphonie fantastique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151" start="62699" end="62706" title="Hector Berlioz" label="Berlioz"/>
<link wikidata="Q77425249" start="62732" end="62753" title="And did those feet in ancient time" label="&amp;quot;Jerusalem&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q354250" start="62757" end="62762" title="Hubert Parry" label="Parry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837149" start="62804" end="62811" title="flypast" label="flypast"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="62820" end="62824" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="RAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q46397" start="62825" end="62839" title="McDonnell Douglas F/A-18 Hornet" label="F/A-18 Hornets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668546" start="62843" end="62864" title="missing man formation" label="missing man formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526670" start="63031" end="63047" title="Vincent Lingiari" label="Vincent Lingiari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320799" start="63178" end="63188" title="Cabramatta, New South Wales" label="Cabramatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="63193" end="63202" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="63226" end="63229" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658569" start="63269" end="63300" title="Australian Electoral Commission" label="Australian Electoral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q23055249" start="63313" end="63332" title="Division of Whitlam" label="Division of Whitlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411395" start="63381" end="63400" title="Division of Throsby" label="Division of Throsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016874" start="63423" end="63436" title="2016 Australian federal election" label="2016 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q463507" start="63457" end="63471" title="Katy Gallagher" label="Katy Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q22080127" start="63487" end="63511" title="Whitlam, Australian Capital Territory" label="a future Canberra suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326560" start="63633" end="63658" title="Earlwood, New South Wales" label="Earlwood, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885621" start="63958" end="63973" title="Barrie Unsworth" label="Barrie Unsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029159" start="64150" end="64167" title="Whitlam Institute" label="Whitlam Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141452" start="64171" end="64196" title="Western Sydney University" label="Western Sydney University"/>
<link wikidata="Q335697" start="64392" end="64408" title="Anthony Albanese" label="Anthony Albanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151732" start="64834" end="64844" title="Paul Kelly (journalist)" label="Paul Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6179312" start="65156" end="65169" title="Jenny Hocking" label="Jenny Hocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q54358319" start="65445" end="65458" title="Ross McMullin" label="Ross McMullin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369355" start="65739" end="65751" title="Ross Gittins" label="Ross Gittins"/>
<link wikidata="Q131686215" start="66270" end="66293" title="The Truth of the Matter" label="The Truth of the Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q28877954" start="66620" end="66640" title="The Hon E.G. Whitlam" label="The Hon E.G. Whitlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133302" start="66660" end="66672" title="Clifton Pugh" label="Clifton Pugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996534" start="66675" end="66693" title="Whitlam government" label="Whitlam government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454079" start="66696" end="66718" title="First Whitlam Ministry" label="First Whitlam Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443644" start="66721" end="66744" title="Second Whitlam Ministry" label="Second Whitlam Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785013" start="66747" end="66769" title="Third Whitlam Ministry" label="Third Whitlam Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565882" start="67230" end="67261" title="National Film and Sound Archive" label="National Film and Sound Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279655" start="67390" end="67418" title="King George Square" label="King George Square, Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050653" start="67420" end="67447" title="State Library of Queensland" label="State Library of Queensland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12457" wikidata="Q826455" url="?curid=12457" title="Geri and Freki">
<text>In Norse mythology, Geri and Freki are two wolves which are said to accompany the god Odin. They are attested in the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot;, a collection of epic poetry compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources, in the &quot;Prose Edda&quot;, written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson, and in the poetry of skalds. The pair has been compared to similar figures found in Greek, Roman and Vedic mythology, and may also be connected to beliefs surrounding the Germanic &quot;wolf-warrior bands&quot;, the Úlfhéðnar.

==Etymology==
The name &quot;Geri&quot; has been interpreted as meaning either &quot;the greedy one&quot; or &quot;the ravenous one&quot;. The name &quot;Geri&quot; can be traced back to the Proto-Germanic adjective , attested in Burgundian &quot;girs&quot;, Old Norse , Old Swedish &quot;giri&quot;, Old High German or and Old Dutch , all of which mean &quot;greedy&quot;. Compare modern , , , , all meaning greedy.

The name &quot;Freki&quot; can be traced back to the Proto-Germanic adjective , attested in Gothic () &quot;covetous, avaricious&quot;, Old English &quot;desirous, greedy, gluttonous, audacious&quot; and Old High German &quot;greedy, covetous, desirous&quot;, The Old Norse form is fairly broad (compare modern , , , ), meaning &quot;brazen, enterprising, covetous, greedy and insatiable&quot;, including having a voracious appetite (”gluttonous”).

John Lindow interprets both Old Norse names as nominalized adjectives. Bruce Lincoln further traces &quot;Geri&quot; back to a Proto-Indo-European stem *&quot;&quot;, which is the same as that found in , a name referring to the hound closely associated with the events of .

==Attestations==
In the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot; poem &quot;Grímnismál&quot;, the god Odin (disguised as &quot;Grímnir&quot;) provides the young Agnarr with information about Odin&#x27;s companions. Agnarr is told that Odin feeds Geri and Freki while the god himself consumes only wine:


The pair is also alluded to via the kenning &quot;Viðrir&#x27;s (Odin&#x27;s) hounds&quot; in &quot;Helgakviða Hundingsbana I&quot;, verse 13, where it is related that they roam the field &quot;greedy for the corpses of those who have fallen in battle&quot;.

In the &quot;Prose Edda&quot; book &quot;Gylfaginning&quot; (chapter 38), the enthroned figure of High explains that Odin gives all of the food on his table to his wolves Geri and Freki and that Odin requires no food, for wine is to him both meat and drink. High then quotes the above-mentioned stanza from the poem &quot;Grímnismál&quot; in support. In chapter 75 of the &quot;Prose Edda&quot; book &quot;Skáldskaparmál&quot; a list of names for wargs and wolves is provided that includes both Geri and Freki.

In skaldic poetry &quot;Geri&quot; and &quot;Freki&quot; are used as common nouns for &quot;wolf&quot; in chapter 58 of &quot;Skáldskaparmál&quot; (quoted in works by the skalds Þjóðólfr of Hvinir and Egill Skallagrímsson) and &quot;Geri&quot; is again used as a common noun for &quot;wolf&quot; in chapter 64 of the &quot;Prose Edda&quot; book &quot;Háttatal&quot;. Geri is referenced in kennings for &quot;blood&quot; in chapter 58 of &quot;Skáldskaparmál&quot; (&quot;Geri&#x27;s ales&quot; in a work by the skald Þórðr Sjáreksson) and in for &quot;carrion&quot; in chapter 60 (&quot;Geri&#x27;s morsel&quot; in a work by the skald Einarr Skúlason). &quot;Freki&quot; is also used in a kenning for &quot;carrion&quot; (&quot;Freki&#x27;s meal&quot;) in a work by Þórðr Sjáreksson in chapter 58 of &quot;Skáldskaparmál&quot;.

==Archaeological record==
If the rider on horseback on the image on the Böksta Runestone has been correctly identified as Odin, then Geri and Freki are shown taking part in hunting an elk.

==Theories==

&quot;Freki&quot; is also a name applied to the monstrous wolf Fenrir in the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot; poem &quot;Völuspá&quot;. Folklorist John Lindow sees irony in the fact that Odin feeds one Freki at his dinner table and another—Fenrir—with his flesh during the events of Ragnarök.

Historian Michael Spiedel connects Geri and Freki with archaeological finds depicting figures wearing wolf-pelts and frequently found wolf-related names among the Germanic peoples, including Wulfhroc (&quot;Wolf-Frock&quot;), Wolfhetan (&quot;Wolf-Hide&quot;), Isangrim (&quot;Grey-Mask&quot;), Scrutolf (&quot;Garb-Wolf&quot;), Wolfram (&quot;Wolf (and) Raven&quot;), Wolfgang (&quot;Wolf-Gait&quot;), Wolfdregil (&quot;Wolf-Runner&quot;), and Vulfolaic (&quot;Wolf-Dancer&quot;) and myths regarding wolf warriors from Norse mythology (such as the Úlfhéðnar). Michael Speidel believes this to point to the pan-Germanic wolf-warrior band cult centered on Odin that waned away after Christianization.

Scholars have also noted Indo-European parallels to the wolves Geri and Freki as companions of a divinity. 19th century scholar Jacob Grimm observed a connection between this aspect of Odin&#x27;s character and the Greek Apollo, to whom both the wolf and the raven are sacred. Philologist Maurice Bloomfield further connected the pair with the two dogs of Yama in Vedic mythology, and saw them as a Germanic counterpart to a more general and widespread Indo-European &quot;Cerberus&quot;-theme. Speidel finds similar parallels in the Vedic Rudra and the Roman Mars. Elaborating on the connection between wolves and figures of great power, he writes: &quot;This is why Geri and Freki, the wolves at Woden&#x27;s side, also glowered on the throne of the Anglo-Saxon kings. Wolf-warriors, like Geri and Freki, were not mere animals but mythical beings: as Woden&#x27;s followers they bodied forth his might, and so did wolf-warriors.&quot;

Bernd Heinrich theorizes that Geri and Freki, along with Odin and his ravens Huginn and Muninn, reflect a symbiosis observed in the natural world among ravens, wolves, and humans on the hunt:

:In a biological symbiosis one organism typically shores up some weakness or deficiency of the other(s). As in such a symbiosis, Odin the father of all humans and gods, though in human form was imperfect by himself. As a separate entity he lacked depth perception (being one-eyed) and he was apparently also uninformed and forgetful. But his weaknesses were compensated by his ravens, Hugin (mind) and Munin (memory) who were part of him. They perched on his shoulders and reconnoitered to the ends of the earth each day to return in the evening and tell him the news. He also had two wolves at his side, and the man/god-raven-wolf association was like one single organism in which the ravens were the eyes, mind, and memory, and the wolves the providers of meat and nourishment. As god, Odin was the ethereal part—he only drank wine and spoke only in poetry. I wondered if the Odin myth was a metaphor that playfully and poetically encapsulates ancient knowledge of our prehistoric past as hunters in association with two allies to produce a powerful hunting alliance. It would reflect a past that we have long forgotten and whose meaning has been obscured and badly frayed as we abandoned our hunting cultures to become herders and agriculturists, to whom ravens act as competitors.
==See also==
* List of wolves

==Notes==
==References==

* Bellows, Henry Adams (1923). &quot;The Poetic Edda&quot;. American-Scandinavian Foundation.
* Bellows, Henry Adams (1936). &quot;The Poetic Edda&quot;. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
* Bloomfield, Maurice (1908) &quot;Cerberus&quot; in: Hastings, James (Ed.) &quot;Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics&quot;, Vol. 5. Edinburgh: T. &amp; T. Clark.
* Faulkes, Anthony (Trans.) (1995). &quot;Edda&quot;. Everyman. .
* Grimm, Jacob (1882). &quot;Teutonic Mythology&quot;, Vol. I, Translated from the 4th Edition by James Steven Stallybrass. London: George Bell &amp; Sons.
* Heinrich, Bernd (2006 [1999]). &quot;The Mind of the Raven&quot;. Harper Perennial. 
* Lindow, John (2001). &quot;Norse Mythology: A Guide to the Gods, Heroes, Rituals, and Beliefs&quot;. Oxford University Press. .
* Orel, Vladimir (2003). &quot;A Handbook of Germanic Etymology&quot;. Leiden: Brill. .
* Simek, Rudolf (2007) translated by Angela Hall. &quot;Dictionary of Northern Mythology&quot;. D.S. Brewer. 
* Spiedel, Michael (2004). &quot;Ancient Germanic Warriors: Warrior Styles from Trajan&#x27;s Column to Icelandic Sagas&quot;. Routledge. 
* Thorpe, Benjamin (Trans) (1907). &quot;Edda Sæmundar Hinns Frôða The Edda of Sæmund the Learned&quot;. Part I. London Trübner &amp; Co
== External links ==
*MyNDIR (My Norse Digital Image Repository) Illustrations of Geri and Freki from manuscripts and early print books.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="3" end="18" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q826455" start="20" end="24" title="Geri and Freki" label="Geri"/>
<link wikidata="Q826455" start="29" end="34" title="Geri and Freki" label="Freki"/>
<link wikidata="Q898061" start="43" end="49" title="Eurasian wolf" label="wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="86" end="90" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="123" end="134" title="Poetic Edda" label="Poetic Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q205882" start="246" end="256" title="Prose Edda" label="Prose Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="295" end="311" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q947305" start="334" end="339" title="skald" label="skald"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="397" end="402" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="404" end="409" title="Roman mythology" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490503" start="414" end="429" title="Sharvara and Shyama" label="Vedic mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="484" end="492" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q335303" start="529" end="538" title="Úlfhéðnar" label="Úlfhéðnar"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="732" end="746" title="Proto-Germanic language" label="Proto-Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q150412" start="771" end="781" title="Burgundian language (Germanic)" label="Burgundian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="800" end="809" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417210" start="812" end="823" title="Old Swedish" label="Old Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="842" end="857" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q443089" start="865" end="874" title="Old Dutch" label="Old Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q35722" start="1051" end="1057" title="Gothic language" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="1095" end="1106" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="1172" end="1178" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="1223" end="1232" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044423" start="1409" end="1420" title="John Lindow" label="John Lindow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977875" start="1480" end="1493" title="Bruce Lincoln" label="Bruce Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="1536" end="1555" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429923" start="1743" end="1753" title="Grímnismál" label="Grímnismál"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="1769" end="1773" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q269118" start="1794" end="1801" title="List of names of Odin" label="Grímnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3606620" start="1828" end="1834" title="Agnarr Geirröðsson" label="Agnarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q952912" start="2008" end="2015" title="kenning" label="kenning"/>
<link wikidata="Q269118" start="2022" end="2028" title="List of names of Odin" label="Viðrir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5704407" start="2072" end="2097" title="Helgakviða Hundingsbana I" label="Helgakviða Hundingsbana I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134288" start="2273" end="2285" title="Gylfaginning" label="Gylfaginning"/>
<link wikidata="Q421981" start="2330" end="2334" title="High, Just-As-High, and Third" label="High"/>
<link wikidata="Q178075" start="2638" end="2652" title="Skáldskaparmál" label="Skáldskaparmál"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463858" start="2679" end="2683" title="warg" label="warg"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="2689" end="2695" title="wolf" label="wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q947305" start="2747" end="2752" title="skald" label="skald"/>
<link wikidata="Q947305" start="2915" end="2920" title="skald" label="skald"/>
<link wikidata="Q612925" start="2922" end="2940" title="Þjóðólfr of Hvinir" label="Þjóðólfr of Hvinir"/>
<link wikidata="Q314454" start="2945" end="2965" title="Egill Skallagrímsson" label="Egill Skallagrímsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634576" start="3095" end="3103" title="Háttatal" label="Háttatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q952912" start="3133" end="3140" title="kenning" label="kenning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626695" start="3261" end="3277" title="Þórðr Sjáreksson" label="Þórðr Sjáreksson"/>
<link wikidata="Q845064" start="3379" end="3394" title="Einarr Skúlason" label="Einarr Skúlason"/>
<link wikidata="Q5005157" start="3645" end="3661" title="Böksta Runestone" label="Böksta Runestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q35517" start="3757" end="3760" title="Moose" label="elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q182560" start="3840" end="3846" title="Fenrir" label="Fenrir"/>
<link wikidata="Q940563" start="3889" end="3896" title="Völuspá" label="Völuspá"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044423" start="3915" end="3926" title="John Lindow" label="John Lindow"/>
<link wikidata="Q170148" start="4051" end="4059" title="Ragnarök" label="Ragnarök"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="4225" end="4241" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q207041" start="4417" end="4422" title="Huginn and Muninn" label="Raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q335303" start="4611" end="4620" title="Úlfhéðnar" label="Úlfhéðnar"/>
<link wikidata="Q59532" start="4744" end="4760" title="Christianization" label="Christianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401124" start="4788" end="4801" title="Proto-Indo-European religion" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q6701" start="4891" end="4902" title="Jacob Grimm" label="Jacob Grimm"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="4984" end="4990" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q114496" start="5052" end="5070" title="Maurice Bloomfield" label="Maurice Bloomfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490503" start="5107" end="5115" title="Sharvara and Shyama" label="two dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9616887" start="5119" end="5123" title="Yama (Hinduism)" label="Yama"/>
<link wikidata="Q83496" start="5236" end="5244" title="Cerberus" label="Cerberus"/>
<link wikidata="Q215262" start="5297" end="5302" title="Vedic period" label="Vedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q855310" start="5303" end="5308" title="Rudra" label="Rudra"/>
<link wikidata="Q337547" start="5317" end="5322" title="Religion in ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q112" start="5323" end="5327" title="Mars (mythology)" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q90277" start="5701" end="5715" title="Bernd Heinrich" label="Bernd Heinrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q207041" start="5778" end="5795" title="Huginn and Muninn" label="Huginn and Muninn"/>
<link wikidata="Q121610" start="5807" end="5816" title="symbiosis" label="symbiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966156" start="7194" end="7208" title="List of wolves" label="List of wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q11336703" start="7238" end="7258" title="Henry Adams Bellows (businessman)" label="Bellows, Henry Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11336703" start="7332" end="7352" title="Henry Adams Bellows (businessman)" label="Bellows, Henry Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q114496" start="7431" end="7450" title="Maurice Bloomfield" label="Bloomfield, Maurice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417845" start="7647" end="7655" title="Everyman&amp;#x27;s Library" label="Everyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6701" start="7661" end="7673" title="Jacob Grimm" label="Grimm, Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q90277" start="7817" end="7832" title="Bernd Heinrich" label="Heinrich, Bernd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5663419" start="7883" end="7899" title="Harper Perennial" label="Harper Perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044423" start="7904" end="7916" title="John Lindow" label="Lindow, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="8005" end="8028" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q113803" start="8122" end="8135" title="Rudolf Simek" label="Simek, Rudolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952408" start="8216" end="8227" title="Boydell &amp;amp; Brewer" label="D.S. Brewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508259" start="8357" end="8366" title="Routledge" label="Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382004" start="8371" end="8387" title="Benjamin Thorpe" label="Thorpe, Benjamin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12458" wikidata="Q209732" url="?curid=12458" title="Ginnungagap">
<text>In Norse mythology, Ginnungagap (old Norse: ; &quot;gaping abyss&quot;, &quot;yawning void&quot;) is the primordial, magical void mentioned in three poems from the &quot;Poetic Edda&quot; and the &quot;Gylfaginning&quot;, the Eddaic text recording Norse cosmogony.

==Etymology==
&quot;Ginnunga-&quot; is usually interpreted as deriving from a verb meaning &quot;gape&quot; or &quot;yawn&quot;, but no such word occurs in Old Norse except in verse 3 of the Eddic poem &quot;Vǫluspá&quot;, &quot;gap var ginnunga&quot;, which may be a play on the term.

In her edition of the poem, Ursula Dronke suggested it was borrowed from Old High German &quot;ginunga&quot;, as the term Múspell is believed to have been borrowed from Old High German. An alternative etymology links the &quot;ginn-&quot; prefix with that found in terms with a sacral meaning, such as &quot;ginn-heilagr&quot;, &quot;ginn-regin&quot; (both referring to the gods) and &quot;ginn-runa&quot; (referring to the runes), thus interpreting &quot;Ginnungagap&quot; as signifying a &quot;magical (and creative) power-filled space&quot;.

==Creation==
Ginnungagap appears as the primordial void in the Norse creation account. The &quot;Gylfaginning&quot; states:

In the &quot;Völuspá&quot;, a supernaturally long-lived völva who was raised by jötnar tells the story of how Odin and his two brothers created the world from Ginnungagap.

==Geographic rationalization==

Scandinavian cartographers from the early 15th century attempted to localize or identify Ginnungagap as a real geographic location from which the creation myth derived. A fragment from a 15th-century (pre-Columbus) Old Norse encyclopedic text entitled &quot;Gripla&quot; (Little Compendium) places Ginnungagap between Greenland and Vinland:

A scholion in a 15th-century manuscript of Adam of Bremen&#x27;s &quot;Gesta Hammaburgensis Ecclesiae Pontificum&quot; similarly refers to &quot;Ghimmendegop&quot; as the Norse word for the abyss in the far north.

Later, the 17th-century Icelandic bishop Guðbrandur Thorlaksson also used the name &quot;Ginnungegap&quot; to refer to a narrow body of water, possibly the Davis Strait, separating the southern tip of Greenland from &quot;Estotelandia, pars America extrema&quot;, probably Baffin Island.

== In popular culture ==

* &quot;Ginnungagap&quot; is song taken from the Jethro Tull album, RökFlöte, and released as a single on January 20, 2023.

* Ginnungagap is featured in the Marvel Universe, as a void that existed before the formation of the world. In this place were formed entities such as the Elder Gods, Xian, Ennead, Frost Giants, Fire Demons, Nyx and Amatsu-Mikaboshi.

* In the Netflix series &quot;Ragnarok&quot;, Ginnungagap is visited as camping site for a classroom field trip during Season 1, Episode 4; it also happens to be the name of this particular episode. In Season 2, Episode 2, Ginnungagap is visited by the characters Laurits and Vidar, and is depicted as a scenic vantage point overlooking a fjord and two adjoining mountains.

* Alastair Reynolds&#x27; space opera novel &quot;Absolution Gap&quot; features a chasm named Ginnungagap Rift.

* Swedish death metal band, Amon Amarth and their 2001 album The Crusher features a track titled, &quot;Fall Through Ginnungagap&quot;.

* Swedish symphonic metal band, Therion, features a track titled &quot;Ginnungagap&quot; on their &quot;Secret of the Runes&quot; album from 2001.

* EVE Online has a black hole whose accretion disk shows up in the skybox named Ginnungagap.

* &quot;Ginungagap&quot; (sic) is the title of a science fiction short story by Michael Swanwick.

* French neofolk group SKÁLD included a song titled &quot;Ginnunga&quot; in their 2018 album &quot;Vikings Chant&quot;.

* Ginnungagap (ギンヌンガガプ, &quot;Ginnungagapu&quot;) is a weaponized grimoire introduced in &quot;Fire Emblem Fates&quot;, part of a video-game franchise published by Nintendo. It is a high-level item that hits the hardest of all tomes and scrolls in the game.

* Ginungagap is the hub world of the video game &quot;Jøtun&quot;.

* In PlatinumGames&#x27;s &quot;Bayonetta 3&quot;, the main characters travel through the multiverse, and the Ginnungagap is used as a gateway. In the game, it is referred to as &quot;Ginnungagap, the Chaotic Rift&quot;.

* A variation of Ginnungagap called &quot;The Spark of the World&quot; appears in the 2022 action-adventure video game &quot;God of War Ragnarök&quot;. This location becomes accessible during the main quest while in Muspelheim, appearing as a cosmic tapestry of orange sparks merged with blue-tinged essence, presumably from Niflheim.

== See also ==
* Abyss (religion)
* Chaos (mythology)
* Plane (esotericism)
* Void (astronomy)

== Notes ==
== References ==
* Dillmann, F. X. (1998). &quot;Ginnungagap&quot; in: Beck, H., Steuer, H. &amp; Timpe, D. (Eds.) &quot;Reallexikon der germanischen Altertumskunde, Volume 12&quot;. Berlin: de Gruyter. .
*

== External links ==
* Guðbrandur Thorlaksson&#x27;s 1606 map of the North Atlantic</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="3" end="18" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q209732" start="20" end="31" title="Ginnungagap" label="Ginnungagap"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="33" end="42" title="old Norse" label="old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="117" end="124" title="Magic (supernatural)" label="magical"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="170" end="181" title="Poetic Edda" label="Poetic Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134288" start="202" end="214" title="Gylfaginning" label="Gylfaginning"/>
<link wikidata="Q170835" start="254" end="263" title="cosmogony" label="cosmogony"/>
<link wikidata="Q205874" start="457" end="467" title="Eddic poem" label="Eddic poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q940563" start="474" end="481" title="Vǫluspá" label="Vǫluspá"/>
<link wikidata="Q253324" start="581" end="594" title="Ursula Dronke" label="Ursula Dronke"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="626" end="641" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q207923" start="675" end="682" title="Múspell" label="Múspell"/>
<link wikidata="Q215304" start="1168" end="1184" title="Creation myth" label="creation account"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134288" start="1196" end="1208" title="Gylfaginning" label="Gylfaginning"/>
<link wikidata="Q940563" start="1237" end="1244" title="Völuspá" label="Völuspá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477129" start="1280" end="1285" title="Seeress (Germanic)" label="völva"/>
<link wikidata="Q210053" start="1304" end="1310" title="Jötunn" label="jötnar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="1334" end="1338" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="1747" end="1756" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q192823" start="1761" end="1768" title="Vinland" label="Vinland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358144" start="1773" end="1781" title="scholion" label="scholion"/>
<link wikidata="Q109244" start="1814" end="1828" title="Adam of Bremen" label="Adam of Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q698513" start="1842" end="1883" title="Gesta Hammaburgensis Ecclesiae Pontificum" label="Gesta Hammaburgensis Ecclesiae Pontificum"/>
<link wikidata="Q189262" start="2142" end="2154" title="Davis Strait" label="Davis Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q81178" start="2259" end="2272" title="Baffin Island" label="Baffin Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q192353" start="2350" end="2361" title="Jethro Tull (band)" label="Jethro Tull"/>
<link wikidata="Q931597" start="2459" end="2474" title="Marvel Universe" label="Marvel Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777295" start="2581" end="2591" title="Elder Gods (Marvel Comics)" label="Elder Gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573004" start="2599" end="2605" title="Heliopolitans (comics)" label="Ennead"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2607" end="2619" title="Giants (Marvel Comics)#Frost Giants" label="Frost Giants"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2621" end="2632" title="Demons (Marvel Comics)" label="Fire Demons"/>
<link wikidata="Q115473644" start="2634" end="2637" title="Nyx (Marvel Comics)" label="Nyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740629" start="2642" end="2658" title="Amatsu-Mikaboshi (character)" label="Amatsu-Mikaboshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q83962233" start="2685" end="2705" title="Ragnarok (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Ragnarok&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q380869" start="3038" end="3055" title="Alastair Reynolds" label="Alastair Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q192863" start="3177" end="3188" title="Amon Amarth" label="Amon Amarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q15782954" start="3210" end="3221" title="Amon Amarth discography" label="The Crusher"/>
<link wikidata="Q162247" start="3318" end="3325" title="Therion (band)" label="Therion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030073" start="3384" end="3415" title="Therion discography" label="&amp;quot;Secret of the Runes&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q455510" start="3608" end="3624" title="Michael Swanwick" label="Michael Swanwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3629" end="3635" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q775614" start="3636" end="3643" title="neofolk" label="neofolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q65158644" start="3650" end="3655" title="Skáld (band)" label="SKÁLD"/>
<link wikidata="Q18762399" start="3843" end="3860" title="Fire Emblem Fates" label="Fire Emblem Fates"/>
<link wikidata="Q860310" start="4027" end="4036" title="Overworld" label="hub world"/>
<link wikidata="Q19599048" start="4055" end="4072" title="Jotun (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Jøtun&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q44997696" start="4107" end="4118" title="Bayonetta 3" label="Bayonetta 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q99397916" start="4422" end="4441" title="God of War Ragnarök" label="God of War Ragnarök"/>
<link wikidata="Q336525" start="4650" end="4666" title="Abyss (religion)" label="Abyss (religion)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17508277" start="4669" end="4686" title="Chaos (mythology)" label="Chaos (mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q247700" start="4689" end="4708" title="Plane (esotericism)" label="Plane (esotericism)"/>
<link wikidata="Q845371" start="4711" end="4727" title="Void (astronomy)" label="Void (astronomy)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12460" wikidata="Q3133" url="?curid=12460" title="Green">
<text>Green is the color between cyan and yellow on the visible spectrum. It is evoked by light which has a dominant wavelength of roughly 495570 nm. In subtractive color systems, used in painting and color printing, it is created by a combination of yellow and cyan; in the RGB color model, used on television and computer screens, it is one of the additive primary colors, along with red and blue, which are mixed in different combinations to create all other colors. By far the largest contributor to green in nature is chlorophyll, the chemical by which plants photosynthesize and convert sunlight into chemical energy. Many creatures have adapted to their green environments by taking on a green hue themselves as camouflage. Several minerals have a green color, including the emerald, which is colored green by its chromium content.
During post-classical and early modern Europe, green was the color commonly associated with wealth, merchants, bankers, and the gentry, while red was reserved for the nobility. For this reason, the costume of the &quot;Mona Lisa&quot; by Leonardo da Vinci and the benches in the British House of Commons are green while those in the House of Lords are red. It also has a long historical tradition as the color of Ireland and of Gaelic culture. It is the historic color of Islam, representing the lush vegetation of Paradise. It was the color of the banner of Muhammad, and is found in the flags of nearly all Islamic countries.
In surveys made in American, European, and Islamic countries, green is the color most commonly associated with nature, life, health, youth, spring, hope, and envy. In the European Union and the United States, green is also sometimes associated with toxicity and poor health, but in China and most of Asia, its associations are very positive, as the symbol of fertility and happiness. Because of its association with nature, it is the color of the environmental movement. Political groups advocating environmental protection and social justice describe themselves as part of the Green movement, some naming themselves Green parties. This has led to similar campaigns in advertising, as companies have sold green, or environmentally friendly, products. Green is also the traditional color of safety and permission; a green light means go ahead, a green card permits permanent residence in the United States.

== Etymology and linguistic definitions ==
The word &quot;green&quot; comes from the Middle English and Old English word &quot;grene&quot;, which, like the German word &quot;grün&quot;, has the same root as the words &quot;grass&quot; and &quot;grow&quot;. It is from a Common Germanic &quot;*gronja-&quot;, which is also reflected in Old Norse &quot;grænn&quot;, Old High German &quot;gruoni&quot; (but unattested in East Germanic), ultimately from a PIE root &quot;*&quot; &quot;to grow&quot;, and root-cognate with &quot;grass&quot; and &quot;to grow&quot;.
The first recorded use of the word as a color term in Old English dates to ca. AD 700.

Latin with &quot;viridis&quot; also has a genuine and widely used term for &quot;green&quot;. Related to &quot;virere&quot; &quot;to grow&quot; and &quot;ver&quot; &quot;spring&quot;, it gave rise to words in several Romance languages, French &quot;vert&quot;, Italian &quot;verde&quot; (and English &quot;&quot;, &quot;verdure&quot; etc.). Likewise the Slavic languages with &quot;zelenъ&quot;. Ancient Greek also had a term for yellowish, pale green – χλωρός, &quot;chloros&quot; (cf. the color of chlorine), cognate with χλοερός &quot;verdant&quot; and χλόη &quot;chloe, the green of new growth&quot;.

Thus, the languages mentioned above (Germanic, Romance, Slavic, Greek) have old terms for &quot;green&quot; which are derived from words for fresh, sprouting vegetation.
However, comparative linguistics makes clear that these terms were coined independently, over the past few millennia, and there is no identifiable single Proto-Indo-European or word for &quot;green&quot;. For example, the Slavic &quot;zelenъ&quot; is cognate with Sanskrit &quot;&quot; &quot;yellow, ochre, golden&quot;.
The Turkic languages also have &quot;jašɨl&quot; &quot;green&quot; or &quot;yellowish green&quot;, compared to a Mongolian word for &quot;meadow&quot;.

=== Languages where green and blue are one color ===

In some languages, including old Chinese, Thai, old Japanese, and Vietnamese, the same word can mean either blue or green. The Chinese character (pronounced &quot;qīng&quot; in Mandarin, &quot;ao&quot; in Japanese, and &quot;&quot; in Sino-Vietnamese) has a meaning that covers both blue and green; blue and green are traditionally considered shades of &quot;&quot;. In more contemporary terms, they are (&quot;lán&quot;, in Mandarin) and (&quot;lǜ&quot;, in Mandarin) respectively. Japanese also has two terms that refer specifically to the color green, (&quot;midori&quot;, which is derived from the classical Japanese descriptive verb &quot;midoru&quot; &quot;to be in leaf, to flourish&quot; in reference to trees) and グリーン (&quot;guriin&quot;, which is derived from the English word &quot;green&quot;). However, in Japan, although the traffic lights have the same colors as other countries have, the green light is described using the same word as for blue, &quot;aoi&quot;, because green is considered a shade of aoi; similarly, green variants of certain fruits and vegetables such as green apples, green &quot;shiso&quot; (as opposed to red apples and red shiso) will be described with the word &quot;aoi&quot;. Vietnamese uses a single word for both blue and green, &quot;&quot;, with variants such as &quot;xanh da trời&quot; (azure, lit. &quot;sky blue&quot;), &quot;lam&quot; (blue), and &quot;lục&quot; (green; also &quot;xanh lá cây&quot;, lit. &quot;leaf green&quot;).

&quot;Green&quot; in modern European languages corresponds to about 520–570 nm, but many historical and non-European languages make other choices, e.g. using a term for the range of ca. 450–530 nm (&quot;blue/green&quot;) and another for ca. 530–590 nm (&quot;green/yellow&quot;). In the comparative study of color terms in the world&#x27;s languages, green is only found as a separate category in languages with the fully developed range of six colors (white, black, red, green, yellow, and blue), or more rarely in systems with five colors (white, red, yellow, green, and black/blue). These languages have introduced supplementary vocabulary to denote &quot;green&quot;, but these terms are recognizable as recent adoptions that are not in origin color terms (much like the English adjective orange being in origin not a color term but the name of a fruit). Thus, the Thai word เขียว &quot;kheīyw&quot;, besides meaning &quot;green&quot;, also means &quot;rank&quot; and &quot;smelly&quot; and holds other unpleasant associations.

The Celtic languages had a term for &quot;blue/green/grey&quot;, Proto-Celtic &quot;*glasto-&quot;, which gave rise to Old Irish &quot;glas&quot; &quot;green, grey&quot; and to Welsh &quot;glas&quot; &quot;blue&quot;. This word is cognate with the Ancient Greek γλαυκός &quot;bluish green&quot;, contrasting with χλωρός &quot;yellowish green&quot; discussed above.

In modern Japanese, the term for green is 緑, while the old term for &quot;blue/green&quot;, now means &quot;blue&quot;. But in certain contexts, green is still conventionally referred to as 青, as in and , reflecting the absence of blue-green distinction in old Japanese (more accurately, the traditional Japanese color terminology grouped some shades of green with blue, and others with yellow tones).

== In science ==
=== Color vision and colorimetry ===
In optics, the perception of green is evoked by light having a spectrum dominated by energy with a wavelength of roughly 495–570 nm. The sensitivity of the dark-adapted human eye is greatest at about 507 nm, a blue-green color, while the light-adapted eye is most sensitive about 555 nm, a yellow-green; these are the peak locations of the rod and cone (scotopic and photopic, respectively) luminosity functions.

The perception of greenness (in opposition to redness forming one of the opponent mechanisms in human color vision) is evoked by light which triggers the medium-wavelength &quot;M&quot; cone cells in the eye more than the long-wavelength &quot;L&quot; cones. Light which triggers this greenness response more than the yellowness or blueness of the other color opponent mechanism is called green. A green light source typically has a spectral power distribution dominated by energy with a wavelength of roughly 487–570 nm.

Human eyes have color receptors known as cone cells, of which there are three types. In some cases, one is missing or faulty, which can cause color blindness, including the common inability to distinguish red and yellow from green, known as deuteranopia or red-green color blindness.
Green is restful to the eye. Studies show that a green environment can reduce fatigue.

In the subtractive color system, used in painting and color printing, green is created by a combination of yellow and blue, or yellow and cyan; in the RGB color model, used on television and computer screens, it is one of the additive primary colors, along with red and blue, which are mixed in different combinations to create all other colors. On the HSV color wheel, also known as the RGB color wheel, the complement of green is magenta; that is, a color corresponding to an equal mixture of red and blue light (one of the purples). On a traditional color wheel, based on subtractive color, the complementary color to green is considered to be red.

In additive color devices such as computer displays and televisions, one of the primary light sources is typically a narrow-spectrum yellowish-green of dominant wavelength ≈550 nm; this &quot;green&quot; primary is combined with an orangish-red &quot;red&quot; primary and a purplish-blue &quot;blue&quot; primary to produce any color in between – the RGB color model. A unique green (green appearing neither yellowish nor bluish) is produced on such a device by mixing light from the green primary with some light from the blue primary.

=== Lasers ===
Lasers emitting in the green part of the spectrum are widely available to the general public in a wide range of output powers. Green laser pointers outputting at 532 nm (563.5 THz) are relatively inexpensive compared to other wavelengths of the same power, and are very popular due to their good beam quality and very high apparent brightness. The most common green lasers use diode pumped solid state (DPSS) technology to create the green light.
An infrared laser diode at 808 nm is used to pump a crystal of neodymium-doped yttrium vanadium oxide (Nd:YVO4) or neodymium-doped yttrium aluminium garnet (Nd:YAG) and induces it to emit 281.76 THz (1064 nm). This deeper infrared light is then passed through another crystal containing potassium, titanium and phosphorus (KTP), whose non-linear properties generate light at a frequency that is twice that of the incident beam (563.5 THz); in this case corresponding to the wavelength of 532 nm (&quot;green&quot;).
Other green wavelengths are also available using DPSS technology ranging from 501 nm to 543 nm.
Green wavelengths are also available from gas lasers, including the helium–neon laser (543 nm), the Argon-ion laser (514 nm) and the Krypton-ion laser (521 nm and 531 nm), as well as liquid dye lasers. Green lasers have a wide variety of applications, including pointing, illumination, surgery, laser light shows, spectroscopy, interferometry, fluorescence, holography, machine vision, non-lethal weapons, and bird control.

As of mid-2011, direct green laser diodes at 510 nm and 500 nm have become generally available,
although the price remains relatively prohibitive for widespread public use. The efficiency of these lasers (peak 3%) compared to that of DPSS green lasers (peak 35%)
may also be limiting adoption of the diodes to niche uses.

=== Pigments, food coloring and fireworks ===
Many minerals provide pigments which have been used in green paints and dyes over the centuries. Pigments, in this case, are minerals which reflect the color green, rather that emitting it through luminescent or phosphorescent qualities. The large number of green pigments makes it impossible to mention them all. Among the more notable green minerals, however is the emerald, which is colored green by trace amounts of chromium and sometimes vanadium.
Chromium(III) oxide (Cr2O3), is called chrome green, also called viridian or institutional green when used as a pigment. For many years, the source of amazonite&#x27;s color was a mystery. Widely thought to have been due to copper because copper compounds often have blue and green colors, the blue-green color is likely to be derived from small quantities of lead and water in the feldspar.
Copper is the source of the green color in malachite pigments, chemically known as basic copper(II) carbonate.

Verdigris is made by placing a plate or blade of copper, brass or bronze, slightly warmed, into a vat of fermenting wine, leaving it there for several weeks, and then scraping off and drying the green powder that forms on the metal. The process of making verdigris was described in ancient times by Pliny. It was used by the Romans in the murals of Pompeii, and in Celtic medieval manuscripts as early as the 5th century AD. It produced a blue-green which no other pigment could imitate, but it had drawbacks: it was unstable, it could not resist dampness, it did not mix well with other colors, it could ruin other colors with which it came into contact, and it was toxic. Leonardo da Vinci, in his treatise on painting, warned artists not to use it. It was widely used in miniature paintings in Europe and Persia in the 16th and 17th centuries. Its use largely ended in the late 19th century, when it was replaced by the safer and more stable chrome green. Viridian, as described above, was patented in 1859. It became popular with painters, since, unlike other synthetic greens, it was stable and not toxic. Vincent van Gogh used it, along with Prussian blue, to create a dark blue sky with a greenish tint in his painting &quot;Café Terrace at Night&quot;.

Green earth is a natural pigment used since the time of the Roman Empire. It is composed of clay colored by iron oxide, magnesium, aluminum silicate, or potassium. Large deposits were found in the South of France near Nice, and in Italy around Verona, on Cyprus, and in Bohemia. The clay was crushed, washed to remove impurities, then powdered. It was sometimes called Green of Verona.

Mixtures of oxidized cobalt and zinc were also used to create green paints as early as the 18th century.

Cobalt green, sometimes known as Rinman&#x27;s green or zinc green, is a translucent green pigment made by heating a mixture of cobalt (II) oxide and zinc oxide. Sven Rinman, a Swedish chemist, discovered this compound in 1780.
Green chrome oxide was a new synthetic green created by a chemist named Pannetier in Paris in about 1835. Emerald green was a synthetic deep green made in the 19th century by hydrating chrome oxide. It was also known as Guignet green.
There is no natural source for green food colorings which has been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration. Chlorophyll, the E numbers E140 and E141, is the most common green chemical found in nature, and only allowed in certain medicines and cosmetic materials.
Quinoline Yellow (E104) is a commonly used coloring in the United Kingdom but is banned in Australia, Japan, Norway and the United States.
Green S (E142) is prohibited in many countries, for it is known to cause hyperactivity, asthma, urticaria, and insomnia.

To create green sparks, fireworks use barium salts, such as barium chlorate, barium nitrate crystals, or barium chloride, also used for green fireplace logs. Copper salts typically burn blue, but cupric chloride (also known as &quot;campfire blue&quot;) can also produce green flames. Green pyrotechnic flares can use a mix ratio 75:25 of boron and potassium nitrate. Smoke can be turned green by a mixture: solvent yellow 33, solvent green 3, lactose, magnesium carbonate plus sodium carbonate added to potassium chlorate.
=== Biology ===

Green is common in nature, as many plants are green because of a complex chemical known as chlorophyll, which is involved in photosynthesis. Chlorophyll absorbs the long wavelengths of light (red) and short wavelengths of light (blue) much more efficiently than the wavelengths that appear green to the human eye, so light reflected by plants is enriched in green.
Chlorophyll absorbs green light poorly because it first arose in organisms living in oceans where purple halobacteria were already exploiting photosynthesis. Their purple color arose because they extracted energy in the green portion of the spectrum using bacteriorhodopsin. The new organisms that then later came to dominate the extraction of light were selected to exploit those portions of the spectrum not used by the halobacteria.
Animals typically use the color green as camouflage, blending in with the chlorophyll green of the surrounding environment. Most fish, reptiles, amphibians, and birds appear green because of a reflection of blue light coming through an over-layer of yellow pigment. Perception of color can also be affected by the surrounding environment. For example, broadleaf forests typically have a yellow-green light about them as the trees filter the light. Turacoverdin is one chemical which can cause a green hue in birds, especially. Invertebrates such as insects or mollusks often display green colors because of porphyrin pigments, sometimes caused by diet. This can causes their feces to look green as well. Other chemicals which generally contribute to greenness among organisms are flavins (lychochromes) and hemanovadin. Humans have imitated this by wearing green clothing as a camouflage in military and other fields. Substances that may impart a greenish hue to one&#x27;s skin include biliverdin, the green pigment in bile, and ceruloplasmin, a protein that carries copper ions in chelation.

The green huntsman spider is green due to the presence of bilin pigments in the spider&#x27;s hemolymph (circulatory system fluids) and tissue fluids.
It hunts insects in green vegetation, where it is well camouflaged.

=== Green eyes ===
There is no green pigment in green eyes; like the color of blue eyes, it is an optical illusion; its appearance is caused by the combination of an amber or light brown pigmentation of the stroma, given by a low or moderate concentration of melanin, with the blue tone imparted by the Rayleigh scattering of the reflected light.
Nobody is brought into the world with green eyes. An infant has one of two eye hues: dark or blue. Following birth, cells called melanocytes start to discharge melanin, the earthy colored shade, in the child&#x27;s irises. This begins happening since melanocytes respond to light in time.
Green eyes are most common in Northern and Central Europe.
They can also be found in Southern Europe, West Asia, Central Asia, and South Asia. In Iceland, 89% of women and 87% of men have either blue or green eye color.
A study of Icelandic and Dutch adults found green eyes to be much more prevalent in women than in men.

== In history and art ==
===Prehistoric history===

Neolithic cave paintings do not have traces of green pigments, but neolithic peoples in northern Europe did make a green dye for clothing, made from the leaves of the birch tree. It was of very poor quality, more brown than green. Ceramics from ancient Mesopotamia show people wearing vivid green costumes, but it is not known how the colors were produced.

=== Ancient history ===
In Ancient Egypt, green was the symbol of regeneration and rebirth, and of the crops made possible by the annual flooding of the Nile. For painting on the walls of tombs or on papyrus, Egyptian artists used finely ground malachite, mined in the west Sinai and the eastern desert; a paintbox with malachite pigment was found inside the tomb of King Tutankhamun. They also used less expensive green earth pigment, or mixed yellow ochre and blue azurite. To dye fabrics green, they first colored them yellow with dye made from saffron and then soaked them in blue dye from the roots of the woad plant.

For the ancient Egyptians, green had very positive associations. The hieroglyph for green represented a growing papyrus sprout, showing the close connection between green, vegetation, vigor and growth. In wall paintings, the ruler of the underworld, Osiris, was typically portrayed with a green face, because green was the symbol of good health and rebirth. Palettes of green facial makeup, made with malachite, were found in tombs. It was worn by both the living and the dead, particularly around the eyes, to protect them from evil. Tombs also often contained small green amulets in the shape of scarab beetles made of malachite, which would protect and give vigor to the deceased. It also symbolized the sea, which was called the &quot;Very Green&quot;.

In Ancient Greece, green and blue were sometimes considered the same color, and the same word sometimes described the color of the sea and the color of trees. The philosopher Democritus described two different greens: , or pale green, and , or leek green. Aristotle considered that green was located midway between black, symbolizing the earth, and white, symbolizing water. However, green was not counted among the four classic colors of Greek painting – red, yellow, black and white – and is rarely found in Greek art.

The Romans had a greater appreciation for the color green; it was the color of Venus, the goddess of gardens, vegetables and vineyards. The Romans made a fine green earth pigment that was widely used in the wall paintings of Pompeii, Herculaneum, Lyon, Vaison-la-Romaine, and other Roman cities. They also used the pigment verdigris, made by soaking copper plates in fermenting wine. By the second century AD, the Romans were using green in paintings, mosaics and glass, and there were ten different words in Latin for varieties of green.

=== Postclassical history ===
In the Middle Ages and Renaissance, the color of clothing showed a person&#x27;s social rank and profession. Red could only be worn by the nobility, brown and gray by peasants, and green by merchants, bankers and the gentry and their families. The Mona Lisa wears green in her portrait, as does the bride in the Arnolfini portrait by Jan van Eyck.

There were no good vegetal green dyes which resisted washing and sunlight for those who wanted or were required to wear green. Green dyes were made out of the fern, plantain, buckthorn berries, the juice of nettles and of leeks, the digitalis plant, the broom plant, the leaves of the fraxinus, or ash tree, and the bark of the alder tree, but they rapidly faded or changed color. Only in the 16th century was a good green dye produced, by first dyeing the cloth blue with woad, and then yellow with &quot;Reseda luteola&quot;, also known as yellow-weed.

The pigments available to painters were more varied; monks in monasteries used verdigris, made by soaking copper in fermenting wine, to color medieval manuscripts. They also used finely-ground malachite, which made a luminous green. They used green earth colors for backgrounds.

During the early Renaissance, painters such as Duccio di Buoninsegna learned to paint faces first with a green undercoat, then with pink, which gave the faces a more realistic hue. Over the centuries the pink has faded, making some of the faces look green.

===Modern history===
==== In the 18th and 19th century ====

The 18th and 19th centuries brought the discovery and production of synthetic green pigments and dyes, which rapidly replaced the earlier mineral and vegetable pigments and dyes. These new dyes were more stable and brilliant than the vegetable dyes, but some contained high levels of arsenic, and were eventually banned.

In the 18th and 19th centuries, green was associated with the romantic movement in literature and art. The German poet and philosopher Goethe declared that green was the most restful color, suitable for decorating bedrooms. Painters such as John Constable and Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot depicted the lush green of rural landscapes and forests. Green was contrasted to the smoky grays and blacks of the Industrial Revolution.

The second half of the 19th century saw the use of green in art to create specific emotions, not just to imitate nature. One of the first to make color the central element of his picture was the American artist James McNeill Whistler, who created a series of paintings called &quot;symphonies&quot; or &quot;noctures&quot; of color, including &quot;Symphony in gray and green; The Ocean&quot; between 1866 and 1872.

The late 19th century also brought the systematic study of color theory, and particularly the study of how complementary colors such as red and green reinforced each other when they were placed next to each other. These studies were avidly followed by artists such as Vincent van Gogh. Describing his painting, The &quot;Night Cafe&quot;, to his brother Theo in 1888, Van Gogh wrote: &quot;I sought to express with red and green the terrible human passions. The hall is blood red and pale yellow, with a green billiard table in the center, and four lamps of lemon yellow, with rays of orange and green. Everywhere it is a battle and antithesis of the most different reds and greens.&quot;

==== In the 20th and 21st century ====
In the 1980s, green became a political symbol, the color of the Green Party in Germany and in many other European countries. It symbolized the environmental movement, and also a new politics of the left which rejected traditional socialism and communism. (See section below.)

== Symbolism and associations ==
=== Safety and permission ===
Green can communicate safety to proceed, as in traffic lights. Green and red were standardized as the colors of international railroad signals in the 19th century. The first traffic light, using green and red gas lamps, was erected in 1868 in front of the Houses of Parliament in London. It exploded the following year, injuring the policeman who operated it. In 1912, the first modern electric traffic lights were put up in Salt Lake City, Utah. Red was chosen largely because of its high visibility, and its association with danger, while green was chosen largely because it could not be mistaken for red. Today green lights universally signal that a system is turned on and working as it should. In many video games, green signifies both health and completed objectives, opposite red.

=== Nature, vivacity, and life ===
Green is the color most commonly associated in Europe and the United States with nature, vivacity and life.
It is the color of many environmental organizations, such as Greenpeace, and of the Green Parties in Europe. Many cities have designated a garden or park as a green space, and use green trash bins and containers. A green cross is commonly used to designate pharmacies in Europe.

In China, green is associated with the east, with sunrise, and with life and growth. In Thailand, the color green is considered for those born on a Wednesday (light green for those born at night).

=== Springtime, freshness, and hope ===
Green is the color most commonly associated in the United States and Europe with springtime, freshness, and hope. Green is often used to symbolize rebirth and renewal and immortality. In Ancient Egypt; the god Osiris, king of the underworld, was depicted as green-skinned. Green as the color of hope is connected with the color of springtime; hope represents the faith that things will improve after a period of difficulty, like the renewal of flowers and plants after the winter season.

=== Youth and inexperience ===
Green the color most commonly associated in Europe and the United States with youth. It also often is used to describe anyone young, inexperienced, probably by the analogy to immature and unripe fruit. Examples include green cheese, a term for a fresh, unaged cheese, and greenhorn, an inexperienced person.

=== Food and diet ===
The color green has been increasingly used by food companies, governments, and practitioners themselves to identify veganism and vegetarianism. The government of India requires food that is vegetarian to be marked with a green circle as part of the &quot;Food Safety and Standards Act of 2006&quot; with changes to symbolism since but still maintaining the color green. In 2021, India introduced a green V to exclusively label vegan options. In the west, the V-Label, a green V designed by the European Vegetarian Union, has been used by food distributors to label vegan and vegetarian options.

=== Calm, tolerance, and the agreeable ===
Surveys also show that green is the color most associated with the calm, the agreeable, and tolerance. Red is associated with heat, blue with cold, and green with an agreeable temperature. Red is associated with dry, blue with wet, and green, in the middle, with dampness. Red is the most active color, blue the most passive; green, in the middle, is the color of neutrality and calm, sometimes used in architecture and design for these reasons.
Blue and green together symbolize harmony and balance. Experimental studies also show this calming effect in a statistical significant decrease of negative emotions
and increase of creative performance.

=== Jealousy and envy ===
Green is often associated with jealousy and envy. The expression &quot;green-eyed monster&quot; was first used by William Shakespeare in Othello: &quot;it is the green-eyed monster which doth mock the meat it feeds on.&quot; Shakespeare also used it in the Merchant of Venice, speaking of &quot;green-eyed jealousy&quot;.

=== Love and sexuality ===
Green today is not commonly associated in Europe and the United States with love and sexuality, but in stories of the medieval period it sometimes represented love and the base, natural desires of man. It was the color of the serpent in the Garden of Eden who caused the downfall of Adam and Eve. However, for the troubadours, green was the color of growing love, and light green clothing was reserved for young women who were not yet married.

In Persian and Sudanese poetry, dark-skinned women, called &quot;green&quot; women, were considered erotic. The Chinese term for cuckold is &quot;to wear a green hat.&quot; This was because in ancient China, prostitutes were called &quot;the family of the green lantern&quot; and a prostitute&#x27;s family would wear a green headscarf.

In Victorian England, the color green was associated with homosexuality.

=== Dragons, fairies, monsters, and devils ===
In legends, folk tales and films, fairies, dragons, monsters, and the devil are often shown as green.

In the Middle Ages, the devil was usually shown as either red, black or green. Dragons were usually green, because they had the heads, claws and tails of reptiles.

Modern Chinese dragons are also often green, but unlike European dragons, they are benevolent; Chinese dragons traditionally symbolize potent and auspicious powers, particularly control over water, rainfall, hurricane, and floods. The dragon is also a symbol of power, strength, and good luck. The Emperor of China usually used the dragon as a symbol of his imperial power and strength. The dragon dance is a popular feature of Chinese festivals.

In Irish and English folklore, the color was sometimes associated with witchcraft, and with faeries and spirits. The type of Irish fairy known as a leprechaun is commonly portrayed wearing a green suit, though before the 20th century he was usually described as wearing a red suit.

In theater and film, green was often connected with monsters and the inhuman. The earliest films of Frankenstein were in black and white, but in the poster for the 1935 version &quot;The Bride of Frankenstein&quot;, the monster had a green face. Actor Bela Lugosi wore green-hued makeup for the role of Dracula in the 1927–1928 Broadway stage production.

=== Poison and sickness ===
Like other common colors, green has several completely opposite associations. While it is the color most associated by Europeans and Americans with good health, it is also the color most often associated with toxicity and poison. There was a solid foundation for this association; in the nineteenth century several popular paints and pigments, notably verdigris, vert de Schweinfurt and vert de Paris, were highly toxic, containing copper or arsenic. The intoxicating drink absinthe was known as &quot;the green fairy&quot;.

A green tinge in the skin is sometimes associated with nausea and sickness. The expression &#x27;green at the gills&#x27; means appearing sick. The color, when combined with gold, is sometimes seen as representing the fading of youth. In some Far East cultures the color green is used as a symbol of sickness or nausea.

=== Social status, prosperity and the dollar ===
Green in Europe and the United States is sometimes associated with status and prosperity. From the Middle Ages to the 19th century it was often worn by bankers, merchants country gentlemen and others who were wealthy but not members of the nobility. The benches in the House of Commons of the United Kingdom, where the landed gentry sat, are colored green.

In the United States green was connected with the dollar bill. Since 1861, the reverse side of the dollar bill has been green. Green was originally chosen because it deterred counterfeiters, who tried to use early camera equipment to duplicate banknotes. Also, since the banknotes were thin, the green on the back did not show through and muddle the pictures on the front of the banknote. Green continues to be used because the public now associates it with a strong and stable currency.

One of the more notable uses of this meaning is found in &quot;The Wonderful Wizard of Oz&quot;. The Emerald City in this story is a place where everyone wears tinted glasses that make everything appear green. According to the populist interpretation of the story, the city&#x27;s color is used by the author, L. Frank Baum, to illustrate the financial system of America in his day, as he lived in a time when America was debating the use of paper money versus gold.

== On flags ==

* The flag of Italy (1797) was modeled after the French tricolor. It was originally the flag of the Cisalpine Republic, whose capital was Milan; red and white were the colors of Milan, and green was the color of the military uniforms of the army of the Cisalpine Republic. Other versions say it is the color of the Italian landscape, or symbolizes hope.
* The flag of Brazil has a green field adapted from the flag of the Empire of Brazil. The green represented the royal family.
* The flag of India was inspired by an earlier flag of the independence movement of Gandhi, which had a red band for Hinduism and a green band representing Islam, the second largest religion in India.
* The flag of Pakistan symbolizes Pakistan&#x27;s commitment to Islam and equal rights of religious minorities where the larger portion (3:2 ratio) of flag is dark green representing Muslim majority (98% of total population) while a white vertical bar (3:1 ratio) at the mast representing equal rights for religious minorities and minority religions in country. The crescent and star symbolizes progress and bright future respectively.
* The flag of Bangladesh has a green field based on a similar flag used during the Bangladesh Liberation War of 1971. It consists of a red disc on top of a green field. The red disc represents the sun rising over Bengal, and also the blood of those who died for the independence of Bangladesh. The green field stands for the lushness of the land of Bangladesh.
* The flag of the international constructed language Esperanto has a green field and a green star in a white area. The green represents hope (&quot;esperanto&quot; means &quot;one who hopes&quot;), the white represents peace and neutrality and the star represents the five inhabited continents.

Green is one of the three colors (along with red and black, or red and gold) of Pan-Africanism. Several African countries thus use the color on their flags, including Nigeria, South Africa, Ghana, Senegal, Mali, Ethiopia, Togo, Guinea, Benin, and Zimbabwe. The Pan-African colors are borrowed from the Ethiopian flag, one of the oldest independent African countries. Green on some African flags represents the natural richness of Africa.

Many flags of the Islamic world are green, as the color is considered sacred in Islam (see below). The flag of Hamas, as well as the flag of Iran, is green, symbolizing their Islamist ideology. The 1977 flag of Libya consisted of a simple green field with no other characteristics. It was the only national flag in the world with just one color and no design, insignia, or other details. Some countries used green in their flags to represent their country&#x27;s lush vegetation, as in the flag of Jamaica, and hope in the future, as in the flags of Portugal and Nigeria. The green cedar of Lebanon tree on the Flag of Lebanon officially represents steadiness and tolerance.
Green is a symbol of Ireland, which is often referred to as the &quot;Emerald Isle&quot;. The color is particularly identified with the republican and nationalist traditions in modern times. It is used this way on the flag of the Republic of Ireland, in balance with white and the Protestant orange. Green is a strong trend in the Irish holiday St. Patrick&#x27;s Day.

== In politics ==
The first recorded green party was a political faction in Constantinople during the 6th century Byzantine Empire. which took its name from a popular chariot racing team. They were bitter opponents of the blue faction, which supported Emperor Justinian I and which had its own chariot racing team. In 532 AD rioting between the factions began after one race, which led to the massacre of green supporters and the destruction of much of the center of Constantinople. (See Nika Riots).

Green was the traditional color of Irish nationalism, beginning in the 17th century. The green harp flag, with a traditional gaelic harp, became the symbol of the movement. It was the banner of the Society of United Irishmen, which organized the ultimately unsuccessful Irish Rebellion of 1798. When Ireland achieved independence in 1922, green was incorporated into the national flag.

In the 1970s, green became the color of the third biggest Swiss Federal Council political party, the Swiss People&#x27;s Party SVP. The ideology is Swiss nationalism, national conservatism, right-wing populism, economic liberalism, agrarianism, isolationism, euroscepticism. The SVP was founded on September 22, 1971, and has 90,000 members.

In the 1980s, green became the color of a number of new European political parties organized around an agenda of environmentalism. Green was chosen for its association with nature, health, and growth. The largest green party in Europe is Alliance &#x27;90/The Greens (German: Bündnis 90/Die Grünen) in Germany, which was formed in 1993 from the merger of the German Green Party, founded in West Germany in 1980, and Alliance 90, founded during the Revolution of 1989–1990 in East Germany. In the 2009 federal elections, the party won 11% of the votes and 68 out of 622 seats in the Bundestag.

Green parties in Europe have programs based on ecology, grassroots democracy, nonviolence, and social justice. Green parties are found in over one hundred countries, and most are members of the Global Green Network.

Greenpeace is a non-governmental environmental organization which emerged from the anti-nuclear and peace movements in the 1970s. Its ship, the Rainbow Warrior, frequently tried to interfere with nuclear tests and whaling operations. The movement now has branches in forty countries.

The Australian Greens was founded in 1992. In the 2010 federal election, the party received 13% of the vote (more than 1.6 million votes) in the Senate, a first for any Australian minor party.

Green is the color associated with Puerto Rico&#x27;s Independence Party, the smallest of that country&#x27;s three major political parties, which advocates Puerto Rican independence from the United States.

In Indonesia, green is used by several Islamist political party, including National Awakening Party, Crescent Star Party, United Development Party, and the local Aceh Just and Prosperous Party.

In Taiwan, green is used by Democratic Progressive Party. Green in Taiwan associates with Taiwan independence movement.

== In religion ==
Green is the traditional color of Islam. According to tradition, the robe and banner of Muhammad were green, and according to the Koran (XVIII, 31 and LXXVI, 21) those fortunate enough to live in paradise wear green silk robes. Muhammad is quoted in a hadith as saying that &quot;water, greenery, and a beautiful face&quot; were three universally good things. Green was accordingly adopted as a Shi&#x27;a color.

Al-Khidr (&quot;The Green One&quot;), was an important Qur&#x27;anic figure who was said to have met and traveled with Moses. He was given that name because of his role as a diplomat and negotiator. Green was also considered to be the median color between light and obscurity.

Roman Catholic and more traditional Protestant clergy wear green vestments at liturgical celebrations during Ordinary Time. In the Eastern Catholic Church, green is the color of Pentecost. Green is one of the Christmas colors as well, possibly dating back to pre-Christian times, when evergreens were worshiped for their ability to maintain their color through the winter season. Romans used green holly and evergreen as decorations for their winter solstice celebration called Saturnalia, which eventually evolved into a Christmas celebration. In Ireland and Scotland especially, green is used to represent Catholics, while orange is used to represent Protestantism. This is shown on the national flag of Ireland.

In Paganism, green represents abundance, growth, wealth, renewal, and balance. In magickal practices, green is often used to bring money and luck. One figure who shares parallels with various deities is the Green Man.

== In gambling and sports ==
* Gambling tables in a casino are traditionally green. The tradition is said to have started in gambling rooms in Venice in the 16th century.
* Billiards tables are traditionally covered with green woolen cloth. The first indoor tables, dating to the 15th century, were colored green after the grass courts used for the similar lawn games of the period.
* Green was the traditional color worn by hunters in the 19th century, particularly the shade called hunter green. In the 20th century most hunters began wearing the color olive drab, a shade of green, instead of hunter green.
* Green is a common color for sports teams. Well-known teams include A.S. Saint-Étienne of France, known as &quot;Les Verts&quot; (The Greens). The Green Bay Packers, an American football team, has the color in its official name and wears green uniforms. The NBA basketball team Boston Celtics is known for the green and white colors. In Israel, the green and white colors are identified with Maccabi Haifa F.C., a successful football club known as &quot;The Greens&quot;. A number of national soccer teams feature the color, with the color usually reflective of the teams&#x27; national flag.
* British racing green was the international motor racing color of Britain from the early 1900s until the 1960s, when it was replaced by the colors of the sponsoring automobile companies.
* A green belt in karate, taekwondo, and judo symbolizes a level of proficiency in the sport.

== Idioms and expressions ==
* Having a green thumb (American English) or green fingers (British English). To be passionate about or talented at gardening. The expression was popularized beginning in 1925 by a BBC gardening program.
* Greenhorn. Someone who is inexperienced.
* Green-eyed monster. Refers to jealousy. (See section above on jealousy and envy).
* Greenmail. A term used in finance and corporate takeovers. It refers to the practice of a company paying a high price to buy back shares of its own stock to prevent an unfriendly takeover by another company or businessman. It originated in the 1980s on Wall Street, and originates from the green of dollars.
* Green room. A room at a theater where actors rest when not onstage, or a room at a television studio where guests wait before going on-camera. It originated in the late 17th century from a room of that color at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane in London.
* Greenwashing. Environmental activists sometimes use this term to describe the advertising of a company that promotes its positive environmental practices to cover up its environmental destruction.
* Green around the gills. A description of a person who looks physically ill.
* Going green. An expression commonly used to refer to preserving the natural environment, and participating in activities such as recycling materials.
* Looking green. A description of a person who looks revolted or repulsed.

== See also ==

*Shades of green
*Green pigments
== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Cited texts ===
* 
* 

== External links ==
* Green All Over—slideshow by &quot;Life&quot; magazine</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3133" start="0" end="5" title="Green" label="Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075" start="13" end="18" title="color" label="color"/>
<link wikidata="Q180778" start="27" end="31" title="cyan" label="cyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q943" start="36" end="42" title="yellow" label="yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q76299" start="50" end="66" title="visible spectrum" label="visible spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q305050" start="102" end="121" title="dominant wavelength" label="dominant wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="140" end="142" title="Nanometre" label="nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q374081" start="147" end="164" title="subtractive color" label="subtractive color"/>
<link wikidata="Q166194" start="269" end="284" title="RGB color model" label="RGB color model"/>
<link wikidata="Q166902" start="344" end="367" title="additive primary colors" label="additive primary colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142" start="380" end="383" title="red" label="red"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088" start="388" end="392" title="blue" label="blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q43177" start="517" end="528" title="chlorophyll" label="chlorophyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="559" end="574" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesize"/>
<link wikidata="Q196113" start="713" end="723" title="camouflage" label="camouflage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="733" end="740" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q43513" start="776" end="783" title="emerald" label="emerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="815" end="823" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234117" start="840" end="854" title="Post-classical history" label="post-classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="859" end="871" title="Early modern period" label="early modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q12418" start="1052" end="1061" title="Mona Lisa" label="Mona Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="1071" end="1088" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q9247597" start="1120" end="1136" title="House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="1166" end="1180" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="1246" end="1253" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q692312" start="1261" end="1275" title="Gaelic culture" label="Gaelic culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="1305" end="1310" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363340" start="1348" end="1356" title="Paradise" label="Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="1392" end="1400" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="1480" end="1488" title="Americas" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="1504" end="1521" title="Muslim world" label="Islamic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860" start="1572" end="1578" title="nature" label="nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3" start="1580" end="1584" title="life" label="life"/>
<link wikidata="Q12147" start="1586" end="1592" title="health" label="health"/>
<link wikidata="Q190007" start="1594" end="1599" title="youth" label="youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312" start="1601" end="1607" title="spring (season)" label="spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q190507" start="1609" end="1613" title="hope" label="hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q188739" start="1619" end="1623" title="envy" label="envy"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1632" end="1646" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1655" end="1668" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q274160" start="1710" end="1718" title="toxicity" label="toxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189417" start="1908" end="1930" title="environmental movement" label="environmental movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661415" start="2039" end="2053" title="Green politics" label="Green movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778417" start="2078" end="2091" title="Green party" label="Green parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q655870" start="2176" end="2200" title="environmentally friendly" label="environmentally friendly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6676995" start="2306" end="2316" title="green card" label="green card"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="2453" end="2467" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="2472" end="2483" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="2524" end="2530" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q669623" start="2638" end="2653" title="Common Germanic" label="Common Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2660" end="2667" title=":wikt:Appendix:Proto-Germanic/grōniz" label="*gronja"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="2703" end="2712" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q35218" start="2732" end="2747" title="Old High German" label="Old High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q108662" start="2786" end="2799" title="East Germanic languages" label="East Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142838" start="2820" end="2828" title="PIE root" label="PIE root"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2892" end="2897" title=":wikt:grass" label="grass"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2914" end="2921" title=":wikt:grow" label="to grow"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3017" end="3022" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3034" end="3041" title=":wikt:viridis" label="viridis"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="3234" end="3251" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3337" end="3344" title=":wikt:verdure" label="verdure"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="3371" end="3387" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3399" end="3405" title=":wikt:зелёный" label="zelenъ"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="3413" end="3426" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3471" end="3477" title=":wikt:χλωρός" label="χλωρός"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668516" start="3584" end="3589" title="chloe" label="chloe"/>
<link wikidata="Q878226" start="3802" end="3825" title="comparative linguistics" label="comparative linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="3947" end="3966" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="4057" end="4065" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="4118" end="4134" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="4354" end="4361" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="4363" end="4367" title="Thai language" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="4373" end="4381" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="4387" end="4397" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="4448" end="4465" title="Chinese character" label="Chinese character"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="4498" end="4506" title="Standard Mandarin" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q455950" start="4514" end="4516" title="Ao (color)" label="ao"/>
<link wikidata="Q908017" start="4556" end="4571" title="Sino-Vietnamese vocabulary" label="Sino-Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168518" start="5438" end="5443" title="perilla" label="shiso"/>
<link wikidata="Q376431" start="6114" end="6124" title="color term" label="color term"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6599" end="6605" title=":wikt:orange" label="orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="6675" end="6679" title="Thai language" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="6843" end="6859" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q653649" start="6904" end="6916" title="Proto-Celtic" label="Proto-Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35308" start="6958" end="6967" title="Old Irish" label="Old Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="7016" end="7021" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7247" end="7248" title=":wikt:緑" label="緑"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607820" start="7497" end="7535" title="Traditional colors of Japan" label="traditional Japanese color terminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q19847180" start="7549" end="7564" title="shades of green" label="shades of green"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="7677" end="7687" title="perception" label="perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="7761" end="7771" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="7791" end="7793" title="Nanometre" label="nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q899219" start="8053" end="8072" title="luminosity function" label="luminosity function"/>
<link wikidata="Q303997" start="8149" end="8157" title="opponent process" label="opponent"/>
<link wikidata="Q374259" start="8178" end="8190" title="color vision" label="color vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q147298" start="8262" end="8271" title="cone cell" label="cone cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q133696" start="8741" end="8752" title="color blind" label="color blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q133696" start="8840" end="8852" title="deuteranopia" label="deuteranopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q374081" start="8978" end="8995" title="subtractive color" label="subtractive color"/>
<link wikidata="Q180778" start="9109" end="9113" title="cyan" label="cyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q166194" start="9122" end="9137" title="RGB color model" label="RGB color model"/>
<link wikidata="Q166902" start="9197" end="9220" title="additive primary colors" label="additive primary colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q376492" start="9324" end="9339" title="HSV color space" label="HSV color wheel"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9359" end="9374" title=":File:RBG color wheel.svg" label="RGB color wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q373984" start="9380" end="9390" title="Complementary color" label="complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276756" start="9403" end="9410" title="magenta" label="magenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142" start="9466" end="9469" title="red" label="red"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088" start="9474" end="9478" title="blue" label="blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257809" start="9497" end="9503" title="purple" label="purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q166902" start="9704" end="9711" title="primary colors" label="primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="9801" end="9803" title="Nanometre" label="nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886951" start="9995" end="10007" title="unique hues" label="unique green"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="10178" end="10183" title="Laser" label="Laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="10344" end="10346" title="Nanometre" label="nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q647887" start="10354" end="10357" title="terahertz radiation" label="THz"/>
<link wikidata="Q448612" start="10581" end="10585" title="DPSS" label="DPSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q321098" start="10637" end="10648" title="laser diode" label="laser diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130571" start="10698" end="10703" title="Doping (semiconductor)" label="doped"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635447" start="11279" end="11288" title="gas laser" label="gas laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q663088" start="11305" end="11322" title="helium–neon laser" label="helium–neon laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q648376" start="11343" end="11352" title="ion laser" label="ion laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929925" start="11427" end="11436" title="dye laser" label="dye laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q380051" start="11532" end="11549" title="laser light shows" label="laser light shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="11551" end="11563" title="spectroscopy" label="spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q850283" start="11565" end="11579" title="interferometry" label="interferometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q191807" start="11581" end="11593" title="fluorescence" label="fluorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q527628" start="11595" end="11605" title="holography" label="holography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425977" start="11607" end="11621" title="machine vision" label="machine vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q911881" start="11623" end="11641" title="non-lethal weapons" label="non-lethal weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405993" start="11647" end="11659" title="bird control" label="bird control"/>
<link wikidata="Q161179" start="12053" end="12060" title="pigment" label="pigment"/>
<link wikidata="Q184240" start="12228" end="12239" title="luminescent" label="luminescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q192275" start="12243" end="12257" title="phosphorescent" label="phosphorescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q43513" start="12399" end="12406" title="emerald" label="emerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q725" start="12451" end="12459" title="chromium" label="chromium"/>
<link wikidata="Q722" start="12474" end="12482" title="vanadium" label="vanadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q407905" start="12523" end="12535" title="Chromium(III) oxide" label="chrome green"/>
<link wikidata="Q6163776" start="12549" end="12557" title="viridian" label="viridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q429786" start="12635" end="12644" title="amazonite" label="amazonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="12708" end="12714" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="12844" end="12848" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="12866" end="12874" title="feldspar" label="feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q164411" start="12919" end="12928" title="malachite" label="malachite"/>
<link wikidata="Q409630" start="12965" end="12985" title="copper(II) carbonate" label="copper(II) carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351119" start="12988" end="12997" title="Verdigris" label="Verdigris"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="13287" end="13292" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny"/>
<link wikidata="Q274160" start="13655" end="13660" title="toxic" label="toxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="13662" end="13679" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q407905" start="13933" end="13945" title="chrome green" label="chrome green"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="13981" end="13987" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582" start="14099" end="14115" title="Vincent van Gogh" label="Vincent van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q421894" start="14136" end="14149" title="Prussian blue" label="Prussian blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025704" start="14220" end="14241" title="Café Terrace at Night" label="Café Terrace at Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552133" start="14250" end="14261" title="Green earth" label="Green earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="14310" end="14322" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q721849" start="14358" end="14368" title="iron oxide" label="iron oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="14370" end="14379" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284687" start="14381" end="14398" title="aluminum silicate" label="aluminum silicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="14403" end="14412" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="14468" end="14472" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="14494" end="14500" title="Verona" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="14505" end="14511" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="14520" end="14527" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q740" start="14658" end="14664" title="cobalt" label="cobalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="14669" end="14673" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q416459" start="14743" end="14755" title="Cobalt green" label="Cobalt green"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14776" end="14795" title="Cobalt green#Rinman&amp;#x27;s green" label="Rinman&amp;#x27;s green"/>
<link wikidata="Q6073243" start="14905" end="14916" title="Sven Rinman" label="Sven Rinman"/>
<link wikidata="Q753009" start="15243" end="15256" title="food coloring" label="food coloring"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="15292" end="15320" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q207810" start="15339" end="15347" title="E number" label="E number"/>
<link wikidata="Q420123" start="15477" end="15493" title="Quinoline Yellow WS" label="Quinoline Yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q420143" start="15616" end="15623" title="Green S" label="Green S"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="15689" end="15702" title="hyperactivity" label="hyperactivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="15704" end="15710" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q187440" start="15712" end="15721" title="urticaria" label="urticaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869874" start="15727" end="15735" title="insomnia" label="insomnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q127933" start="15762" end="15770" title="firework" label="firework"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112" start="15776" end="15782" title="barium" label="barium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370" start="15783" end="15788" title="Salt (chemistry)" label="salts"/>
<link wikidata="Q412492" start="15798" end="15813" title="barium chlorate" label="barium chlorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q407666" start="15815" end="15829" title="barium nitrate" label="barium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q407270" start="15843" end="15858" title="barium chloride" label="barium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q421781" start="15934" end="15949" title="cupric chloride" label="cupric chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q618" start="16077" end="16082" title="boron" label="boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q177836" start="16087" end="16104" title="potassium nitrate" label="potassium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q127900" start="16182" end="16189" title="lactose" label="lactose"/>
<link wikidata="Q407931" start="16191" end="16210" title="magnesium carbonate" label="magnesium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q190227" start="16216" end="16232" title="sodium carbonate" label="sodium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q309328" start="16242" end="16260" title="potassium chlorate" label="potassium chlorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="16404" end="16418" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054206" start="16749" end="16761" title="halobacteria" label="halobacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q242310" start="16900" end="16917" title="bacteriorhodopsin" label="bacteriorhodopsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q196113" start="17121" end="17131" title="camouflage" label="camouflage"/>
<link wikidata="Q165939" start="17273" end="17283" title="reflection (physics)" label="reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7853647" start="17528" end="17540" title="Turacoverdin" label="Turacoverdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q422926" start="17687" end="17696" title="porphyrin" label="porphyrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q174337" start="17860" end="17867" title="flavins" label="flavins"/>
<link wikidata="Q422964" start="18067" end="18077" title="biliverdin" label="biliverdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q65979" start="18100" end="18104" title="bile" label="bile"/>
<link wikidata="Q422752" start="18110" end="18123" title="ceruloplasmin" label="ceruloplasmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="18127" end="18134" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="18155" end="18158" title="ion" label="ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q319827" start="18163" end="18172" title="chelation" label="chelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q403009" start="18179" end="18200" title="Micrommata virescens" label="green huntsman spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914458" start="18311" end="18324" title="Interstitial fluid" label="tissue fluids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796515" start="18602" end="18608" title="Stroma of cornea" label="stroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q187526" start="18654" end="18661" title="melanin" label="melanin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193709" start="18698" end="18717" title="Rayleigh scattering" label="Rayleigh scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="19061" end="19069" title="Northern Europe" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="19074" end="19088" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27449" start="19116" end="19131" title="Southern Europe" label="Southern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="19133" end="19142" title="West Asia" label="West Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="19144" end="19156" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="19162" end="19172" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="19177" end="19184" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="19407" end="19416" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25243" start="19574" end="19579" title="birch" label="birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="19660" end="19671" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="19792" end="19805" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q164411" start="20010" end="20019" title="malachite" label="malachite"/>
<link wikidata="Q12154" start="20137" end="20148" title="Tutankhamun" label="Tutankhamun"/>
<link wikidata="Q108212" start="20232" end="20239" title="azurite" label="azurite"/>
<link wikidata="Q25434" start="20313" end="20320" title="saffron" label="saffron"/>
<link wikidata="Q212547" start="20376" end="20380" title="woad" label="woad"/>
<link wikidata="Q132659" start="20458" end="20468" title="hieroglyph" label="hieroglyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q125576" start="20501" end="20508" title="papyrus" label="papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q46491" start="20639" end="20645" title="Osiris" label="Osiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q186946" start="20987" end="21001" title="scarab beetles" label="scarab beetles"/>
<link wikidata="Q41980" start="21322" end="21332" title="Democritus" label="Democritus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807269" start="21391" end="21395" title="leek" label="leek"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="21403" end="21412" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q47652" start="21748" end="21753" title="Venus (mythology)" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="21894" end="21901" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q178813" start="21903" end="21914" title="Herculaneum" label="Herculaneum"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="21916" end="21920" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q504887" start="21922" end="21939" title="Vaison-la-Romaine" label="Vaison-la-Romaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12418" start="22487" end="22496" title="Mona Lisa" label="Mona Lisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q102272" start="22573" end="22585" title="Jan van Eyck" label="Jan van Eyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q80005" start="22747" end="22751" title="fern" label="fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q165449" start="22753" end="22761" title="Plantain (cooking)" label="plantain"/>
<link wikidata="Q79190" start="22763" end="22772" title="buckthorn" label="buckthorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q121671" start="22795" end="22802" title="Urtica" label="nettles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807269" start="22810" end="22815" title="leeks" label="leeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q156533" start="22821" end="22830" title="digitalis" label="digitalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q145781" start="22842" end="22847" title="broom (shrub)" label="broom"/>
<link wikidata="Q128887" start="22873" end="22881" title="fraxinus" label="fraxinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25239" start="22916" end="22921" title="alder" label="alder"/>
<link wikidata="Q157927" start="23094" end="23108" title="Reseda luteola" label="Reseda luteola"/>
<link wikidata="Q15792" start="23471" end="23492" title="Duccio di Buoninsegna" label="Duccio di Buoninsegna"/>
<link wikidata="Q871" start="24027" end="24034" title="arsenic" label="arsenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="24127" end="24144" title="romantic movement" label="romantic movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="24200" end="24206" title="Goethe" label="Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q159297" start="24306" end="24320" title="John Constable" label="John Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q148475" start="24325" end="24352" title="Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot" label="Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot"/>
<link wikidata="Q203643" start="24703" end="24725" title="James McNeill Whistler" label="James McNeill Whistler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582" start="25177" end="25193" title="Vincent van Gogh" label="Vincent van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q674846" start="25220" end="25246" title="The Night Café" label="The &amp;quot;Night Cafe&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q49766" start="25702" end="25724" title="Alliance &amp;#x27;90/The Greens" label="Green Party in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189417" start="25781" end="25803" title="environmental movement" label="environmental movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004" start="26025" end="26038" title="traffic light" label="traffic light"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="26234" end="26254" title="Houses of Parliament" label="Houses of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="26403" end="26417" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="26419" end="26423" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q668136" start="26719" end="26725" title="Health (gaming)" label="health"/>
<link wikidata="Q81307" start="26971" end="26981" title="Greenpeace" label="Greenpeace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778417" start="26994" end="27007" title="Green Parties" label="Green Parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="27615" end="27628" title="Ancient Egypt" label="Ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q46491" start="27638" end="27644" title="Osiris" label="Osiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603491" start="28167" end="28179" title="green cheese" label="green cheese"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28220" end="28229" title="Cowboy#Symbolism" label="greenhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="28441" end="28446" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q443112" start="28738" end="28745" title="V-Label" label="V-Label"/>
<link wikidata="Q443112" start="28773" end="28798" title="European Vegetarian Union" label="European Vegetarian Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6545811" start="29625" end="29633" title="jealousy" label="jealousy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188739" start="29638" end="29642" title="envy" label="envy"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="29708" end="29727" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q26833" start="29731" end="29738" title="Othello" label="Othello"/>
<link wikidata="Q206400" start="29851" end="29869" title="Merchant of Venice" label="Merchant of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="30062" end="30077" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915835" start="30170" end="30177" title="Serpents in the Bible" label="serpent"/>
<link wikidata="Q19014" start="30185" end="30199" title="Garden of Eden" label="Garden of Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q58701" start="30227" end="30239" title="Adam and Eve" label="Adam and Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q186370" start="30258" end="30269" title="troubadours" label="troubadours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483612" start="30518" end="30525" title="cuckold" label="cuckold"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="30671" end="30681" title="prostitute" label="prostitute"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="30730" end="30747" title="Victorian England" label="Victorian England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="30785" end="30798" title="homosexuality" label="homosexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028" start="30882" end="30889" title="fairies" label="fairies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559" start="30891" end="30898" title="dragons" label="dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q276453" start="30900" end="30908" title="monsters" label="monsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q215605" start="31123" end="31138" title="Chinese dragons" label="Chinese dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q636304" start="31507" end="31519" title="dragon dance" label="dragon dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q55647961" start="31567" end="31572" title="Irish folklore" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q641031" start="31577" end="31593" title="English folklore" label="English folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028" start="31656" end="31663" title="faeries" label="faeries"/>
<link wikidata="Q244392" start="31712" end="31722" title="leprechaun" label="leprechaun"/>
<link wikidata="Q875904" start="32030" end="32055" title="The Bride of Frankenstein" label="The Bride of Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q34529" start="32099" end="32110" title="Bela Lugosi" label="Bela Lugosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q41542" start="32150" end="32157" title="Dracula" label="Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q274160" start="32440" end="32448" title="toxicity" label="toxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q170210" start="32705" end="32713" title="absinthe" label="absinthe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="33396" end="33434" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q130295" start="34037" end="34063" title="The Wonderful Wizard of Oz" label="The Wonderful Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961610" start="34075" end="34087" title="Emerald City" label="Emerald City"/>
<link wikidata="Q207544" start="34284" end="34297" title="L. Frank Baum" label="L. Frank Baum"/>
<link wikidata="Q42876" start="34464" end="34477" title="flag of Italy" label="flag of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="34596" end="34601" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q82194" start="34818" end="34832" title="flag of Brazil" label="flag of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q41673" start="34944" end="34957" title="flag of India" label="flag of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="35022" end="35028" title="Gandhi" label="Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q371394" start="35658" end="35683" title="Bangladesh Liberation War" label="Bangladesh Liberation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q80338" start="35788" end="35794" title="Bengal" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q33215" start="35968" end="35988" title="constructed language" label="constructed language"/>
<link wikidata="Q143" start="35989" end="35998" title="Esperanto" label="Esperanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q282739" start="36312" end="36326" title="Pan-Africanism" label="Pan-Africanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="36399" end="36406" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="36408" end="36420" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="36422" end="36427" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041" start="36429" end="36436" title="Senegal" label="Senegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q912" start="36438" end="36442" title="Mali" label="Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="36444" end="36452" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="36454" end="36458" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006" start="36460" end="36466" title="Guinea" label="Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="36468" end="36473" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q954" start="36479" end="36487" title="Zimbabwe" label="Zimbabwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q426325" start="36493" end="36511" title="Pan-African colours" label="Pan-African colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q162068" start="36534" end="36548" title="Flag of Ethiopia" label="Ethiopian flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q779924" start="36689" end="36702" title="Muslim world" label="Islamic world"/>
<link wikidata="Q38799" start="36782" end="36787" title="Hamas" label="Hamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q126622" start="36804" end="36816" title="flag of Iran" label="flag of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="36846" end="36854" title="Islamism" label="Islamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q172517" start="37161" end="37176" title="flag of Jamaica" label="flag of Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q128812" start="37221" end="37229" title="flag of Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q61105" start="37253" end="37258" title="Cedrus libani" label="cedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q216517" start="37482" end="37492" title="Fianna Fáil" label="republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="37497" end="37508" title="nationalist" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="37576" end="37595" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q181817" start="37691" end="37713" title="Saint Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="37792" end="37806" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="37830" end="37846" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164462" start="37883" end="37897" title="chariot racing" label="chariot racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="37976" end="37987" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q162665" start="38204" end="38214" title="Nika Riots" label="Nika Riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021987" start="38253" end="38270" title="Irish nationalism" label="Irish nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288250" start="38343" end="38354" title="gaelic harp" label="gaelic harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q535030" start="38416" end="38442" title="Society of United Irishmen" label="Society of United Irishmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q944941" start="38488" end="38511" title="Irish Rebellion of 1798" label="Irish Rebellion of 1798"/>
<link wikidata="Q82205" start="38589" end="38602" title="Flag of Ireland" label="national flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q385258" start="38706" end="38731" title="Swiss People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Swiss People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="39061" end="39077" title="environmentalism" label="environmentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q154797" start="39530" end="39539" title="Bundestag" label="Bundestag"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189417" start="39589" end="39596" title="ecology movement" label="ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q810220" start="39598" end="39618" title="grassroots democracy" label="grassroots democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76611" start="39620" end="39631" title="nonviolence" label="nonviolence"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="39637" end="39651" title="social justice" label="social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q384069" start="39736" end="39756" title="Global Greens" label="Global Green Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q81307" start="39759" end="39769" title="Greenpeace" label="Greenpeace"/>
<link wikidata="Q567862" start="39903" end="39918" title="Rainbow Warrior (2011)" label="Rainbow Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q781486" start="40048" end="40065" title="Australian Greens" label="Australian Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="40273" end="40284" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q19683" start="40292" end="40310" title="Puerto Rican Independence Party" label="Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="40449" end="40458" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="40485" end="40493" title="Islamism" label="Islamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257317" start="40521" end="40545" title="National Awakening Party" label="National Awakening Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915024" start="40547" end="40566" title="Crescent Star Party (Indonesia)" label="Crescent Star Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669302" start="40568" end="40592" title="United Development Party" label="United Development Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q123553439" start="40608" end="40638" title="Aceh Just and Prosperous Party" label="Aceh Just and Prosperous Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="40644" end="40650" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q903822" start="40669" end="40697" title="Democratic Progressive Party" label="Democratic Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q708772" start="40731" end="40759" title="Taiwan independence movement" label="Taiwan independence movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="40868" end="40876" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="40910" end="40915" title="Koran" label="Koran"/>
<link wikidata="Q234343" start="41032" end="41038" title="hadith" label="hadith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="41175" end="41185" title="Shi&amp;#x27;a" label="Shi&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q311577" start="41194" end="41202" title="Al-Khidr" label="Al-Khidr"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="41249" end="41260" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077" start="41313" end="41318" title="Moses" label="Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="41472" end="41486" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="41508" end="41518" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501052" start="41537" end="41546" title="vestments" label="vestments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153387" start="41581" end="41594" title="Ordinary Time" label="Ordinary Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q49376" start="41603" end="41626" title="Eastern Catholic Church" label="Eastern Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q39864" start="41650" end="41659" title="Pentecost" label="Pentecost"/>
<link wikidata="Q19809" start="41681" end="41690" title="Christmas" label="Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q117085" start="41870" end="41875" title="holly" label="holly"/>
<link wikidata="Q190489" start="41880" end="41889" title="evergreen" label="evergreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q207932" start="41915" end="41930" title="winter solstice" label="winter solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q207213" start="41950" end="41960" title="Saturnalia" label="Saturnalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="42032" end="42040" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q39338" start="42097" end="42103" title="orange (color)" label="orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="42125" end="42138" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="42191" end="42199" title="Paganism" label="Paganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="42270" end="42278" title="Magic (supernatural)" label="magickal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460159" start="42395" end="42404" title="Green Man" label="Green Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q11416" start="42438" end="42446" title="Gambling" label="Gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q133215" start="42459" end="42465" title="casino" label="casino"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="42550" end="42556" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500725" start="42580" end="42596" title="Billiards tables" label="Billiards tables"/>
<link wikidata="Q19847180" start="42891" end="42903" title="hunter green" label="hunter green"/>
<link wikidata="Q864152" start="42962" end="42972" title="olive drab" label="olive drab"/>
<link wikidata="Q19521" start="43086" end="43104" title="A.S. Saint-Étienne" label="A.S. Saint-Étienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q213837" start="43165" end="43182" title="Green Bay Packers" label="Green Bay Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="43187" end="43204" title="American football" label="American football"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="43276" end="43279" title="NBA" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q131371" start="43296" end="43310" title="Boston Celtics" label="Boston Celtics"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="43355" end="43361" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129100" start="43410" end="43428" title="Maccabi Haifa F.C." label="Maccabi Haifa F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q919991" start="43613" end="43633" title="British racing green" label="British racing green"/>
<link wikidata="Q11419" start="43817" end="43823" title="karate" label="karate"/>
<link wikidata="Q36389" start="43825" end="43834" title="taekwondo" label="taekwondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420" start="43840" end="43844" title="judo" label="judo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11690" start="44509" end="44520" title="Wall Street" label="Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756626" start="44781" end="44806" title="Theatre Royal, Drury Lane" label="Theatre Royal, Drury Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q983063" start="44820" end="44832" title="Greenwashing" label="Greenwashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q19847180" start="45340" end="45355" title="Shades of green" label="Shades of green"/>
<link wikidata="Q114089191" start="45357" end="45371" title="Green pigments" label="Green pigments"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="45479" end="45504" title="Life (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Life&amp;quot; magazine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12461" wikidata="Q173582" url="?curid=12461" title="Gradient">
<text>In vector calculus, the gradient of a scalar-valued differentiable function formula_1 of several variables is the vector field (or vector-valued function) formula_2 whose value at a point formula_3 gives the direction and the rate of fastest increase. The gradient transforms like a vector under change of basis of the space of variables of formula_1. If the gradient of a function is non-zero at a point formula_3, the direction of the gradient is the direction in which the function increases most quickly from formula_3, and the magnitude of the gradient is the rate of increase in that direction, the greatest absolute directional derivative. Further, a point where the gradient is the zero vector is known as a stationary point. The gradient thus plays a fundamental role in optimization theory, where it is used to minimize a function by gradient descent. In coordinate-free terms, the gradient of a function formula_7 may be defined by:

formula_8

where formula_9 is the total infinitesimal change in formula_1 for an infinitesimal displacement formula_11, and is seen to be maximal when formula_11 is in the direction of the gradient formula_2. The nabla symbol formula_14, written as an upside-down triangle and pronounced &quot;del&quot;, denotes the vector differential operator.

When a coordinate system is used in which the basis vectors are not functions of position, the gradient is given by the vector whose components are the partial derivatives of formula_1 at formula_3. That is, for formula_17, its gradient formula_18 is defined at the point formula_19 in &quot;n&quot;-dimensional space as the vector

formula_20

Note that the above definition for gradient is defined for the function formula_1 only if formula_1 is differentiable at formula_3. There can be functions for which partial derivatives exist in every direction but fail to be differentiable. Furthermore, this definition as the vector of partial derivatives is only valid when the basis of the coordinate system is orthonormal. For any other basis, the metric tensor at that point needs to be taken into account.

For example, the function formula_24 unless at origin where formula_25, is not differentiable at the origin as it does not have a well defined tangent plane despite having well defined partial derivatives in every direction at the origin. In this particular example, under rotation of x-y coordinate system, the above formula for gradient fails to transform like a vector (gradient becomes dependent on choice of basis for coordinate system) and also fails to point towards the &#x27;steepest ascent&#x27; in some orientations. For differentiable functions where the formula for gradient holds, it can be shown to always transform as a vector under transformation of the basis so as to always point towards the fastest increase.

The gradient is dual to the total derivative formula_9: the value of the gradient at a point is a tangent vector – a vector at each point; while the value of the derivative at a point is a &quot;co&quot;tangent vector – a linear functional on vectors. They are related in that the dot product of the gradient of formula_1 at a point formula_3 with another tangent vector formula_29 equals the directional derivative of formula_1 at formula_3 of the function along formula_29; that is, formula_33. 
The gradient admits multiple generalizations to more general functions on manifolds; see .

==Motivation==
Consider a room where the temperature is given by a scalar field, , so at each point the temperature is , independent of time. At each point in the room, the gradient of at that point will show the direction in which the temperature rises most quickly, moving away from . The magnitude of the gradient will determine how fast the temperature rises in that direction.

Consider a surface whose height above sea level at point is . The gradient of at a point is a plane vector pointing in the direction of the steepest slope or grade at that point. The steepness of the slope at that point is given by the magnitude of the gradient vector.

The gradient can also be used to measure how a scalar field changes in other directions, rather than just the direction of greatest change, by taking a dot product. Suppose that the steepest slope on a hill is 40%. A road going directly uphill has slope 40%, but a road going around the hill at an angle will have a shallower slope. For example, if the road is at a 60° angle from the uphill direction (when both directions are projected onto the horizontal plane), then the slope along the road will be the dot product between the gradient vector and a unit vector along the road, as the dot product measures how much the unit vector along the road aligns with the steepest slope, which is 40% times the cosine of 60°, or 20%.

More generally, if the hill height function is differentiable, then the gradient of dotted with a unit vector gives the slope of the hill in the direction of the vector, the directional derivative of along the unit vector.

==Notation==

The gradient of a function formula_1 at point formula_35 is usually written as formula_36. It may also be denoted by any of the following:

* formula_37 : to emphasize the vector nature of the result.
* formula_38
* formula_39 and formula_40 : Written with Einstein notation, where repeated indices () are summed over.

==Definition==
The gradient (or gradient vector field) of a scalar function is denoted or where (nabla) denotes the vector differential operator, del. The notation is also commonly used to represent the gradient. The gradient of is defined as the unique vector field whose dot product with any vector at each point is the directional derivative of along . That is,

formula_41

where the right-hand side is the directional derivative and there are many ways to represent it. Formally, the derivative is &quot;dual&quot; to the gradient; see relationship with derivative.

When a function also depends on a parameter such as time, the gradient often refers simply to the vector of its spatial derivatives only (see Spatial gradient).

The magnitude and direction of the gradient vector are independent of the particular coordinate representation.

===Cartesian coordinates===
In the three-dimensional Cartesian coordinate system with a Euclidean metric, the gradient, if it exists, is given by

formula_42

where , , are the standard unit vectors in the directions of the , and coordinates, respectively. For example, the gradient of the function
formula_43
is
formula_44
or 
formula_45

In some applications it is customary to represent the gradient as a row vector or column vector of its components in a rectangular coordinate system; this article follows the convention of the gradient being a column vector, while the derivative is a row vector.

===Cylindrical and spherical coordinates===
In cylindrical coordinates, the gradient is given by:

formula_46

where is the axial distance, is the azimuthal or azimuth angle, is the axial coordinate, and , and are unit vectors pointing along the coordinate directions.

In spherical coordinates with a Euclidean metric, the gradient is given by:

formula_47

where is the radial distance, is the azimuthal angle and is the polar angle, and , and are again local unit vectors pointing in the coordinate directions (that is, the normalized covariant basis).

For the gradient in other orthogonal coordinate systems, see Orthogonal coordinates (Differential operators in three dimensions).

===General coordinates===
We consider general coordinates, which we write as , where is the number of dimensions of the domain. Here, the upper index refers to the position in the list of the coordinate or component, so refers to the second component—not the quantity squared. The index variable refers to an arbitrary element . Using Einstein notation, the gradient can then be written as:

formula_48 (Note that its dual is formula_49),

where formula_50 and formula_51 refer to the unnormalized local covariant and contravariant bases respectively, formula_52 is the inverse metric tensor, and the Einstein summation convention implies summation over &quot;i&quot; and &quot;j&quot;.

If the coordinates are orthogonal we can easily express the gradient (and the differential) in terms of the normalized bases, which we refer to as formula_53 and formula_54, using the scale factors (also known as Lamé coefficients) formula_55 :

formula_56 (and formula_57),

where we cannot use Einstein notation, since it is impossible to avoid the repetition of more than two indices. Despite the use of upper and lower indices, formula_58, formula_59, and formula_60 are neither contravariant nor covariant.

The latter expression evaluates to the expressions given above for cylindrical and spherical coordinates.

==Relationship with derivative==
===Relationship with total derivative===
The gradient is closely related to the total derivative (total differential) formula_9: they are transpose (dual) to each other. Using the convention that vectors in formula_62 are represented by column vectors, and that covectors (linear maps formula_63) are represented by row vectors, the gradient formula_2 and the derivative formula_9 are expressed as a column and row vector, respectively, with the same components, but transpose of each other:

formula_66
formula_67

While these both have the same components, they differ in what kind of mathematical object they represent: at each point, the derivative is a cotangent vector, a linear form (or covector) which expresses how much the (scalar) output changes for a given infinitesimal change in (vector) input, while at each point, the gradient is a tangent vector, which represents an infinitesimal change in (vector) input. In symbols, the gradient is an element of the tangent space at a point, formula_68, while the derivative is a map from the tangent space to the real numbers, formula_69. The tangent spaces at each point of formula_62 can be &quot;naturally&quot; identified with the vector space formula_62 itself, and similarly the cotangent space at each point can be naturally identified with the dual vector space formula_72 of covectors; thus the value of the gradient at a point can be thought of a vector in the original formula_62, not just as a tangent vector.

Computationally, given a tangent vector, the vector can be &quot;multiplied&quot; by the derivative (as matrices), which is equal to taking the dot product with the gradient:
formula_74

====Differential or (exterior) derivative====
The best linear approximation to a differentiable function
formula_75
at a point formula_76 in formula_62 is a linear map from formula_62 to formula_79 which is often denoted by formula_80 or formula_81 and called the differential or total derivative of formula_1 at formula_76. The function formula_9, which maps formula_76 to formula_80, is called the total differential or exterior derivative of formula_1 and is an example of a differential 1-form.

Much as the derivative of a function of a single variable represents the slope of the tangent to the graph of the function, the directional derivative of a function in several variables represents the slope of the tangent hyperplane in the direction of the vector.

The gradient is related to the differential by the formula
formula_88
for any formula_89, where formula_90 is the dot product: taking the dot product of a vector with the gradient is the same as taking the directional derivative along the vector.

If formula_62 is viewed as the space of (dimension formula_92) column vectors (of real numbers), then one can regard formula_9 as the row vector with components
formula_94
so that formula_95 is given by matrix multiplication. Assuming the standard Euclidean metric on formula_62, the gradient is then the corresponding column vector, that is,
formula_97

====Linear approximation to a function====
The best linear approximation to a function can be expressed in terms of the gradient, rather than the derivative. The gradient of a function formula_1 from the Euclidean space formula_62 to formula_79 at any particular point formula_101 in formula_62 characterizes the best linear approximation to formula_1 at formula_101. The approximation is as follows:

formula_105

for formula_76 close to formula_101, where formula_108 is the gradient of formula_1 computed at formula_101, and the dot denotes the dot product on formula_62. This equation is equivalent to the first two terms in the multivariable Taylor series expansion of formula_1 at formula_101.

===Relationship with ===
Let be an open set in . If the function is differentiable, then the differential of is the Fréchet derivative of . Thus is a function from to the space such that
formula_114
where · is the dot product.

As a consequence, the usual properties of the derivative hold for the gradient, though the gradient is not a derivative itself, but rather dual to the derivative:

;Linearity
:The gradient is linear in the sense that if and are two real-valued functions differentiable at the point , and and are two constants, then is differentiable at , and moreover formula_115
;Product rule
:If and are real-valued functions differentiable at a point , then the product rule asserts that the product is differentiable at , and formula_116
;Chain rule
:Suppose that is a real-valued function defined on a subset of , and that is differentiable at a point . There are two forms of the chain rule applying to the gradient. First, suppose that the function is a parametric curve; that is, a function maps a subset into . If is differentiable at a point such that , then formula_117 where ∘ is the composition operator: .

More generally, if instead , then the following holds:
formula_118
where T denotes the transpose Jacobian matrix.

For the second form of the chain rule, suppose that is a real valued function on a subset of , and that is differentiable at the point . Then
formula_119

==Further properties and applications==

===Level sets===

A level surface, or isosurface, is the set of all points where some function has a given value.

If is differentiable, then the dot product of the gradient at a point with a vector gives the directional derivative of at in the direction . It follows that in this case the gradient of is orthogonal to the level sets of . For example, a level surface in three-dimensional space is defined by an equation of the form . The gradient of is then normal to the surface.

More generally, any embedded hypersurface in a Riemannian manifold can be cut out by an equation of the form such that is nowhere zero. The gradient of is then normal to the hypersurface.

Similarly, an affine algebraic hypersurface may be defined by an equation , where is a polynomial. The gradient of is zero at a singular point of the hypersurface (this is the definition of a singular point). At a non-singular point, it is a nonzero normal vector.

===Conservative vector fields and the gradient theorem===
The gradient of a function is called a gradient field. A (continuous) gradient field is always a conservative vector field: its line integral along any path depends only on the endpoints of the path, and can be evaluated by the gradient theorem (the fundamental theorem of calculus for line integrals). Conversely, a (continuous) conservative vector field is always the gradient of a function.

===Gradient is direction of steepest ascent===
The gradient of a function formula_17 at point is also the direction of its steepest ascent, i.e. it maximizes its directional derivative:

Let formula_121 be an arbitrary unit vector. With the directional derivative defined as

formula_122

we get, by substituting the function formula_123 with its Taylor series,

formula_124

where formula_125 denotes higher order terms in formula_126.

Dividing by formula_127, and taking the limit yields a term which is bounded from above by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality

formula_128

Choosing formula_129 maximizes the directional derivative, and equals the upper bound

formula_130

==Generalizations==

=== Jacobian ===
The Jacobian matrix is the generalization of the gradient for vector-valued functions of several variables and differentiable maps between Euclidean spaces or, more generally, manifolds. A further generalization for a function between Banach spaces is the Fréchet derivative.

Suppose is a function such that each of its first-order partial derivatives exist on . Then the Jacobian matrix of is defined to be an matrix, denoted by formula_131 or simply formula_132. The th entry is formula_133. Explicitly
formula_134

===Gradient of a vector field===

Since the total derivative of a vector field is a linear mapping from vectors to vectors, it is a tensor quantity.

In rectangular coordinates, the gradient of a vector field is defined by:

formula_135

(where the Einstein summation notation is used and the tensor product of the vectors and is a dyadic tensor of type (2,0)). Overall, this expression equals the transpose of the Jacobian matrix:

formula_136

In curvilinear coordinates, or more generally on a curved manifold, the gradient involves Christoffel symbols:

formula_137

where are the components of the inverse metric tensor and the are the coordinate basis vectors.

Expressed more invariantly, the gradient of a vector field can be defined by the Levi-Civita connection and metric tensor:

formula_138

where is the connection.

===Riemannian manifolds===
For any smooth function on a Riemannian manifold , the gradient of is the vector field such that for any vector field ,
formula_139
that is,
formula_140
where denotes the inner product of tangent vectors at defined by the metric and is the function that takes any point to the directional derivative of in the direction , evaluated at . In other words, in a coordinate chart from an open subset of to an open subset of , is given by:
formula_141
where denotes the th component of in this coordinate chart.

So, the local form of the gradient takes the form:

formula_142

Generalizing the case , the gradient of a function is related to its exterior derivative, since
formula_143
More precisely, the gradient is the vector field associated to the differential 1-form using the musical isomorphism
formula_144
(called &quot;sharp&quot;) defined by the metric . The relation between the exterior derivative and the gradient of a function on is a special case of this in which the metric is the flat metric given by the dot product.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 

== Notes ==
== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==

==External links==
* .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q200802" start="3" end="18" title="vector calculus" label="vector calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q173582" start="24" end="32" title="Gradient" label="gradient"/>
<link wikidata="Q193460" start="38" end="51" title="scalar-valued function" label="scalar-valued"/>
<link wikidata="Q783507" start="52" end="75" title="differentiable function" label="differentiable function"/>
<link wikidata="Q629085" start="89" end="106" title="Multivalued function" label="several variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q186247" start="114" end="126" title="vector field" label="vector field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375954" start="131" end="153" title="vector-valued function" label="vector-valued function"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091629" start="532" end="541" title="magnitude (mathematics)" label="magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q120812" start="614" end="622" title="absolute value" label="absolute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500758" start="716" end="732" title="stationary point" label="stationary point"/>
<link wikidata="Q141495" start="780" end="799" title="optimization theory" label="optimization theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199743" start="844" end="860" title="gradient descent" label="gradient descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q937750" start="1158" end="1170" title="nabla symbol" label="nabla symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q334508" start="1262" end="1290" title="Del" label="vector differential operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q13471665" start="1413" end="1419" title="Vector (mathematics and physics)" label="vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q186475" start="1445" end="1463" title="partial derivative" label="partial derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365325" start="2002" end="2013" title="Orthonormal basis" label="orthonormal"/>
<link wikidata="Q757269" start="2040" end="2053" title="metric tensor" label="metric tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q636889" start="2859" end="2875" title="total derivative" label="total derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179296" start="2929" end="2943" title="tangent vector" label="tangent vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713076" start="3020" end="3048" title="cotangent vector" label="&amp;quot;co&amp;quot;tangent vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q181365" start="3112" end="3123" title="dot product" label="dot product"/>
<link wikidata="Q383851" start="3224" end="3246" title="directional derivative" label="directional derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q203920" start="3403" end="3411" title="manifold" label="manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q193460" start="3488" end="3500" title="scalar field" label="scalar field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139344" start="3962" end="3967" title="Grade (slope)" label="grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q181365" start="4227" end="4238" title="dot product" label="dot product"/>
<link wikidata="Q36255" start="4629" end="4640" title="unit vector" label="unit vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q13647261" start="4780" end="4786" title="cosine" label="cosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q783507" start="4851" end="4865" title="differentiable function" label="differentiable"/>
<link wikidata="Q181365" start="4888" end="4894" title="dot product" label="dotted"/>
<link wikidata="Q36255" start="4902" end="4913" title="unit vector" label="unit vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q383851" start="4978" end="5000" title="directional derivative" label="directional derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q673253" start="5299" end="5316" title="Einstein notation" label="Einstein notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q937750" start="5459" end="5464" title="nabla symbol" label="nabla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058681" start="5485" end="5506" title="differential operator" label="differential operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q334508" start="5508" end="5511" title="del" label="del"/>
<link wikidata="Q44528" start="5656" end="5662" title="Euclidean vector" label="vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q383851" start="5773" end="5795" title="directional derivative" label="directional derivative"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5903" end="5931" title="#Derivative" label="relationship with derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q27961801" start="6076" end="6092" title="Spatial gradient" label="Spatial gradient"/>
<link wikidata="Q188211" start="6151" end="6162" title="Invariant (mathematics)" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11210" start="6181" end="6206" title="Coordinate system" label="coordinate representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="6262" end="6289" title="Cartesian coordinate system" label="Cartesian coordinate system"/>
<link wikidata="Q847073" start="6297" end="6313" title="Euclidean metric" label="Euclidean metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000912" start="6386" end="6394" title="standard basis" label="standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q20294235" start="6617" end="6627" title="row vector" label="row vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q20294235" start="6631" end="6644" title="column vector" label="column vector"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6860" end="6883" title="cylindrical coordinate system#Definition" label="cylindrical coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7086" end="7107" title="spherical coordinate system#Definition" label="spherical coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7351" end="7366" title="Curvilinear coordinates#Covariant and contravariant bases" label="covariant basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588831" start="7396" end="7424" title="orthogonal coordinate system" label="orthogonal coordinate system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7431" end="7498" title="Orthogonal coordinates#Differential operators in three dimensions" label="Orthogonal coordinates (Differential operators in three dimensions)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790208" start="7539" end="7558" title="Curvilinear coordinates" label="general coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q673253" start="7836" end="7853" title="Einstein notation" label="Einstein notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q752487" start="7919" end="7923" title="Dual space" label="dual"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8005" end="8038" title="Curvilinear coordinates#Covariant and contravariant bases" label="covariant and contravariant bases"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8071" end="8092" title="Metric tensor#Inverse metric" label="inverse metric tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047080" start="8267" end="8279" title="Differential form" label="differential"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790208" start="8402" end="8419" title="Lamé coefficients" label="Lamé coefficients"/>
<link wikidata="Q636889" start="8922" end="8938" title="total derivative" label="total derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q750432" start="8940" end="8958" title="total differential" label="total differential"/>
<link wikidata="Q223683" start="8980" end="8989" title="transpose" label="transpose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858846" start="8991" end="8995" title="Transpose of a linear map" label="dual"/>
<link wikidata="Q20294235" start="9079" end="9092" title="column vector" label="column vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q20294235" start="9158" end="9168" title="row vector" label="row vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713076" start="9500" end="9516" title="cotangent vector" label="cotangent vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q261527" start="9520" end="9531" title="linear form" label="linear form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179296" start="9690" end="9704" title="tangent vector" label="tangent vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q752487" start="10149" end="10166" title="dual vector space" label="dual vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q181365" start="10464" end="10475" title="dot product" label="dot product"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130428" start="10771" end="10783" title="differential (calculus)" label="differential"/>
<link wikidata="Q636889" start="10787" end="10803" title="total derivative" label="total derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q750432" start="10907" end="10925" title="total differential" label="total differential"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754547" start="10929" end="10948" title="exterior derivative" label="exterior derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047080" start="10985" end="11004" title="differential 1-form" label="differential 1-form"/>
<link wikidata="Q275447" start="11080" end="11085" title="slope" label="slope"/>
<link wikidata="Q131251" start="11093" end="11100" title="tangent" label="tangent"/>
<link wikidata="Q182598" start="11108" end="11113" title="graph of a function" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q657586" start="11229" end="11239" title="hyperplane" label="hyperplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q181365" start="11387" end="11398" title="dot product" label="dot product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049914" start="11724" end="11745" title="matrix multiplication" label="matrix multiplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071054" start="11928" end="11948" title="linear approximation" label="linear approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="12052" end="12060" title="function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071054" start="12194" end="12214" title="linear approximation" label="linear approximation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12509" end="12536" title="Taylor series#Taylor series in several variables" label="multivariable Taylor series"/>
<link wikidata="Q213363" start="12612" end="12620" title="open set" label="open set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305350" start="12693" end="12711" title="Fréchet derivative" label="Fréchet derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753188" start="12970" end="12979" title="Linearity" label="Linearity"/>
<link wikidata="Q466720" start="13170" end="13182" title="Product rule" label="Product rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q207455" start="13332" end="13342" title="Chain rule" label="Chain rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q35889" start="13550" end="13566" title="parametric curve" label="parametric curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156798" start="13685" end="13705" title="composition operator" label="composition operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q506041" start="13807" end="13822" title="Jacobian matrix" label="Jacobian matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311829" start="14059" end="14069" title="isosurface" label="isosurface"/>
<link wikidata="Q215067" start="14326" end="14336" title="orthogonal" label="orthogonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q126955" start="14344" end="14353" title="level set" label="level set"/>
<link wikidata="Q125539" start="14524" end="14532" title="embedded submanifold" label="embedded"/>
<link wikidata="Q973321" start="14533" end="14545" title="hypersurface" label="hypersurface"/>
<link wikidata="Q632814" start="14551" end="14570" title="Riemannian manifold" label="Riemannian manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554813" start="14707" end="14736" title="affine algebraic variety" label="affine algebraic hypersurface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588205" start="15114" end="15139" title="conservative vector field" label="conservative vector field"/>
<link wikidata="Q467699" start="15145" end="15158" title="line integral" label="line integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q383851" start="15574" end="15596" title="directional derivative" label="directional derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q131187" start="15759" end="15772" title="Taylor series" label="Taylor series"/>
<link wikidata="Q190546" start="15945" end="15970" title="Cauchy-Schwarz inequality" label="Cauchy-Schwarz inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q506041" start="16127" end="16142" title="Jacobian matrix" label="Jacobian matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q783507" start="16234" end="16252" title="differentiable map" label="differentiable map"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="16262" end="16277" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q203920" start="16299" end="16307" title="manifold" label="manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q194397" start="16358" end="16370" title="Banach space" label="Banach space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305350" start="16379" end="16397" title="Fréchet derivative" label="Fréchet derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q636889" start="16686" end="16702" title="total derivative" label="total derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q207643" start="16726" end="16740" title="linear mapping" label="linear mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q188524" start="16774" end="16780" title="tensor" label="tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q673253" start="16891" end="16918" title="Einstein summation notation" label="Einstein summation notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163016" start="16935" end="16949" title="tensor product" label="tensor product"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396526" start="16974" end="16987" title="dyadic tensor" label="dyadic tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q632814" start="17146" end="17154" title="Riemannian manifold" label="manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q847816" start="17178" end="17197" title="Christoffel symbols" label="Christoffel symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q757269" start="17253" end="17266" title="metric tensor" label="metric tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q548675" start="17391" end="17413" title="Levi-Civita connection" label="Levi-Civita connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q868473" start="17508" end="17523" title="smooth function" label="smooth function"/>
<link wikidata="Q214159" start="17671" end="17684" title="inner product" label="inner product"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721559" start="17858" end="17874" title="coordinate chart" label="coordinate chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915448" start="18277" end="18296" title="musical isomorphism" label="musical isomorphism"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12462" wikidata="Q177493" url="?curid=12462" title="Gauss (unit)">
<text>The gauss (symbol: , sometimes Gs) is a unit of measurement of magnetic induction, also known as magnetic flux density. The unit is part of the Gaussian system of units, which inherited it from the older centimetre–gram–second electromagnetic units (CGS-EMU) system. It was named after the German mathematician and physicist Carl Friedrich Gauss in 1936. One gauss is defined as one maxwell per square centimetre.

As the centimetre–gram–second system of units (cgs system) has been superseded by the International System of Units (SI), the use of the gauss has been deprecated by the standards bodies, but is still regularly used in various subfields of science. The SI unit for magnetic flux density is the tesla (symbol T), which corresponds to .

==Name, symbol, and metric prefixes==
Albeit not a component of the International System of Units, the usage of the gauss generally follows the rules for SI units. Since the name is derived from a person&#x27;s name, its symbol is the uppercase letter &quot;G&quot;. When the unit is spelled out, it is written in lowercase (&quot;gauss&quot;), unless it begins a sentence. The gauss may be combined with metric prefixes, such as in milligauss, mG (or mGs), or kilogauss, kG (or kGs).

==Unit conversions==
formula_1

The gauss is the unit of magnetic flux density B in the system of Gaussian units and is equal to Mx/cm2 or g/Bi/s2, while the oersted is the unit of {{math|H}}-field. One tesla (T) corresponds to 104 gauss, and one ampere (A) per metre corresponds to 4π × 10−3 oersted. 
The units for magnetic flux Φ, which is the integral of magnetic {{math|B}}-field over an area, are the weber (Wb) in the SI and the maxwell (Mx) in the CGS-Gaussian system. The conversion factor is {{val|e=8|u=maxwell per weber}}, since flux is the integral of field over an area, area having the units of the square of distance, thus {{val|e=4|u=G/T}} (magnetic field conversion factor) times the square of {{val|e=2|u=cm/m}} (linear distance conversion factor). 108 Mx/Wb = 104 G/T × (102 cm/m)2.

==Typical values==
{{main|Orders of magnitude (magnetic field)}}
* 10−9–10−8 G – the magnetic field of the human brain
* 10−6–10−3 G – the magnetic field of Galactic molecular clouds. Typical magnetic field strengths within the interstellar medium of the Milky Way are ~5 μG.
* 0.25–0.60 G – the Earth&#x27;s magnetic field at its surface
* 4 G – near Jupiter&#x27;s equator
* 25 G – the Earth&#x27;s magnetic field in its core
* 50 G – a typical refrigerator magnet
* 100 G – an iron magnet
* 1500 G – within a sun spot
* 10000 to 13000 G – remanence of a neodymium-iron-boron (NIB) magnet
* 16000 to 22000 G – saturation of high permeability iron alloys used in transformers
* 3000–70000 G – a medical magnetic resonance imaging machine 
* 1012–1013 G – the surface of a neutron star
* 4 × 1013 G – the Schwinger limit
* 1014 G – the magnetic field of SGR J1745-2900, orbiting the supermassive black hole Sgr A* in the center of the Milky Way.
* 1015 G – the magnetic field of some newly created magnetars
* 1017 G – the upper limit to neutron star magnetism

==See also==
*Tesla (unit)
*Centimetre–gram–second system of units
*Gaussian units

== Notes ==
{{notelist}}

==References==
{{reflist}}

{{CGS units}}</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q177493" start="4" end="9" title="Gauss (unit)" label="gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q177493" start="19" end="19" title="Gauss (unit)" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q177493" start="31" end="33" title="Gauss (unit)" label="Gs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11408" start="97" end="118" title="magnetic flux density" label="magnetic flux density"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234036" start="144" end="159" title="Gaussian units" label="Gaussian system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="204" end="248" title="centimetre–gram–second system of units#Electromagnetic units .28EMU.29" label="centimetre–gram–second electromagnetic units"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="325" end="345" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Carl Friedrich Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q608697" start="383" end="390" title="maxwell (unit)" label="maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q174728" start="402" end="412" title="centimetre" label="centimetre"/>
<link wikidata="Q26240" start="422" end="460" title="centimetre–gram–second system of units" label="centimetre–gram–second system of units"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="501" end="530" title="International System of Units" label="International System of Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q163343" start="709" end="714" title="Tesla (unit)" label="tesla"/>
<link wikidata="Q131299" start="1156" end="1169" title="metric prefix" label="metric prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234036" start="1335" end="1349" title="Gaussian units" label="Gaussian units"/>
<link wikidata="Q608697" start="1366" end="1368" title="Maxwell (unit)" label="Mx"/>
<link wikidata="Q41803" start="1376" end="1377" title="gram (unit)" label="g"/>
<link wikidata="Q864818" start="1378" end="1380" title="Abampere" label="Bi"/>
<link wikidata="Q844976" start="1395" end="1402" title="oersted" label="oersted"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1418" end="1434" title="Magnetic_field#The_H-field" label="{{math|H}}-field"/>
<link wikidata="Q163343" start="1440" end="1445" title="tesla (unit)" label="tesla"/>
<link wikidata="Q25272" start="1484" end="1490" title="ampere" label="ampere"/>
<link wikidata="Q844976" start="1530" end="1537" title="oersted" label="oersted"/>
<link wikidata="Q177831" start="1554" end="1567" title="magnetic flux" label="magnetic flux"/>
<link wikidata="Q80091" start="1584" end="1592" title="integral" label="integral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1596" end="1621" title="Magnetic_field#The_B-field" label="magnetic {{math|B}}-field"/>
<link wikidata="Q11500" start="1630" end="1634" title="area" label="area"/>
<link wikidata="Q170804" start="1644" end="1649" title="weber (unit)" label="weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="1662" end="1664" title="SI" label="SI"/>
<link wikidata="Q608697" start="1673" end="1680" title="Maxwell (unit)" label="maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6485344" start="1778" end="1782" title="flux" label="flux"/>
<link wikidata="Q272447" start="2207" end="2223" title="molecular clouds" label="molecular clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="2296" end="2305" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500960" start="2337" end="2364" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="2393" end="2400" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q857867" start="2464" end="2468" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s outer core" label="core"/>
<link wikidata="Q121569" start="2488" end="2507" title="refrigerator magnet" label="refrigerator magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="2521" end="2525" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11421" start="2526" end="2532" title="magnet" label="magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582994" start="2553" end="2561" title="sun spot" label="sun spot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4150950" start="2583" end="2592" title="remanence" label="remanence"/>
<link wikidata="Q908880" start="2598" end="2631" title="neodymium magnet" label="neodymium-iron-boron (NIB) magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630994" start="2653" end="2663" title="saturation (magnetic)" label="saturation"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="2745" end="2779" title="magnetic resonance imaging" label="magnetic resonance imaging machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="2814" end="2826" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789519" start="2846" end="2861" title="Schwinger limit" label="Schwinger limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q15711221" start="2895" end="2909" title="SGR J1745-2900" label="SGR J1745-2900"/>
<link wikidata="Q237284" start="2948" end="2954" title="Sagittarius A*" label="Sgr A*"/>
<link wikidata="Q190426" start="3039" end="3047" title="magnetar" label="magnetar"/>
<link wikidata="Q163343" start="3117" end="3129" title="Tesla (unit)" label="Tesla (unit)"/>
<link wikidata="Q26240" start="3131" end="3169" title="Centimetre–gram–second system of units" label="Centimetre–gram–second system of units"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234036" start="3171" end="3185" title="Gaussian units" label="Gaussian units"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12463" wikidata="Q35666" url="?curid=12463" title="Glacier">
<text>A glacier (; or ) is a persistent body of dense ice, a form of rock, that is constantly moving downhill under its own weight. A glacier forms where the accumulation of snow exceeds its ablation over many years, often centuries. It acquires distinguishing features, such as crevasses and seracs, as it slowly flows and deforms under stresses induced by its weight. As it moves, it abrades rock and debris from its substrate to create landforms such as cirques, moraines, or fjords. Although a glacier may flow into a body of water, it forms only on land and is distinct from the much thinner sea ice and lake ice that form on the surface of bodies of water.

On Earth, 99% of glacial ice is contained within vast ice sheets (also known as &quot;continental glaciers&quot;) in the polar regions, but glaciers may be found in mountain ranges on every continent other than the Australian mainland, including Oceania&#x27;s high-latitude oceanic island countries such as New Zealand. Between latitudes 35°N and 35°S, glaciers occur only in the Himalayas, Andes, and a few high mountains in East Africa, Mexico, New Guinea and on Zard-Kuh in Iran. With more than 7,000 known glaciers, Pakistan has more glacial ice than any other country outside the polar regions. Glaciers cover about 10% of Earth&#x27;s land surface. Continental glaciers cover nearly or about 98% of Antarctica&#x27;s , with an average thickness of ice . Greenland and Patagonia also have huge expanses of continental glaciers. The volume of glaciers, not including the ice sheets of Antarctica and Greenland, has been estimated at 170,000 km3.

Glacial ice is the largest reservoir of fresh water on Earth, holding with ice sheets about 69 percent of the world&#x27;s freshwater. Many glaciers from temperate, alpine and seasonal polar climates store water as ice during the colder seasons and release it later in the form of meltwater as warmer summer temperatures cause the glacier to melt, creating a water source that is especially important for plants, animals and human uses when other sources may be scant. However, within high-altitude and Antarctic environments, the seasonal temperature difference is often not sufficient to release meltwater.

Since glacial mass is affected by long-term climatic changes, e.g., precipitation, mean temperature, and cloud cover, glacial mass changes are considered among the most sensitive indicators of climate change and are a major source of variations in sea level.

A large piece of compressed ice, or a glacier, appears blue, as large quantities of water appear blue, because water molecules absorb other colors more efficiently than blue. The other reason for the blue color of glaciers is the lack of air bubbles. Air bubbles, which give a white color to ice, are squeezed out by pressure increasing the created ice&#x27;s density.

== Etymology and Terminology ==
The word &quot;glacier&quot; is a loanword from French and goes back, via Franco-Provençal, to the Vulgar Latin &#x27;, derived from the Late Latin &#x27;, and ultimately Latin &quot;&quot;, meaning &quot;ice&quot;. The processes and features caused by or related to glaciers are referred to as glacial. The process of glacier establishment, growth and flow is called glaciation. The corresponding area of study is called glaciology. Glaciers are important components of the global cryosphere.

== Types ==

=== Classification by size, shape and behavior ===
Glaciers are categorized by their morphology, thermal characteristics, and behavior. &quot;Alpine glaciers&quot; form on the crests and slopes of mountains. A glacier that fills a valley is called a &quot;valley glacier&quot;, or alternatively, an &quot;alpine glacier&quot; or &quot;mountain glacier&quot;. A large body of glacial ice astride a mountain, mountain range, or volcano is termed an &quot;ice cap&quot; or &quot;ice field&quot;. Ice caps have an area less than by definition.

Glacial bodies larger than are called &quot;ice sheets&quot; or &quot;continental glaciers&quot;. Several kilometers deep, they obscure the underlying topography. Only nunataks protrude from their surfaces. The only extant ice sheets are the two that cover most of Antarctica and Greenland. They contain vast quantities of freshwater, enough that if both melted, global sea levels would rise by over . Portions of an ice sheet or cap that extend into water are called ice shelves; they tend to be thin with limited slopes and reduced velocities. Narrow, fast-moving sections of an ice sheet are called &quot;ice streams&quot;. In Antarctica, many ice streams drain into large ice shelves. Some drain directly into the sea, often with an ice tongue, like Mertz Glacier.

&quot;Tidewater glaciers&quot; are glaciers that terminate in the sea, including most glaciers flowing from Greenland, Antarctica, Baffin, Devon, and Ellesmere Islands in Canada, Southeast Alaska, and the Northern and Southern Patagonian Ice Fields. As the ice reaches the sea, pieces break off or calve, forming icebergs. Most tidewater glaciers calve above sea level, which often results in a tremendous impact as the iceberg strikes the water. Tidewater glaciers undergo centuries-long cycles of advance and retreat that are much less affected by climate change than other glaciers.

=== Classification by thermal state ===

Thermally, a &quot;temperate glacier&quot; is at a melting point throughout the year, from its surface to its base. The ice of a &quot;polar glacier&quot; is always below the freezing threshold from the surface to its base, although the surface snowpack may experience seasonal melting. A &quot;subpolar glacier&quot; includes both temperate and polar ice, depending on the depth beneath the surface and position along the length of the glacier. In a similar way, the thermal regime of a glacier is often described by its basal temperature. A &quot;cold-based glacier&quot; is below freezing at the ice-ground interface and is thus frozen to the underlying substrate. A &quot;warm-based glacier&quot; is above or at freezing at the interface and is able to slide at this contact. This contrast is thought to a large extent to govern the ability of a glacier to effectively erode its bed, as sliding ice promotes plucking at rock from the surface below. Glaciers which are partly cold-based and partly warm-based are known as &quot;polythermal&quot;.

== Formation ==

Glaciers form where the accumulation of snow and ice exceeds ablation. A glacier usually originates from a cirque landform (alternatively known as a corrie or as a ) – a typically armchair-shaped geological feature (such as a depression between mountains enclosed by arêtes) – which collects and compresses through gravity the snow that falls into it. This snow accumulates and refreezes, turning into névé (granular snow). Further crushing of the individual snowflakes and expelling the air from the snow turns it into firn and eventually &quot;glacial ice&quot;. This glacial ice will fill the cirque until it &quot;overflows&quot; through a geological weakness or vacancy from the edge of the cirque called the &quot;lip&quot; or threshold. When the mass of snow and ice reaches sufficient thickness, it begins to move by a combination of surface slope, gravity, and pressure. On steeper slopes, this can occur with as little as of snow-ice.

In temperate glaciers, snow repeatedly freezes and thaws, changing into granular ice or névé. Under the pressure of the layers of ice and snow above it, this granular snow fuses into denser firn. Over a period of years, layers of firn undergo further compaction and become glacial ice. Glacier ice is slightly more dense than ice formed from frozen water because glacier ice contains fewer trapped air bubbles.

Glacial ice has a distinctive blue tint because it absorbs some red light due to an overtone of the infrared OH stretching mode of the water molecule. (Liquid water appears blue for the same reason. The blue of glacier ice is sometimes misattributed to Rayleigh scattering of bubbles in the ice.)

== Structure ==

A glacier originates at a location called its glacier head and terminates at its glacier foot, snout, or terminus.

Glaciers are broken into zones based on surface snowpack and melt conditions. The ablation zone is the region where there is a net loss in glacier mass. The upper part of a glacier, where accumulation exceeds ablation, is called the accumulation zone. The equilibrium line separates the ablation zone and the accumulation zone; it is the contour where the amount of new snow gained by accumulation is equal to the amount of ice lost through ablation. In general, the accumulation zone accounts for 60–70% of the glacier&#x27;s surface area, more if the glacier calves icebergs. Ice in the accumulation zone is deep enough to exert a downward force that erodes underlying rock. After a glacier melts, it often leaves behind a bowl- or amphitheater-shaped depression that ranges in size from large basins like the Great Lakes to smaller mountain depressions known as cirques.

The accumulation zone can be subdivided based on its melt conditions.
# The dry snow zone is a region where no melt occurs, even in the summer, and the snowpack remains dry.
# The percolation zone is an area with some surface melt, causing meltwater to percolate into the snowpack. This zone is often marked by refrozen ice lenses, glands, and layers. The snowpack also never reaches the melting point.
# Near the equilibrium line on some glaciers, a superimposed ice zone develops. This zone is where meltwater refreezes as a cold layer in the glacier, forming a continuous mass of ice.
# The wet snow zone is the region where all of the snow deposited since the end of the previous summer has been raised to 0 °C.

The health of a glacier is usually assessed by determining the glacier mass balance or observing terminus behavior. Healthy glaciers have large accumulation zones, more than 60% of their area is snow-covered at the end of the melt season, and they have a terminus with a vigorous flow.

Following the Little Ice Age&#x27;s end around 1850, glaciers around the Earth have retreated substantially. A slight cooling led to the advance of many alpine glaciers between 1950 and 1985, but since 1985 glacier retreat and mass loss has become larger and increasingly ubiquitous.

== Motion ==
Glaciers move downhill by the force of gravity and the internal deformation of ice. At the molecular level, ice consists of stacked layers of molecules with relatively weak bonds between layers. When the amount of strain (deformation) is proportional to the stress being applied, ice will act as an elastic solid. Ice needs to be at least thick to even start flowing, but once its thickness exceeds about , stress on the layer above will exceeds the inter-layer binding strength, and then it will move faster than the layer below. This means that small amounts of stress can result in a large amount of strain, causing the deformation to become a plastic flow rather than elastic. Then, the glacier will begin to deform under its own weight and flow across the landscape. According to the Glen–Nye flow law, the relationship between stress and strain, and thus the rate of internal flow, can be modeled as follows:

:formula_1

where: 
:formula_2 = shear strain (flow) rate
:formula_3 = stress
:formula_4 = a constant between 2–4 (typically 3 for most glaciers)
:formula_5 = a temperature-dependent constant

The lowest velocities are near the base of the glacier and along valley sides where friction acts against flow, causing the most deformation. Velocity increases inward toward the center line and upward, as the amount of deformation decreases. The highest flow velocities are found at the surface, representing the sum of the velocities of all the layers below.

Because ice can flow faster where it is thicker, the rate of glacier-induced erosion is directly proportional to the thickness of overlying ice. Consequently, pre-glacial low hollows will be deepened and pre-existing topography will be amplified by glacial action, while nunataks, which protrude above ice sheets, barely erode at all – erosion has been estimated as 5 m per 1.2 million years. This explains, for example, the deep profile of fjords, which can reach a kilometer in depth as ice is topographically steered into them. The extension of fjords inland increases the rate of ice sheet thinning since they are the principal conduits for draining ice sheets. It also makes the ice sheets more sensitive to changes in climate and the ocean.

Although evidence in favor of glacial flow was known by the early 19th century, other theories of glacial motion were advanced, such as the idea that meltwater, refreezing inside glaciers, caused the glacier to dilate and extend its length. As it became clear that glaciers behaved to some degree as if the ice were a viscous fluid, it was argued that &quot;regelation&quot;, or the melting and refreezing of ice at a temperature lowered by the pressure on the ice inside the glacier, was what allowed the ice to deform and flow. James Forbes came up with the essentially correct explanation in the 1840s, although it was several decades before it was fully accepted.

=== Fracture zone and cracks ===
The top of a glacier are rigid because they are under low pressure. This upper section is known as the &quot;fracture zone&quot; and moves mostly as a single unit over the plastic-flowing lower section. When a glacier moves through irregular terrain, cracks called crevasses develop in the fracture zone. Crevasses form because of differences in glacier velocity. If two rigid sections of a glacier move at different speeds or directions, shear forces cause them to break apart, opening a crevasse. Crevasses are seldom more than deep but, in some cases, can be at least deep. Beneath this point, the plasticity of the ice prevents the formation of cracks. Intersecting crevasses can create isolated peaks in the ice, called seracs.

Crevasses can form in several different ways. Transverse crevasses are transverse to flow and form where steeper slopes cause a glacier to accelerate. Longitudinal crevasses form semi-parallel to flow where a glacier expands laterally. Marginal crevasses form near the edge of the glacier, caused by the reduction in speed caused by friction of the valley walls. Marginal crevasses are largely transverse to flow. Moving glacier ice can sometimes separate from the stagnant ice above, forming a bergschrund. Bergschrunds resemble crevasses but are singular features at a glacier&#x27;s margins. Crevasses make travel over glaciers hazardous, especially when they are hidden by fragile snow bridges.

Below the equilibrium line, glacial meltwater is concentrated in stream channels. Meltwater can pool in proglacial lakes on top of a glacier or descend into the depths of a glacier via moulins. Streams within or beneath a glacier flow in englacial or sub-glacial tunnels. These tunnels sometimes reemerge at the glacier&#x27;s surface.

===Subglacial processes===
Most of the important processes controlling glacial motion occur in the ice-bed contact—even though it is only a few meters thick. The bed&#x27;s temperature, roughness and softness define basal shear stress, which in turn defines whether movement of the glacier will be accommodated by motion in the sediments, or if it will be able to slide. A soft bed, with high porosity and low pore fluid pressure, allows the glacier to move by sediment sliding: the base of the glacier may even remain frozen to the bed, where the underlying sediment slips underneath it like a tube of toothpaste. A hard bed cannot deform in this way; therefore the only way for hard-based glaciers to move is by basal sliding, where meltwater forms between the ice and the bed itself. Whether a bed is hard or soft depends on the porosity and pore pressure; higher porosity decreases the sediment strength (thus increases the shear stress τB).

Porosity may vary through a range of methods. 
*Movement of the overlying glacier may cause the bed to undergo ; the resulting shape change reorganizes blocks. This reorganizes closely packed blocks (a little like neatly folded, tightly packed clothes in a suitcase) into a messy jumble (just as clothes never fit back in when thrown in in a disordered fashion). This increases the porosity. Unless water is added, this will necessarily reduce the pore pressure (as the pore fluids have more space to occupy).
*Pressure may cause compaction and consolidation of underlying sediments. Since water is relatively incompressible, this is easier when the pore space is filled with vapor; any water must be removed to permit compression. In soils, this is an irreversible process.
*Sediment degradation by abrasion and fracture decreases the size of particles, which tends to decrease pore space. However, the motion of the particles may disorder the sediment, with the opposite effect. These processes also generate heat.

Bed softness may vary in space or time, and changes dramatically from glacier to glacier. An important factor is the underlying geology; glacial speeds tend to differ more when they change bedrock than when the gradient changes. Further, bed roughness can also act to slow glacial motion. The roughness of the bed is a measure of how many boulders and obstacles protrude into the overlying ice. Ice flows around these obstacles by melting under the high pressure on their stoss side; the resultant meltwater is then forced into the cavity arising in their lee side, where it re-freezes.

As well as affecting the sediment stress, fluid pressure (pw) can affect the friction between the glacier and the bed. High fluid pressure provides a buoyancy force upwards on the glacier, reducing the friction at its base. The fluid pressure is compared to the ice overburden pressure, pi, given by ρgh. Under fast-flowing ice streams, these two pressures will be approximately equal, with an effective pressure (pi – pw) of 30 kPa; i.e. all of the weight of the ice is supported by the underlying water, and the glacier is afloat.

====Basal melting and sliding ====

Glaciers may also move by basal sliding, where the base of the glacier is lubricated by the presence of liquid water, reducing basal shear stress and allowing the glacier to slide over the terrain on which it sits. Meltwater may be produced by pressure-induced melting, friction or geothermal heat. The more variable the amount of melting at surface of the glacier, the faster the ice will flow. Basal sliding is dominant in temperate or warm-based glaciers.

:τD = ρgh sin α
:where τD is the driving stress, and α the ice surface slope in radians.

:τB is the basal shear stress, a function of bed temperature and softness.

:τF, the shear stress, is the lower of τB and τD. It controls the rate of plastic flow.

The presence of basal meltwater depends on both bed temperature and other factors. For instance, the melting point of water decreases under pressure, meaning that water melts at a lower temperature under thicker glaciers. This acts as a &quot;double whammy&quot;, because thicker glaciers have a lower heat conductance, meaning that the basal temperature is also likely to be higher. Bed temperature tends to vary in a cyclic fashion. A cool bed has a high strength, reducing the speed of the glacier. This increases the rate of accumulation, since newly fallen snow is not transported away. Consequently, the glacier thickens, with three consequences: firstly, the bed is better insulated, allowing greater retention of geothermal heat.

Secondly, the increased pressure can facilitate melting. Most importantly, τD is increased. These factors will combine to accelerate the glacier. As friction increases with the square of velocity, faster motion will greatly increase frictional heating, with ensuing melting – which causes a positive feedback, increasing ice speed to a faster flow rate still: west Antarctic glaciers are known to reach velocities of up to a kilometer per year.
Eventually, the ice will be surging fast enough that it begins to thin, as accumulation cannot keep up with the transport. This thinning will increase the conductive heat loss, slowing the glacier and causing freezing. This freezing will slow the glacier further, often until it is stationary, whence the cycle can begin again.
The flow of water under the glacial surface can have a large effect on the motion of the glacier itself. Subglacial lakes contain significant amounts of water, which can move fast: cubic kilometers can be transported between lakes over the course of a couple of years. This motion is thought to occur in two main modes: &quot;pipe flow&quot; involves liquid water moving through pipe-like conduits, like a sub-glacial river; &quot;sheet flow&quot; involves motion of water in a thin layer. A switch between the two flow conditions may be associated with surging behavior. Indeed, the loss of sub-glacial water supply has been linked with the shut-down of ice movement in the Kamb ice stream. The subglacial motion of water is expressed in the surface topography of ice sheets, which slump down into vacated subglacial lakes.

=== Speed ===

The speed of glacial displacement is partly determined by friction. Friction makes the ice at the bottom of the glacier move more slowly than ice at the top. In alpine glaciers, friction is also generated at the valley&#x27;s sidewalls, which slows the edges relative to the center.

Mean glacial speed varies greatly but is typically around per day. There may be no motion in stagnant areas; for example, in parts of Alaska, trees can establish themselves on surface sediment deposits. In other cases, glaciers can move as fast as per day, such as in Greenland&#x27;s Jacobshavn Isbræ. Glacial speed is affected by factors such as slope, ice thickness, snowfall, longitudinal confinement, basal temperature, meltwater production, and bed hardness.

A few glaciers have periods of very rapid advancement called surges. These glaciers exhibit normal movement until suddenly they accelerate, then return to their previous movement state. These surges may be caused by the failure of the underlying bedrock, the pooling of meltwater at the base of the glacier — perhaps delivered from a supraglacial lake — or the simple accumulation of mass beyond a critical &quot;tipping point&quot;. Temporary rates up to per day have occurred when increased temperature or overlying pressure caused bottom ice to melt and water to accumulate beneath a glacier.

In glaciated areas where the glacier moves faster than one km per year, glacial earthquakes occur. These are large scale earthquakes that have seismic magnitudes as high as 6.1. The number of glacial earthquakes in Greenland peaks every year in July, August, and September and increased rapidly in the 1990s and 2000s. In a study using data from January 1993 through October 2005, more events were detected every year since 2002, and twice as many events were recorded in 2005 as there were in any other year.

=== Ogives ===

Ogives or Forbes bands are alternating wave crests and valleys that appear as dark and light bands of ice on glacier surfaces. They are linked to seasonal motion of glaciers; the width of one dark and one light band generally equals the annual movement of the glacier. Ogives are formed when ice from an icefall is severely broken up, increasing ablation surface area during summer. This creates a swale and space for snow accumulation in the winter, which in turn creates a ridge. Sometimes ogives consist only of undulations or color bands and are described as wave ogives or band ogives.

== Geography ==
Glaciers are present on every continent and in approximately fifty countries, excluding those (Australia, South Africa) that have glaciers only on distant subantarctic island territories. Extensive glaciers are found in Antarctica, Argentina, Chile, Canada, Pakistan, Alaska, Greenland and Iceland. Mountain glaciers are widespread, especially in the Andes, the Himalayas, the Rocky Mountains, the Caucasus, Scandinavian Mountains, and the Alps. Snezhnika glacier in Pirin Mountain, Bulgaria with a latitude of 41°46′09″ N is the southernmost glacial mass in Europe. Mainland Australia currently contains no glaciers, although a small glacier on Mount Kosciuszko was present in the last glacial period. In New Guinea, small, rapidly diminishing, glaciers are located on Puncak Jaya. Africa has glaciers on Mount Kilimanjaro in Tanzania, on Mount Kenya, and in the Rwenzori Mountains. Oceanic islands with glaciers include Iceland, several of the islands off the coast of Norway including Svalbard and Jan Mayen to the far north, New Zealand and the subantarctic islands of Marion, Heard, Grande Terre (Kerguelen) and Bouvet. During glacial periods of the Quaternary, Taiwan, Hawaii on Mauna Kea and Tenerife also had large alpine glaciers, while the Faroe and Crozet Islands were completely glaciated.

The permanent snow cover necessary for glacier formation is affected by factors such as the degree of slope on the land, amount of snowfall and the winds. Glaciers can be found in all latitudes except from 20° to 27° north and south of the equator where the presence of the descending limb of the Hadley circulation lowers precipitation so much that with high insolation snow lines reach above . Between 19˚N and 19˚S, however, precipitation is higher, and the mountains above usually have permanent snow.

Even at high latitudes, glacier formation is not inevitable. Areas of the Arctic, such as Banks Island, and the McMurdo Dry Valleys in Antarctica are considered polar deserts where glaciers cannot form because they receive little snowfall despite the bitter cold. Cold air, unlike warm air, is unable to transport much water vapor. Even during glacial periods of the Quaternary, Manchuria, lowland Siberia, and central and northern Alaska, though extraordinarily cold, had such light snowfall that glaciers could not form.

In addition to the dry, unglaciated polar regions, some mountains and volcanoes in Bolivia, Chile and Argentina are high () and cold, but the relative lack of precipitation prevents snow from accumulating into glaciers. This is because these peaks are located near or in the hyperarid Atacama Desert.

== Glacial geology ==

=== Erosion ===

Glaciers erode terrain through two principal processes: plucking and abrasion.

As glaciers flow over bedrock, they soften and lift blocks of rock into the ice. This process, called plucking, is caused by subglacial water that penetrates fractures in the bedrock and subsequently freezes and expands. This expansion causes the ice to act as a lever that loosens the rock by lifting it. Thus, sediments of all sizes become part of the glacier&#x27;s load. If a retreating glacier gains enough debris, it may become a rock glacier, like the Timpanogos Glacier in Utah.

Abrasion occurs when the ice and its load of rock fragments slide over bedrock and function as sandpaper, smoothing and polishing the bedrock below. The pulverized rock this process produces is called rock flour and is made up of rock grains between 0.002 and 0.00625 mm in size. Abrasion leads to steeper valley walls and mountain slopes in alpine settings, which can cause avalanches and rock slides, which add even more material to the glacier. Glacial abrasion is commonly characterized by glacial striations. Glaciers produce these when they contain large boulders that carve long scratches in the bedrock. By mapping the direction of the striations, researchers can determine the direction of the glacier&#x27;s movement. Similar to striations are chatter marks, lines of crescent-shape depressions in the rock underlying a glacier. They are formed by abrasion when boulders in the glacier are repeatedly caught and released as they are dragged along the bedrock.The rate of glacier erosion varies. Six factors control erosion rate:
* Velocity of glacial movement
* Thickness of the ice
* Shape, abundance and hardness of rock fragments contained in the ice at the bottom of the glacier
* Relative ease of erosion of the surface under the glacier
* Thermal conditions at the glacier base
* Permeability and water pressure at the glacier base
When the bedrock has frequent fractures on the surface, glacial erosion rates tend to increase as plucking is the main erosive force on the surface; when the bedrock has wide gaps between sporadic fractures, however, abrasion tends to be the dominant erosive form and glacial erosion rates become slow. Glaciers in lower latitudes tend to be much more erosive than glaciers in higher latitudes, because they have more meltwater reaching the glacial base and facilitate sediment production and transport under the same moving speed and amount of ice.

Material that becomes incorporated in a glacier is typically carried as far as the zone of ablation before being deposited. Glacial deposits are of two distinct types:

* &quot;Glacial till&quot;: material directly deposited from glacial ice. Till includes a mixture of undifferentiated material ranging from clay size to boulders, the usual composition of a moraine.
* &quot;Fluvial and outwash sediments&quot;: sediments deposited by water. These deposits are stratified by size.

Larger pieces of rock that are encrusted in till or deposited on the surface are called &quot;glacial erratics&quot;. They range in size from pebbles to boulders, but as they are often moved great distances, they may be drastically different from the material upon which they are found. Patterns of glacial erratics hint at past glacial motions.

=== Moraines ===

Glacial moraines are formed by the deposition of material from a glacier and are exposed after the glacier has retreated. They usually appear as linear mounds of till, a non-sorted mixture of rock, gravel, and boulders within a matrix of fine powdery material. Terminal or end moraines are formed at the foot or terminal end of a glacier. Lateral moraines are formed on the sides of the glacier. Medial moraines are formed when a glacier meets its tributary glacier and merge, and the lateral moraines of each coalesce to form a moraine in the middle of the combined glacier. Less apparent are ground moraines, also called &quot;glacial drift&quot;, which often blankets the surface underneath the glacier downslope from the equilibrium line. The term &quot;moraine&quot; is of French origin. It was coined by peasants to describe alluvial embankments and rims found near the margins of glaciers in the French Alps. In modern geology, the term is used more broadly and is applied to a series of formations, all of which are composed of till. Moraines can also create moraine-dammed lakes.

=== Drumlins ===

Drumlins are asymmetrical, canoe-shaped hills made mainly of glacial sediments. Their heights vary from 15 to 50 meters, and they can reach a kilometer in length. The steepest side of the hill faces the direction from which the ice advanced (&quot;stoss&quot;), while a longer slope is left in the ice&#x27;s direction of movement (&quot;lee&quot;). Drumlins are found in groups called &quot;drumlin fields&quot; or &quot;drumlin camps&quot;. One of these fields is found east of Rochester, New York; it is estimated to contain about 10,000 drumlins. Although the process that forms drumlins is not fully understood, their shape implies that they are products of the plastic deformation zone of ancient glaciers. It is believed that many drumlins were formed when glaciers advanced over and altered the deposits of earlier glaciers.

=== Glacial valleys, cirques, arêtes, and pyramidal peaks ===
Before glaciation, mountain valleys have a characteristic &quot;V&quot; shape, produced by eroding water. During glaciation, these valleys are often widened, deepened and smoothed to form a U-shaped glacial valley or glacial trough, as it is sometimes called. The erosion that creates glacial valleys truncates any spurs of rock or earth that may have earlier extended across the valley, creating broadly triangular-shaped cliffs called truncated spurs. Within glacial valleys, depressions created by plucking and abrasion can be filled by lakes, called paternoster lakes. If a glacial valley runs into a large body of water, it forms a fjord.

Typically glaciers deepen their valleys more than their smaller tributaries. Therefore, when glaciers recede, the valleys of the tributary glaciers remain above the main glacier&#x27;s depression and are called hanging valleys.

At the start of a classic valley glacier is a bowl-shaped cirque, which have escarped walls on three sides but is open on the side that descends into the valley called the &quot;lip&quot;. Cirques are where ice begins to accumulate in a glacier. Two glacial cirques may form back to back and erode their backwalls until only a narrow ridge, called an arête is left. This structure may result in a mountain pass. If multiple cirques encircle a single mountain, they create pointed pyramidal peaks; particularly steep examples are called horns.

=== Roches moutonnées ===
Passage of glacial ice over an area of bedrock may cause the rock to be sculpted into a knoll called a &quot;roche moutonnée,&quot; or &quot;sheepback&quot; rock. Roches moutonnées may be elongated, rounded and asymmetrical in shape. They range in length from less than a meter to several hundred meters long. Roches moutonnées have a gentle slope on their up-glacier sides and a steep to vertical face on their down-glacier sides. The glacier abrades the smooth slope on the upstream side as it flows along, but tears rock fragments loose and carries them away from the downstream side via plucking.

=== Alluvial stratification ===
As the water that rises from the ablation zone moves away from the glacier, it carries fine eroded sediments with it. As the speed of the water decreases, so does its capacity to carry objects in suspension. The water thus gradually deposits the sediment as it runs, creating an alluvial plain. When this phenomenon occurs in a valley, it is called a &quot;valley train&quot;. When the deposition is in an estuary, the sediments are known as bay mud. Outwash plains and valley trains are usually accompanied by basins known as &quot;kettles&quot;. These are small lakes formed when large ice blocks that are trapped in alluvium melt and produce water-filled depressions. Kettle diameters range from 5 m to 13 km, with depths of up to 45 meters. Most are circular in shape because the blocks of ice that formed them were rounded as they melted.

=== Glacial deposits ===

When a glacier&#x27;s size shrinks below a critical point, its flow stops and it becomes stationary. Meanwhile, meltwater within and beneath the ice leaves stratified alluvial deposits. These deposits, in the forms of columns, terraces and clusters, remain after the glacier melts and are known as &quot;glacial deposits&quot;. Glacial deposits that take the shape of hills or mounds are called &quot;kames&quot;. Some kames form when meltwater deposits sediments through openings in the interior of the ice. Others are produced by fans or deltas created by meltwater. When the glacial ice occupies a valley, it can form terraces or kames along the sides of the valley. Long, sinuous glacial deposits are called &quot;eskers&quot;. Eskers are composed of sand and gravel that was deposited by meltwater streams that flowed through ice tunnels within or beneath a glacier. They remain after the ice melts, with heights exceeding 100 meters and lengths of as long as 100 km.

=== Loess deposits ===
Very fine glacial sediments or rock flour is often picked up by wind blowing over the bare surface and may be deposited great distances from the original fluvial deposition site. These eolian loess deposits may be very deep, even hundreds of meters, as in areas of China and the Midwestern United States. Katabatic winds can be important in this process.

== Retreat of glaciers due to climate change ==
Glaciers, which can be hundreds of thousands of years old, are used to track climate change over long periods of time. Researchers melt or crush samples from glacier ice cores whose progressively deep layers represent respectively earlier times in Earth&#x27;s climate history. The researchers apply various instruments to the content of bubbles trapped in the cores&#x27; layers in order to track changes in the atmosphere&#x27;s composition. Temperatures are deduced from differing relative concentrations of respective gases, confirming that for at least the last million years, global temperatures have been linked to carbon dioxide concentrations.

Human activities in the industrial era have increased the concentration of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping greenhouse gases in the air, causing current global warming. Human influence is the principal driver of changes to the cryosphere of which glaciers are a part.
Global warming creates positive feedback loops with glaciers. For example, in ice–albedo feedback, rising temperatures increase glacier melt, exposing more of earth&#x27;s land and sea surface (which is darker than glacier ice), allowing sunlight to warm the surface rather than being reflected back into space. Reference glaciers tracked by the World Glacier Monitoring Service have lost ice every year since 1988. A study that investigated the period 1995 to 2022 showed that the flow velocity of glaciers in the Alps accelerates and slows down to a similar extent at the same time, despite large distances. This clearly shows that their speed is controlled by the climate change.

Water runoff from melting glaciers causes global sea level to rise, a phenomenon the IPCC terms a &quot;slow onset&quot; event. Impacts at least partially attributable to sea level rise include for example encroachment on coastal settlements and infrastructure, existential threats to small islands and low-lying coasts, losses of coastal ecosystems and ecosystem services, groundwater salinization, and compounding damage from tropical cyclones, flooding, storm surges, and land subsidence.

== Isostatic rebound ==

Large masses, such as ice sheets or glaciers, can depress the crust of the Earth into the mantle. The depression usually totals a third of the ice sheet or glacier&#x27;s thickness. After the ice sheet or glacier melts, the mantle begins to flow back to its original position, pushing the crust back up. This post-glacial rebound, which proceeds very slowly after the melting of the ice sheet or glacier, is currently occurring in measurable amounts in Scandinavia and the Great Lakes region of North America.

A geomorphological feature created by the same process on a smaller scale is known as &quot;dilation-faulting&quot;. It occurs where previously compressed rock is allowed to return to its original shape more rapidly than can be maintained without faulting. This leads to an effect similar to what would be seen if the rock were hit by a large hammer. Dilation faulting can be observed in recently de-glaciated parts of Iceland and Cumbria.

== On other planets ==
The polar ice caps of Mars show geologic evidence of glacial deposits. The south polar cap is especially comparable to glaciers on Earth. Topographical features and computer models indicate the existence of more glaciers in Mars&#x27; past. At mid-latitudes, between 35° and 65° north or south, Martian glaciers are affected by the thin Martian atmosphere. Because of the low atmospheric pressure, ablation near the surface is solely caused by sublimation, not melting. As on Earth, many glaciers are covered with a layer of rocks which insulates the ice. A radar instrument on board the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter found ice under a thin layer of rocks in formations called lobate debris aprons (LDAs).

In 2015, as &quot;New Horizons&quot; flew by the Pluto-Charon system, the spacecraft discovered a massive basin covered in a layer of nitrogen ice on Pluto. A large portion of the basin&#x27;s surface is divided into irregular polygonal features separated by narrow troughs, interpreted as convection cells fueled by internal heat from Pluto&#x27;s interior. Glacial flows were also observed near Sputnik Planitia&#x27;s margins, appearing to flow both into and out of the basin.

== See also ==
* 
* 


== References ==
=== Bibliography ===


=== General references ===
* A less-technical treatment of all aspects, with photographs and firsthand accounts of glaciologists&#x27; experiences. All images of this book can be found online (see Weblinks: Glaciers-online)
* 
* An undergraduate-level textbook.
* A textbook for undergraduates avoiding mathematical complexities
* A textbook devoted to explaining the geography of our planet.
* A comprehensive reference on the physical principles underlying formation and behavior.
== Further reading ==
* Gornitz, Vivien. &quot;Vanishing Ice: Glaciers, Ice Sheets, and Rising Seas&quot; (Columbia University Press, 2019) online review
* Moon, Twila. Saying goodbye to glaciers, &quot;Science,&quot; 12 May 2017, Vol. 356, Issue 6338, pp. 580–581, 

== External links ==

* Erosion carried out by Glaciers (Work of Glaciers)
* , a report in the Global Environment Outlook (GEO) series.
* , a report in the Global Environment Outlook (GEO) series.
* Glacial structures – photo atlas 
* NOW on PBS &quot;On Thin Ice&quot;
* Photo project tracks changes in Himalayan glaciers since 1921
* Short radio episode &quot;California Glaciers&quot; from &quot;The Mountains of California&quot; by John Muir, 1894. California Legacy Project
* Dynamics of Glaciers
* Mountain glaciers and their role in the Earth system
* GletscherVergleiche.ch – Before/After Images by Simon Oberli</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="2" end="9" title="Glacier" label="glacier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="185" end="193" title="Ablation#Glaciology" label="ablation"/>
<link wikidata="Q862193" start="273" end="281" title="crevasse" label="crevasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q384262" start="287" end="292" title="serac" label="serac"/>
<link wikidata="Q184368" start="451" end="457" title="cirque" label="cirque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610088" start="460" end="467" title="moraine" label="moraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q45776" start="473" end="478" title="fjord" label="fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q213926" start="591" end="598" title="sea ice" label="sea ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12599" start="712" end="721" title="ice sheet" label="ice sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q60670" start="779" end="791" title="polar region" label="polar region"/>
<link wikidata="Q46831" start="823" end="837" title="mountain range" label="mountain range"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="933" end="947" title="oceanic island" label="oceanic island"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="966" end="977" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="1039" end="1048" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="1050" end="1055" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="1106" end="1116" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q147826" start="1124" end="1132" title="Zard-Kuh" label="Zard-Kuh"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="1179" end="1187" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="1364" end="1374" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507" start="1433" end="1442" title="Patagonia" label="Patagonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q102192" start="1650" end="1661" title="fresh water" label="fresh water"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="1764" end="1773" title="Temperate climate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q859654" start="1775" end="1781" title="Alpine climate" label="alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q193372" start="1795" end="1808" title="polar climate" label="polar climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q360925" start="1891" end="1900" title="meltwater" label="meltwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049799" start="1969" end="1981" title="Water resources" label="water source"/>
<link wikidata="Q25257" start="2288" end="2301" title="precipitation (meteorology)" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="2303" end="2319" title="temperature" label="mean temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q830457" start="2325" end="2336" title="cloud cover" label="cloud cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q903816" start="2338" end="2358" title="Retreat of glaciers since 1850" label="glacial mass changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="2413" end="2427" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="2468" end="2477" title="Current sea level rise" label="sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q882572" start="2527" end="2539" title="Blue ice (glacial)" label="appears blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148636" start="2564" end="2581" title="Color of water" label="water appear blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="2916" end="2924" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q15087" start="2956" end="2972" title="Franco-Provençal language" label="Franco-Provençal"/>
<link wikidata="Q37560" start="2981" end="2993" title="Vulgar Latin" label="Vulgar Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503113" start="3019" end="3029" title="Late Latin" label="Late Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3053" end="3058" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="3250" end="3260" title="glacial period" label="glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q52120" start="3304" end="3314" title="glaciology" label="glaciology"/>
<link wikidata="Q493109" start="3364" end="3374" title="cryosphere" label="cryosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="3532" end="3538" title="Alps" label="Alpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="3816" end="3823" title="volcano" label="volcano"/>
<link wikidata="Q878077" start="3843" end="3850" title="ice cap" label="ice cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132248" start="3866" end="3875" title="ice field" label="ice field"/>
<link wikidata="Q12599" start="3975" end="3984" title="ice sheet" label="ice sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q194408" start="4099" end="4106" title="nunatak" label="nunatak"/>
<link wikidata="Q46966" start="4399" end="4410" title="ice shelves" label="ice shelves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2540532" start="4539" end="4550" title="ice streams" label="ice streams"/>
<link wikidata="Q46966" start="4607" end="4618" title="ice shelf" label="ice shelves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406037" start="4668" end="4678" title="ice tongue" label="ice tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131216" start="4685" end="4698" title="Mertz Glacier" label="Mertz Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800892" start="4707" end="4725" title="Tidewater glacier cycle" label="Tidewater glaciers"/>
<link wikidata="Q81178" start="4832" end="4838" title="Baffin Island" label="Baffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q186841" start="4840" end="4845" title="Devon Island" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q146841" start="4851" end="4867" title="Ellesmere Island" label="Ellesmere Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q198710" start="4880" end="4896" title="Southeast Alaska" label="Southeast Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031462" start="4906" end="4914" title="Northern Patagonian Ice Field" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031467" start="4919" end="4948" title="Southern Patagonian Ice Field" label="Southern Patagonian Ice Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q47568" start="5014" end="5021" title="iceberg" label="iceberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800892" start="5190" end="5219" title="tidewater glacier cycle" label="cycles of advance and retreat"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575846" start="5574" end="5582" title="snowpack" label="snowpack"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="6202" end="6215" title="Glacial erosion" label="erode its bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771460" start="6241" end="6249" title="Plucking (glaciation)" label="plucking"/>
<link wikidata="Q690578" start="6421" end="6433" title="Glacier ice accumulation" label="accumulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q322177" start="6458" end="6466" title="ablation" label="ablation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184368" start="6504" end="6510" title="cirque" label="cirque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334383" start="6664" end="6669" title="arête" label="arête"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733083" start="6799" end="6803" title="névé" label="névé"/>
<link wikidata="Q828861" start="6917" end="6921" title="firn" label="firn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733083" start="7431" end="7435" title="névé" label="névé"/>
<link wikidata="Q261967" start="7839" end="7847" title="overtone" label="overtone"/>
<link wikidata="Q70906" start="7864" end="7877" title="Infrared spectroscopy" label="OH stretching"/>
<link wikidata="Q193709" start="8008" end="8027" title="Rayleigh scattering" label="Rayleigh scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q556920" start="8175" end="8183" title="Glacier terminus" label="terminus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428388" start="8419" end="8436" title="accumulation zone" label="accumulation zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q184368" start="9051" end="9057" title="cirque" label="cirque"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414854" start="9381" end="9391" title="Ice segregation" label="ice lenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3528741" start="9841" end="9861" title="glacier mass balance" label="glacier mass balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q190530" start="10079" end="10093" title="Little Ice Age" label="Little Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q903816" start="10118" end="10172" title="Retreat of glaciers since 1850" label="glaciers around the Earth have retreated substantially"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412" start="10402" end="10409" title="gravity" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q472074" start="11010" end="11022" title="Plasticity (physics)" label="plastic flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q124485902" start="11152" end="11169" title="Glen–Nye flow law" label="Glen–Nye flow law"/>
<link wikidata="Q194408" start="12105" end="12112" title="nunatak" label="nunatak"/>
<link wikidata="Q45776" start="12275" end="12280" title="fjord" label="fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356328" start="13112" end="13124" title="James David Forbes" label="James Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="13342" end="13350" title="pressure" label="pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q862193" start="13549" end="13557" title="crevasse" label="crevasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q43606218" start="13723" end="13728" title="Shear (geology)" label="shear"/>
<link wikidata="Q384262" start="14009" end="14014" title="serac" label="serac"/>
<link wikidata="Q820206" start="14513" end="14524" title="bergschrund" label="bergschrund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548378" start="14703" end="14714" title="snow bridge" label="snow bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q766608" start="14903" end="14910" title="Moulin (geomorphology)" label="moulins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571817" start="17492" end="17502" title="stoss (geography)" label="stoss side"/>
<link wikidata="Q372001" start="17576" end="17584" title="lee side" label="lee side"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962812" start="18204" end="18217" title="basal sliding" label="basal sliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455803" start="18252" end="18262" title="lubrication" label="lubricated"/>
<link wikidata="Q657936" start="18311" end="18323" title="shear stress" label="shear stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q360925" start="18393" end="18402" title="Meltwater" label="Meltwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q10577628" start="18460" end="18475" title="geothermal heat" label="geothermal heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q82580" start="21304" end="21312" title="friction" label="friction"/>
<link wikidata="Q770424" start="21815" end="21831" title="Jacobshavn Glacier" label="Jacobshavn Isbræ"/>
<link wikidata="Q287381" start="22057" end="22063" title="Surge (glacier)" label="surges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420381" start="22330" end="22347" title="supraglacial lake" label="supraglacial lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984731" start="22665" end="22683" title="glacial earthquake" label="glacial earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3984731" start="22785" end="22803" title="glacial earthquake" label="glacial earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344823" start="23518" end="23523" title="swale (landform)" label="swale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141556" start="23883" end="23895" title="subantarctic" label="subantarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="24079" end="24084" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="24090" end="24099" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="24105" end="24120" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5477" start="24126" end="24134" title="Caucasus Mountains" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q186547" start="24136" end="24158" title="Scandinavian Mountains" label="Scandinavian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="24168" end="24172" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q24910168" start="24174" end="24183" title="Snezhnika" label="Snezhnika"/>
<link wikidata="Q726158" start="24195" end="24200" title="Pirin" label="Pirin"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="24211" end="24219" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="24227" end="24235" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q178167" start="24374" end="24390" title="Mount Kosciuszko" label="Mount Kosciuszko"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="24410" end="24429" title="last glacial period" label="last glacial period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045888" start="24498" end="24509" title="Puncak Jaya" label="Puncak Jaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296" start="24534" end="24551" title="Mount Kilimanjaro" label="Mount Kilimanjaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q172070" start="24568" end="24579" title="Mount Kenya" label="Mount Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q106540" start="24592" end="24610" title="Rwenzori Mountains" label="Rwenzori Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="24716" end="24724" title="Svalbard" label="Svalbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q14056" start="24729" end="24738" title="Jan Mayen" label="Jan Mayen"/>
<link wikidata="Q46623" start="24801" end="24807" title="Marion Island" label="Marion"/>
<link wikidata="Q131198" start="24809" end="24814" title="Heard Island" label="Heard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24816" end="24840" title="Kerguelen Islands#Grande Terre" label="Grande Terre (Kerguelen)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23408" start="24845" end="24851" title="Bouvet Island" label="Bouvet"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="24895" end="24901" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q68740" start="24903" end="24909" title="Hawaii (island)" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q131230" start="24913" end="24922" title="Mauna Kea" label="Mauna Kea"/>
<link wikidata="Q40846" start="24927" end="24935" title="Tenerife" label="Tenerife"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="24978" end="24983" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q201698" start="24988" end="25002" title="Crozet Islands" label="Crozet Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="25215" end="25223" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q338589" start="25328" end="25346" title="Hadley circulation" label="Hadley circulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556707" start="25391" end="25401" title="insolation" label="insolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q740358" start="25402" end="25411" title="snow line" label="snow line"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="25612" end="25618" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q200226" start="25628" end="25640" title="Banks Island" label="Banks Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q571433" start="25650" end="25669" title="McMurdo Dry Valleys" label="McMurdo Dry Valleys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290007" start="25699" end="25711" title="polar desert" label="polar desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q26185" start="25905" end="25915" title="Quaternary" label="Quaternary"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="25917" end="25926" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="25936" end="25943" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515679" start="25949" end="25956" title="Alaska Interior" label="central"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245148" start="25961" end="25976" title="northern Alaska" label="northern Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773097" start="26337" end="26346" title="hyperarid" label="hyperarid"/>
<link wikidata="Q47141" start="26347" end="26361" title="Atacama Desert" label="Atacama Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771460" start="26460" end="26468" title="Plucking (glaciation)" label="plucking"/>
<link wikidata="Q188842" start="26473" end="26481" title="abrasion (geology)" label="abrasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q884736" start="26920" end="26932" title="rock glacier" label="rock glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807641" start="26943" end="26961" title="Timpanogos Glacier" label="Timpanogos Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q869697" start="27173" end="27183" title="rock flour" label="rock flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q625751" start="27466" end="27483" title="glacial striation" label="glacial striation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432903" start="27726" end="27738" title="chatter mark" label="chatter mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q372934" start="29448" end="29463" title="glacial erratic" label="glacial erratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610088" start="29727" end="29734" title="moraine" label="moraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q427711" start="29881" end="29885" title="till" label="till"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279297" start="30313" end="30328" title="drift (geology)" label="ground moraines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="30629" end="30633" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q192701" start="30827" end="30834" title="Drumlin" label="Drumlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192701" start="31219" end="31232" title="drumlin field" label="drumlin field"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="31307" end="31326" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q39816" start="31781" end="31800" title="V-shaped valley" label="&amp;quot;V&amp;quot; shape"/>
<link wikidata="Q649266" start="31913" end="31921" title="U-shaped valley" label="U-shaped"/>
<link wikidata="Q7847911" start="32160" end="32175" title="truncated spurs" label="truncated spurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144568" start="32277" end="32293" title="paternoster lake" label="paternoster lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q45776" start="32360" end="32365" title="fjord" label="fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q159675" start="32432" end="32443" title="tributary" label="tributaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q39816" start="32579" end="32593" title="hanging valley" label="hanging valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334383" start="32948" end="32953" title="arête" label="arête"/>
<link wikidata="Q133056" start="32994" end="33007" title="mountain pass" label="mountain pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570358" start="33077" end="33091" title="pyramidal peak" label="pyramidal peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570358" start="33133" end="33138" title="Glacial horn" label="horns"/>
<link wikidata="Q190559" start="33276" end="33291" title="roche moutonnée" label="roche moutonnée"/>
<link wikidata="Q656586" start="34080" end="34094" title="alluvial plain" label="alluvial plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="34207" end="34214" title="estuary" label="estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368108" start="34243" end="34250" title="bay mud" label="bay mud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424609" start="34334" end="34341" title="Kettle (landform)" label="kettles"/>
<link wikidata="Q134783" start="34828" end="34838" title="Stratigraphy" label="stratified"/>
<link wikidata="Q828581" start="34899" end="34907" title="Terrace (geology)" label="terraces"/>
<link wikidata="Q427711" start="34976" end="34992" title="glacial deposits" label="glacial deposits"/>
<link wikidata="Q663753" start="35073" end="35077" title="kame" label="kame"/>
<link wikidata="Q43197" start="35212" end="35218" title="river delta" label="deltas"/>
<link wikidata="Q332784" start="35390" end="35395" title="esker" label="esker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434465" start="35823" end="35830" title="fluvial" label="fluvial"/>
<link wikidata="Q215839" start="35854" end="35860" title="Eolian processes" label="eolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q22723" start="35861" end="35866" title="loess" label="loess"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="35948" end="35972" title="Midwestern United States" label="Midwestern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q212903" start="35974" end="35988" title="Katabatic wind" label="Katabatic wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q258914" start="36239" end="36247" title="ice core" label="ice core"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="36695" end="36709" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="36841" end="36855" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="36886" end="36900" title="Climate change" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430548" start="36945" end="36952" title="Effects of climate change" label="changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q493109" start="36960" end="36970" title="cryosphere" label="cryosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q918004" start="37024" end="37047" title="positive feedback" label="positive feedback loops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310671" start="37079" end="37098" title="ice–albedo feedback" label="ice–albedo feedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q656311" start="37347" end="37379" title="World Glacier Monitoring Service" label="World Glacier Monitoring Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q841083" start="37747" end="37751" title="sea level rise" label="rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q171183" start="37770" end="37774" title="IPCC" label="IPCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161410" start="38512" end="38532" title="post-glacial rebound" label="post-glacial rebound"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="38656" end="38667" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="38676" end="38687" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="39200" end="39204" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q131800" start="39622" end="39633" title="Sublimation (phase transition)" label="sublimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q106080" start="39639" end="39646" title="melting" label="melting"/>
<link wikidata="Q183160" start="39766" end="39793" title="Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter" label="Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663562" start="39853" end="39872" title="lobate debris apron" label="lobate debris apron"/>
<link wikidata="Q48461" start="39901" end="39913" title="New Horizons" label="New Horizons"/>
<link wikidata="Q339" start="39932" end="39937" title="Pluto" label="Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604" start="39938" end="39944" title="Charon (moon)" label="Charon"/>
<link wikidata="Q58066183" start="41066" end="41077" title="Twila Moon" label="Moon, Twila"/>
<link wikidata="Q17076803" start="41273" end="41299" title="Global Environment Outlook" label="Global Environment Outlook"/>
<link wikidata="Q17076803" start="41334" end="41360" title="Global Environment Outlook" label="Global Environment Outlook"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41631" end="41656" title="California Legacy Project" label="California Legacy Project"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12464" wikidata="Q1134288" url="?curid=12464" title="Gylfaginning">
<text>Gylfaginning (Old Norse: &#x27;The Beguiling of Gylfi&#x27; or &#x27;The Deluding of Gylfi&#x27;; ) is the first main part of the 13th century &quot;Prose Edda&quot;, after the initial Prologue. The &quot;Gylfaginning&quot; takes the form of a dialogue between a Swedish King Gylfi and three men on thrones in Asgard called High, Just-As-High, and Third. Gylfi asks many questions of the three men on the history and future of the Æsir. The creation and eventual destruction of the world are described, as are many other aspects of Norse mythology. While the Gylfaginning never makes it explicit, the three are often presumed to be guises of Odin.

The second part of the &quot;Prose Edda&quot; is the &quot;Skáldskaparmál&quot; and the third &quot;Háttatal&quot;. The work is often attributed to or considered to have been compiled by Snorri Sturluson.

== Summary ==
The &quot;Gylfaginning&quot; tells the story of Gylfi, a king of &quot;the land that men now call Sweden&quot;. He is tricked by one of the goddesses of the Æsir, and wonders if all Æsir use magic and tricks for their will to be done. To find out more, he takes the &quot;path of the serpent&quot; to journey to Asgard; the Æsir realize he is coming and prepare illusions to deceive him. Gylfi finds a great palace. Inside the palace, he encounters a man who asks Gylfi&#x27;s name; Gylfi introduces himself as Gangleri. &quot;Gangleri&quot; then is taken to the king of the palace and comes upon three men on thrones: High, Just-As-High, and Third (Hár, Jafnhár, and Þriði).

Gangleri is then challenged to show his wisdom by asking questions, as is the custom in many sagas. Each question made to High, Just-As-High, and Third is about an aspect of the Norse mythology or its gods, and also about the creation and destruction of the world (Ragnarök). In the end, the palace and its people vanish, presumably as they were illusions to begin with. Gylfi is left standing on empty ground. Gylfi then returns to his nation and retells the tales he was told. 

The author may have used this narrative device as a means to safely document a vanishing and largely oral tradition within a Christian context. In the same way, a line continues the idea raised in the Prologue that Asgard is another name for the city of Troy, another way to make stories of the Norse gods acceptable as describing a lost ancient history rather than rival deities to the Christian god. The account can be downplayed as just stories for the devout, but Sturlson trusts that most listeners would be won over by the account of the three men of the vanished world of the Æsir. The very final section of the &quot;Gylfaginning&quot; is also related to the Trojan connection to the Æsir, but is discarded as a later addition written by a separate author than the rest of the work by some scholars. According to this final section, the human descendants of the Trojans took on the same names told in the stories that had been told to Gylfi, presumably to endow themselves with additional authority.

The work as a whole is around 20,000 words.

== References ==
=== Bibliography ===
* 

==External links==
* , 1916 translation by Arthur Gilchrist Brodeur
* Guðni Jónsson (ed.), &quot;Eddukvaeði&quot;, Íslendingasagnaútgáfan (1954) (heimskringla.no), Old Norse edition
* Text of all original manuscripts
* The text with modern Icelandic spelling</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="14" end="23" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q205882" start="149" end="159" title="Prose Edda" label="Prose Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428205" start="185" end="193" title="Prologue (Prose Edda)" label="Prologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296321" start="276" end="281" title="Gylfi" label="Gylfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q421981" start="324" end="353" title="High, Just-As-High, and Third" label="High, Just-As-High, and Third"/>
<link wikidata="Q170358" start="431" end="435" title="Æsir" label="Æsir"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="532" end="547" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="642" end="646" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q178075" start="708" end="722" title="Skáldskaparmál" label="Skáldskaparmál"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634576" start="749" end="757" title="Háttatal" label="Háttatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="836" end="852" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296321" start="917" end="922" title="Gylfi" label="Gylfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q170358" start="1026" end="1030" title="Æsir" label="Æsir"/>
<link wikidata="Q178182" start="1181" end="1187" title="Asgard" label="Asgard"/>
<link wikidata="Q421981" start="1488" end="1517" title="High, Just-As-High, and Third" label="High, Just-As-High, and Third"/>
<link wikidata="Q180494" start="1639" end="1643" title="saga" label="saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q170148" start="1811" end="1819" title="Ragnarök" label="Ragnarök"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="2281" end="2285" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798817" start="3166" end="3190" title="Arthur Gilchrist Brodeur" label="Arthur Gilchrist Brodeur"/>
<link wikidata="Q13526981" start="3193" end="3206" title="Guðni Jónsson" label="Guðni Jónsson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12466" wikidata="Q189508" url="?curid=12466" title="Glorious Revolution">
<text>The Glorious Revolution, also known as The Revolution of 1688, was the deposition of James II and VII in November 1688. He was replaced by his daughter Mary II and her Dutch husband, William III of Orange, a nephew of James who thereby had an interest to the throne irrespective of his marriage to Mary, his first cousin. The two ruled as joint monarchs of England, Scotland, and Ireland until Mary&#x27;s death in 1694, when William became ruler in his own right. Jacobitism, the political movement that aimed to restore the exiled James or his descendants in the House of Stuart to the throne, persisted into the late 18th century. William&#x27;s invasion was the last successful invasion of England. 

Despite his own Catholicism, usually an impediment to Protestant support, James became king in February 1685 with widespread backing from the Protestant majorities in England and Scotland, as well as largely Catholic Ireland. However, his policies quickly eroded support, and by June 1688, dissatisfaction turned into active, yet largely unarmed, resistance. The prospect of a Catholic dynasty following the birth of his son James Francis Edward on 10 June led a group of domestic opponents to issue the Invitation to William, seeking Dutch support to remove him.

The Dutch States General and William were concerned that James might support Louis XIV of France in the Nine Years&#x27; War. Exploiting unrest in England and claiming to be responding to the invitation, William landed in Devon with an expeditionary force on 5 November 1688. As William advanced on London, James&#x27;s army disintegrated and he went into exile in France on 23 December. In April 1689, while Dutch troops occupied London, Parliament made William and Mary joint monarchs of England and Ireland. A separate but similar Scottish settlement was made in June.

Domestically, the Revolution confirmed the primacy of Parliament over the Crown in both England and Scotland. In terms of external policy, until his death in 1702, William combined the roles of Dutch stadtholder and British monarch. Both states thus became allies in resisting French expansion, an alliance which persisted for much of the 18th century, despite differing objectives. Under William&#x27;s leadership, Dutch resources were focused on the land war with France, with the Royal Navy taking the lead at sea. This was a significant factor in the Dutch Republic being overtaken as the leading European maritime power by Britain during the War of the Spanish Succession.

==Background==
Despite his Catholicism, James became king in 1685 with widespread backing in all three of his kingdoms. In June 1685, he quickly crushed Protestant risings in Scotland and England, but was forced into exile less than four years later. Modern historians argue James failed to appreciate how much Royal power relied on support from the landed gentry, and the loss of that support fatally damaged his regime. The vast majority of the gentry in England and Scotland were Protestant, while even in largely Catholic Ireland a disproportionate number were members of the Protestant Church of Ireland. Although willing to accept James&#x27;s personal religious beliefs, his backers did so only so long as he maintained the primacy of the Protestant Church of England and Church of Scotland. When his policies appeared to undermine the existing political and religious order, the result was to alienate his English and Scottish supporters and destabilise Ireland.

Stuart political ideology derived from James VI and I, who in 1603 had created a vision of a centralised state, run by a monarch whose authority came from God, and where the function of Parliament was simply to obey. Disputes over the relationship between king and Parliament led to the War of the Three Kingdoms and continued after the 1660 Stuart Restoration. Charles II came to rely on the Royal Prerogative since measures passed in this way could be withdrawn when he decided, rather than Parliament. However, it could not be used for major legislation or taxation.

Concern that Charles II intended to create an absolute monarchy led to the 1679 to 1681 Exclusion Crisis, dividing the English political class into those who wanted to &#x27;exclude&#x27; James from the throne, mostly Whigs, and their opponents, mostly Tories. However, in 1685 many Whigs feared the consequences of bypassing the &#x27;natural heir&#x27;, while Tories were often strongly anti-Catholic, and their support assumed the continued primacy of the Church of England. Most importantly, it was seen as a short-term issue; James was 52, his marriage to Mary of Modena remained childless after 11 years, and the heirs were his Protestant daughters, Mary and Anne.

There was much greater sympathy in Scotland for a &#x27;Stuart heir&#x27;, and the 1681 Succession Act confirmed the duty of all to support him, &#x27;regardless of religion.&#x27; Over 95 percent of Scots belonged to the national church or kirk; even other Protestant sects were banned, and by 1680, Catholics were a tiny minority confined to parts of the aristocracy and the remote Highlands. Episcopalians had regained control of the kirk in 1660, leading to a series of Presbyterian uprisings, but memories of the bitter religious conflicts of the Civil War period meant the majority preferred stability.

In England and Scotland, most of those who backed James in 1685 wanted to retain existing political and religious arrangements, but this was not the case in Ireland. While he was guaranteed support from the Catholic majority, James was also popular among Irish Protestants, since the Church of Ireland depended on Royal support for its survival, while Ulster was dominated by Presbyterians who supported his tolerance policies. However, religion was only one factor; of equal concern for Catholics were laws barring them from serving in the military or holding public office, and land reform. In 1600, 90% of Irish land was owned by Catholics but following a series of confiscations during the 17th century, this had dropped to 22% in 1685. Catholic and Protestant merchants in Dublin and elsewhere objected to commercial restrictions placing them at a disadvantage to their English competitors.

===The political background in England===
While James&#x27;s supporters viewed hereditary succession as more important than his personal Catholicism, they opposed his policies of &#x27;Tolerance&#x27; under which Catholics would be allowed to hold public office and engage in public life. Opposition was led by devout Anglicans who argued that the measures he proposed were incompatible with the oath he had sworn as king to uphold the supremacy of the Church of England. According to opponents, demanding that Parliament approve his measures James was not only to be breaking his own word but requiring others to do the same. Parliament refused to comply, despite being &quot;the most Loyal Parliament a Stuart ever had&quot;.

Although historians generally accept James wished to promote Catholicism, not establish an absolute monarchy, his stubborn and inflexible reaction to opposition had the same result. When the English and Scottish Parliaments refused to repeal the 1678 and 1681 Test Acts, he suspended them in November 1685 and ruled by decree. Attempts to form a &#x27;King&#x27;s party&#x27; of Catholics, English Dissenters and dissident Scottish Presbyterians was politically short-sighted, since it rewarded those who joined the 1685 rebellions and undermined his supporters.

Demanding tolerance for Catholics was also badly timed. In October 1685 Louis XIV of France issued the Edict of Fontainebleau revoking the 1598 Edict of Nantes which had given French Protestants the right to practise their religion; over the next four years, an estimated 200,000 to 400,000 went into exile, 40,000 of whom settled in London. Combined with Louis&#x27;s expansionist policies and the killing of 2,000 Vaudois Protestants in 1686, it led to fears Protestant Europe was threatened by a Catholic counter-reformation. These concerns were reinforced by events in Ireland; the Lord Deputy, the Earl of Tyrconnell, wanted to create a Catholic establishment able to survive James&#x27;s death, which meant replacing Protestant officials at a pace that was inherently destabilising.

===Timeline of events: 1686 to 1688===
The majority of those who backed James in 1685 did so because they wanted stability and the rule of law, qualities frequently undermined by his actions. After suspending Parliament in November 1685, he sought to rule by decree; although the principle was not disputed, the widening of its scope caused considerable concern, particularly when judges who disagreed with its application were dismissed. He then alienated many by perceived attacks on the established church; Henry Compton, Bishop of London, was suspended for refusing to ban John Sharp from preaching after he gave an anti-Catholic sermon.

He often made things worse by political clumsiness; to general fury, the Ecclesiastical Commission of 1686 established to discipline the Church of England included suspected Catholics like the Earl of Huntingdon. This was combined with an inability to accept opposition; in April 1687, he ordered Magdalen College, Oxford, to elect a Catholic sympathiser named Anthony Farmer as president, but as he was ineligible under the college statutes, the fellows elected John Hough instead. Both Farmer and Hough withdrew in favour of another candidate selected by James, who then demanded the fellows personally apologise on their knees for &#x27;defying&#x27; him; when they refused, they were replaced by Catholics.

Attempts to create an alternative &#x27;Kings Party&#x27; were never likely to succeed, as English Catholics made up only 1.1% of the population and Nonconformists 4.4%. Both groups were divided; since private worship was generally tolerated, Catholic moderates feared greater visibility would provoke a backlash. Among Nonconformists, while Quakers and Congregationalists supported repeal of the Test Acts, the majority wanted to amend the 1662 Act of Uniformity and be allowed back into the Church of England. When James ensured the election of the Presbyterian John Shorter as Lord Mayor of London in 1687, he insisted on complying with the Test Act, reportedly because of a &#x27;distrust of the King&#x27;s favour...thus encouraging that which His Majesties whole Endeavours were intended to disannull.&#x27;

To ensure a compliant Parliament, James required potential MPs to be approved by their local Lord Lieutenant; eligibility for both offices required positive answers in writing to the &#x27;Three Questions&#x27;, one being a commitment to repeal of the Test Act. In addition, local government and town corporations were purged to create an obedient electoral machine, further alienating the county gentry who had formed the majority of those who backed James in 1685. On 24 August 1688, writs were issued for a general election.

The expansion of the military caused great concern, particularly in England and Scotland, where memories of the Civil War left huge resistance to standing armies. In Ireland, Talbot replaced Protestant officers with Catholics; James did the same in England, while basing the troops at Hounslow appeared a deliberate attempt to overawe Parliament. In April 1688, he ordered his Declaration of Indulgence read in every church; when the Archbishop of Canterbury and six other bishops refused, they were charged with seditious libel and confined in the Tower of London. Two events turned dissent into a crisis; the birth of James Francis Edward Stuart on 10 June created the prospect of a Catholic dynasty, while the acquittal of the Seven Bishops on 30 June destroyed James&#x27;s political authority.

==Dutch intervention==

===Prelude: 1685 to June 1688===
In 1677, James&#x27;s elder daughter and heir Mary married her Protestant cousin William III of Orange, stadtholder of the main provinces of the Dutch Republic. The two initially shared common objectives in wanting Mary to succeed her father, while French ambitions in the Spanish Netherlands threatened both English and Dutch trade. Although William sent James troops to help suppress the 1685 Monmouth Rebellion, their relationship deteriorated thereafter.

The Franco-Dutch War, continued French expansion, and expulsion of the Huguenots meant William assumed another war was inevitable, and although the States General of the Netherlands preferred peace, the majority accepted he was correct. This view was widely shared throughout Protestant Europe; in October 1685, Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburg renounced his French alliance for one with the Dutch. In July 1686, other Protestant states formed the anti-French League of Augsburg, with Dutch support; securing or neutralising English resources, especially the Royal Navy, now became key to both sides.

Following a skirmish between French and Dutch naval vessels in July 1686, William concluded English neutrality was not enough and he needed their active support in the event of war. His relationship with James was affected by the fact both men relied on advisors with relatively limited views; in William&#x27;s case, mainly English and Scots Presbyterian exiles, the latter with close links to the Protestant minority in Ireland, who saw Tyrconnell&#x27;s policies as a threat to their existence. Having largely alienated his Tory support base, James depended on a small circle of Catholic converts like Sunderland, Melfort and Perth.

Suspicions increased when James sought William&#x27;s backing for repealing the Test Acts; he predictably refused, further damaging their relationship. Having previously assumed he was guaranteed English support in a war with France, William now worried he might face an Anglo-French alliance like during the &quot;Rampjaar&quot;, despite assurances by James he had no intention of doing so. Historians argue whether these assurances were genuine, but James did not fully appreciate the distrust caused by his domestic policies. In August 1687, William&#x27;s cousin de Zuylestein travelled to England with condolences on the death of Mary of Modena&#x27;s mother, allowing him to make contact with the political opposition. Throughout 1688, his English supporters provided William detailed information on public opinion and developments, very little of which was intercepted.

In October 1687, after fourteen years of marriage and multiple miscarriages, it was announced the Queen was pregnant, Melfort immediately declaring it was a boy. When James then wrote to Mary urging her to convert to Catholicism, it convinced many he was seeking a Catholic heir, one way or the other and may have been a deciding factor in whether to invade. Early in 1688, a pamphlet circulated in England written by Dutch Grand Pensionary Gaspar Fagel; this guaranteed William&#x27;s support for freedom of worship for Dissenters &quot;and&quot; retaining the Test Acts, unlike James who offered tolerance in return for repeal.

In April 1688, Louis XIV announced tariffs on Dutch herring imports, along with plans to support the Royal Navy in the English Channel. James immediately denied making any such request, but fearing it was the prelude to a formal alliance, the Dutch began preparing a military intervention. On the pretext of needing additional resources to deal with French privateers, in July the States General authorised an additional 9,000 sailors and 21 new warships.

===Invitation to William===
The success of William&#x27;s invasion would partly depend on domestic support, and at the end of April William met with Edward Russell, unofficial envoy for the Whig opposition. In a conversation recorded by Gilbert Burnet, he requested a formal invitation asking him to &quot;rescue the nation and the religion&quot;, with a projected date of end September. William subsequently claimed he was &#x27;forced&#x27; to take control of the conspiracy when Russell warned him the English would rise against James even without his help, and he feared this would lead to a republic, depriving his wife of her inheritance.

Although this version is strongly disputed, Zuylestein returned to England in June, ostensibly to congratulate James on his new son, in reality to co-ordinate with William&#x27;s supporters. Spurred by the prospect of a Catholic successor, the &quot;Invitation to William&quot; was quickly drafted by Henry Sydney, later described by Whig historians as &quot;the great wheel on which the Revolution rolled&quot;. The signatories provided no considerable political power, but they were selected to make it seem like they represented a broad spectrum, and provided William with an essential propaganda tool. Danby, a Tory, and Devonshire, a Whig; Henry Compton, Bishop of London, for the church; Shrewsbury and Lumley for the army, and finally Russell and Sydney for the navy. They promised to support a Dutch landing, but stressed the importance of acting quickly.

The Invitation was carried to The Hague on 30 June by Rear Admiral Herbert, disguised as a common sailor. Meanwhile, William&#x27;s ally Bentinck launched a propaganda campaign in England, which presented him as a &quot;true Stuart&quot;, but one without the faults of either James or Charles II. Much of the &quot;spontaneous&quot; support for William on his landing was organised by Bentinck and his agents.

==Dutch preparations: July to September 1688==
William&#x27;s key strategic purpose was creating a defensive coalition that would block further French expansion in Europe, an objective not shared by the majority of his English supporters. In 1672, an alliance with the Electorate of Cologne had enabled France to bypass Dutch forward defences and nearly over-run the Republic, so ensuring an anti-French ruler was vital to prevent a repetition. As an ecclesiastical principality of the Holy Roman Empire, Cologne&#x27;s ruler was nominated by Pope Innocent XI, in conjunction with Emperor Leopold I. Both Louis and James were in dispute with Innocent over the right to appoint Catholic bishops and clergy; when the old Elector died in June 1688, Innocent and Leopold ignored the French candidate in favour of Joseph Clemens of Bavaria.

After 1678, France continued its expansion into the Rhineland, including the 1683 to 1684 War of the Reunions, additional territorial demands in the Palatinate, and construction of forts at Landau and Traben-Trarbach. This presented an existential threat to Habsburg dominance, guaranteeing Leopold&#x27;s support for the Dutch, and negating French attempts to build German alliances. William&#x27;s envoy Johann von Görtz assured Leopold English Catholics would not be persecuted and intervention was to elect a free Parliament, not depose James, a convenient fiction that allowed him to remain neutral.

Although his English supporters considered a token force sufficient, William assembled 260 transport ships and 15,000 men, nearly half the 30,000 strong Dutch States Army. With France on the verge of war, their absence was of great concern to the States General and Bentinck hired 13,616 German mercenaries to man Dutch border fortresses, freeing elite units like the Scots Brigade for use in England. The increase could be presented as a limited precaution against French aggression, as the Dutch would typically double or triple their army strength in wartime; William instructed his experienced deputy Schomberg to prepare for a campaign in Germany.

==Decision to invade==
At the beginning of September, an invasion remained in the balance, with the States General fearing a French attack via Flanders while their army was in England. However, the surrender of Belgrade on 6 September seemed to presage an Ottoman collapse and release Austrian resources for use in Germany. Hoping to act before Leopold could respond and relieve pressure on the Ottomans, Louis attacked Philippsburg. With France now committed in Germany, this greatly reduced the threat to the Dutch.

Instead, Louis attempted to intimidate the States General, and on 9 September, his envoy D&#x27;Avaux handed them two letters. The first warned an attack on James meant war with France, the second any interference with French operations in Germany would end with the destruction of the Dutch state. Both misfired; convinced Louis was trying to drag him into war, James told the Dutch there was no secret Anglo-French alliance against them, although his denials only increased their suspicions. By confirming France&#x27;s primary objective was the Rhineland, the second allowed William to move troops from the eastern border to the coast, even though most of the new mercenaries had yet to arrive.

On 22 September, the French seized over 100 Dutch ships, many owned by Amsterdam merchants; in response, on 26 September the Amsterdam City Council agreed to back William. This was a significant decision since the Council dominated the States of Holland, the most powerful political body in the Dutch Republic which contributed nearly 60% of its budget. French troops entered the Rhineland on 27 September and in a secret session held on 29th, William argued for a pre-emptive strike, as Louis and James would &quot;attempt to bring this state to its ultimate ruin and subjugation, as soon as they find the occasion&quot;. This was accepted by the States, with the objective left deliberately vague, other than making the English &quot;King and Nation live in a good relation, and useful to their friends and allies, and especially to this State&quot;.

Following their approval, the Amsterdam financial market raised a loan of four million guilders in only three days, with further financing coming from various sources, including two million guilders from the banker Francisco Lopes Suasso. The biggest concern for Holland was the potential impact on the Dutch economy and politics of William becoming ruler of England; the claim he had no intention of &quot;removing the King from the throne&quot; was not believed. These fears were arguably justified; William&#x27;s access to English resources permanently diminished Amsterdam&#x27;s power within the Republic and its status as the world&#x27;s leading commercial and financial centre.

==English defensive strategy==
Neither James nor Sunderland trusted Louis, correctly suspecting that his support would continue only so long as it coincided with French interests, while Mary of Modena claimed his warnings were simply an attempt to drag England into an unwanted alliance. As a former naval commander, James appreciated the difficulties of a successful invasion, even in good weather, and as autumn approached, the likelihood seemed to diminish. With the Dutch on the verge of war with France, he did not believe the States General would allow William to make the attempt; if they did, his army and navy were strong enough to defeat it.

Reasonable in theory, his reliance on the loyalty and efficiency of the military proved deeply flawed. Both the army and the navy remained overwhelmingly Protestant and anti-Catholic; in July, only personal intervention by James prevented a naval mutiny when a Catholic captain held Mass on his ship. The transfer of 2,500 Catholics from the Royal Irish Army to England in September led to clashes with Protestant troops, some of his most reliable units refused to obey orders, and many of their officers resigned.

When James demanded the repatriation of all six regiments of the Scots Brigade in January 1688, William refused but used the opportunity to purge those considered unreliable, a total of 104 officers and 44 soldiers. Some may have been Williamite agents, such as Colonel Belasyse, a Protestant with over 15 years of service who returned to his family estates in Yorkshire and made contact with Danby. The promotion of Catholic former Brigade officers like Thomas Buchan and Alexander Cannon to command positions led to the formation of the Association of Protestant Officers, which included senior veterans like Charles Trelawny, John Churchill, and Percy Kirke.

On 14 August, Churchill offered his support to William, helping convince him it was safe to risk an invasion; although James was aware of the conspiracy, he took no action. One reason may have been fears over the impact on the army; with a notional strength of 34,000, it looked impressive on paper but morale was brittle while many were untrained or lacked weapons. It also had to fill policing roles previously delegated to the militia, which had been deliberately allowed to decay; most of the 4,000 regular troops brought from Scotland in October had to be stationed in London to keep order. In October, attempts were made to restore the militia but many members were reportedly so angry at the changes made to local corporations, James was advised it was better not to raise them.

Widespread discontent and growing hostility to the Stuart regime were particularly apparent in North-East and South-West England, the two landing places identified by William. A Tory whose brother Jonathan was one of the Seven Bishops, Trelawny&#x27;s commitment confirmed support from a powerful and well-connected West Country bloc, allowing access to the ports of Plymouth and Torbay. In the north, a force organised by Belasyse and Danby prepared to seize York, its most important city, and Hull, its largest port.

Herbert had been replaced by Dartmouth as commander of the fleet when he defected in June but many captains owed him their appointments and were of doubtful loyalty. Dartmouth suspected Berkeley and Grafton of plotting to overthrow him; to monitor them, he placed their ships next to his and minimised contact between the other vessels to prevent conspiracy. A lack of funds meant that excluding fireships and light scouting vessels, only 16 warships were available in early October, all third rates or fourth rates that were short of both men and supplies.

While the Downs was the best place to intercept a cross-Channel attack, it was also vulnerable to a surprise assault, even for ships fully manned and adequately provisioned. Instead, James placed his ships in a strong defensive position near Chatham Dockyard, believing the Dutch would seek to establish naval superiority before committing to a landing. While this had been the original plan, winter storms meant conditions deteriorated rapidly for those on the transports; William therefore decided to sail in convoy and avoid battle. The easterly winds that allowed the Dutch to cross prevented the Royal Navy leaving the Thames estuary and intervening.

The English fleet was outnumbered 2:1, undermanned, short of supplies, and in the wrong place. Key landing locations in the south-west and Yorkshire had been secured by sympathisers, while both army and navy were led by officers whose loyalty was questionable. Even early in 1686, foreign observers doubted the military would fight for James against a Protestant heir, and William claimed only to be securing the inheritance of his wife Mary. While still a dangerous undertaking, the invasion was less risky than it seemed.

==Invasion==
===Embarkation of the army and the Declaration of The Hague===
The Dutch preparations, though carried out with great speed, could not remain secret. The English envoy Ignatius White, the Marquess d&#x27;Albeville, warned his country: &quot;an absolute conquest is intended under the specious and ordinary pretences of religion, liberty, property and a free Parliament&quot;. Louis threatened an immediate declaration of war if William proceeded and sent James 300,000 livres.

Embarkations, begun on 22 September (Gregorian calendar), had been completed on 8 October, and the expedition was that day openly approved by the States of Holland; the same day James issued a proclamation to the English nation that it should prepare for a Dutch invasion to ward off conquest. On 30 September/10 October (Julian/Gregorian calendars) William issued the &quot;Declaration of The Hague&quot; (actually written by Fagel), of which 60,000 copies of the English translation by Gilbert Burnet were distributed after the landing in England, in which he assured that his only aim was to maintain the Protestant religion, install a free parliament and investigate the legitimacy of the Prince of Wales. He would respect the position of James.

William went on to condemn James&#x27;s advisers for overturning the religion, laws, and liberties of England, Scotland, and Ireland by the use of the suspending and dispensing power; the establishment of the &quot;manifestly illegal&quot; commission for ecclesiastical causes and its use to suspend the Bishop of London and to remove the Fellows of Magdalen College, Oxford. William also condemned James&#x27;s attempt to repeal the Test Acts and the penal laws through pressuring individuals and waging an assault on parliamentary boroughs, as well as his purging of the judiciary. James&#x27;s attempt to pack Parliament was in danger of removing &quot;the last and great remedy for all those evils&quot;.

&quot;Therefore&quot;, William continued, &quot;we have thought fit to go over to England, and to carry over with us a force sufficient, by the blessing of God, to defend us from the violence of those evil Counsellors ... this our Expedition is intended for no other design, but to have, a free and lawful Parliament assembled as soon as is possible&quot;. On 4/14 October, William responded to the allegations by James in a second declaration, denying any intention to become king or to conquer England, a claim which remains controversial.

The swiftness of the embarkations surprised all foreign observers. Louis had in fact delayed his threats against the Dutch until early September because he assumed it then would be too late in the season to set the expedition in motion anyway, if their reaction proved negative; typically, such an enterprise would take at least some months. Being ready after the last week of September / first week of October would normally have meant that the Dutch could have profited from the last spell of good weather, as the autumn storms tend to begin in the third week of that month. However, this year they came early. For three weeks, the invasion fleet was prevented by adverse south-westerly gales from departing from the naval port of Hellevoetsluis and Catholics all over the Netherlands and the British kingdoms held prayer sessions that this &quot;popish wind&quot; might endure. However, on 14/24 October, it became the famous &quot;Protestant Wind&quot; by turning to the east.

===Crossing and landing===
Although most of the warships were provided by the Admiralty of Amsterdam, officially the States General treated the operation as a private affair, allowing William use of the Dutch States Navy and army. The nominal commander was Arthur Herbert, but operational control remained with Lieutenant-Admiral Cornelis Evertsen the Youngest and Vice-Admiral Philips van Almonde. Accompanied by Willem Bastiaensz Schepers, the Rotterdam shipping magnate who provided financing, William boarded the frigate &quot;Den Briel&quot; on 16/26 October. 

With over 400 ships of various types carrying 40,000 men, the expeditionary force was the largest fleet assembled in European waters up to that date. After departing on 19/29 October, the fleet was scattered by a gale, forcing the &quot;Brill&quot; back to Hellevoetsluis on 21/31 October. William refused to go ashore, and the fleet reassembled, having lost only one ship but nearly a thousand horses; press reports deliberately exaggerated the damage and claimed the expedition might be postponed until next spring. 

Dartmouth and his senior commanders considered taking advantage of this by blockading Hellevoetsluis, then decided against it, partly because the stormy weather made it dangerous but also because they could not rely on their men. William replaced his losses and departed when the wind changed on 1/11 November, this time heading for Harwich where Bentinck had prepared a landing site. It has been suggested this was a feint to divert some of Dartmouth&#x27;s ships north, which proved to be the case and when the wind shifted again, the Dutch armada sailed south into the Strait of Dover. In doing so, they twice passed the English fleet, which was unable to intercept because of the adverse winds and tides.

With the French fleet absent in the Mediterranean, on 3/13 November, the fleet entered the English Channel in a formation 25 ships deep. Intended to awe observers with its size and power, the troops were lined up on deck, firing musket volleys, colours flying and military bands playing. The same wind blowing the Dutch down the Channel trapped Dartmouth in the Thames estuary, leaving him unable to prevent William reaching Torbay on 5 November. 

Bad weather obliged Dartmouth to anchor in Portsmouth for two days, allowing William to complete his disembarkation undisturbed. Most estimates suggest his force consisted of around 15,000 regular troops, plus up to 5,000 volunteers, mostly British exiles and French Huguenots. He also brought weapons to equip another 20,000 men, although the subsequent collapse of James&#x27;s army meant most local volunteers were quickly sent home.

==The collapse of James&#x27;s rule==
James had considered himself safe from invasion, due to the French threat to the Spanish Netherlands, his navy and because it was late in the year for launching an expedition. He now panicked and met with the bishops on 28 September, offering them concessions. They responded five days later with demands that he restore the religious position to that prevailing in February 1685, and hold free elections for a new Parliament. Although they hoped this would allow James to remain king, in reality there was little chance of this. At a minimum, he would have to disinherit his son, enforce the Test Acts, and accept the supremacy of Parliament, all of which were unacceptable. In addition, by now his Whig opponents did not trust him to keep his promises, while Tories like Danby were too committed to William to escape punishment.

Although his veterans were superior to the largely untested recruits of the Royal Army, William and his English supporters preferred to avoid bloodshed. Torbay was sufficiently far from London to provide time for the regime to collapse on its own, while to avoid alienating the local population, his troops were well supplied and paid three months in advance. On 9 November, he entered Exeter and issued a proclamation claiming he sought only to secure the rights of his wife and a free Parliament. Despite this, there was little enthusiasm for either party, and the general mood was one of confusion and distrust. In Northern England, much of the gentry confirmed their backing for the invasion after Danby had the &quot;Declaration&quot; read out in York on 12 November.

On 19 November, James joined his main force of 19,000 at Salisbury, but morale was low and the loyalty of some commanders doubtful, with a number of officers defecting to William between 10 and 20 November. Although the numbers were relatively small, the defections badly impacted morale, while the Royal Army was short of both food and ammunition. On 20 November, Royal dragoons clashed with Williamite scouts at Wincanton, but along with a minor skirmish at Reading on 9 December, these were the only substantial military actions of the campaign. After securing his rear by taking Plymouth on 18 November, William began his advance on 21 November, while Danby and Belasyse captured York and Hull several days later.

His commander Feversham and other senior officers advised James to retreat. Lacking information on William&#x27;s movements, suspicious of his own soldiers, worn out by lack of sleep and debilitating nose-bleeds, on 23 November James agreed. Because of its strategic implications, the withdrawal was a practical admission of defeat. On 24 November, Churchill, Grafton and Princess Anne&#x27;s husband George deserted to William, followed by Anne herself on 26 November. The next day, James met with those peers still in London, and with the exception of Melfort, Perth and other Catholics, they urged him to announce free Parliamentary elections and negotiate with William.

On 8 December, Halifax, Nottingham and Godolphin met with William at Hungerford to hear his demands, which included the dismissal of Catholics from public office and funding for his army. Many viewed these as a reasonable basis for a settlement, but James decided to flee the country, convinced his life was threatened. This suggestion is generally dismissed by historians, since William made it clear he would not allow his uncle to be harmed. Some Tories hoped James could retain his throne but name a Protestant successor, while the Whigs preferred to drive him out of the country by imposing conditions he would refuse.

The Queen and Prince of Wales left for France on 9 December, James following separately on 10 December. Accompanied only by Edward Hales and Ralph Sheldon, he made his way to Faversham in Kent seeking passage to France, first dropping the Great Seal in the River Thames in a last-ditch attempt to prevent Parliament being summoned. In London, his flight and rumours of a &quot;Papist&quot; invasion led to riots and destruction of Catholic property, which quickly spread throughout the country. To fill the power vacuum, the Earl of Rochester set up a temporary government including members of the Privy Council and City of London authorities, but it took them two days to restore order.

When news arrived, James had been captured in Faversham on 11 December by local fishermen, Lord Ailesbury, one of his personal attendants, was sent to escort him back to London. On entering the city on 16 December, he was welcomed by cheering crowds. By making it seem that James remained in control, Tory loyalists hoped for a settlement which would leave them in government. To create an appearance of normality, he heard Mass and presided over a meeting of the Privy Council. James made it clear to the French ambassador Paul Barillon that he still intended to escape to France. His few remaining supporters viewed his flight as cowardice, and a failure to ensure law and order criminally negligent.

Happy to help him into exile, William recommended he relocate to Ham, largely because it was easy to escape from. James suggested Rochester instead, allegedly because his personal guard was there, in reality conveniently positioned for a ship to France. On 18 December, he left London with a Dutch escort as William entered, cheered by the same crowds who greeted his predecessor two days before. William occupied London and now effectively controlled the English government and the country&#x27;s army, navy, and finances. On 22 December, Berwick arrived in Rochester with blank passports allowing them to leave England, while his guards were instructed not to impede his escape. Although Ailesbury and others begged him to stay, James left for France on 23 December.

==The revolutionary settlement==

James&#x27; departure enabled William to take control of the provisional government on 28 December. Elections were held in early January for a Convention Parliament, which assembled on 22 January. While the Whigs had a slight majority in the Commons, the Lords was dominated by the Tories, but both were led by moderates. Even Stuart loyalists like Archbishop Sancroft recognised keeping James on the throne was no longer possible. Instead, they argued his daughter Mary should either be appointed regent, or sole monarch.

The issue was debated for next two weeks, much to the annoyance of William, who needed a swift resolution. The situation in Ireland was rapidly deteriorating, while the French had over-run large parts of the Rhineland and were preparing to attack the Dutch. At a meeting with Danby and Halifax on 3 February, he declared he would return home if the Convention did not appoint him joint monarch, while Mary stated she would only rule jointly with her husband. Faced with this ultimatum, on 6 February Parliament declared that in choosing exile, James had abdicated and thus vacated the Crown, which was therefore offered jointly to William and Mary.

Historian Tim Harris argues the most radical act of the 1688 Revolution was the idea of a &quot;contract&quot; between ruler and people, rebutting the Stuart ideology of divine right. While this was a victory for the Whigs, other pieces of legislation were proposed by the Tories, often with moderate Whig support, designed to protect the Anglican establishment from being undermined by future monarchs, including the Calvinist William. The Declaration of Right was a tactical compromise, setting out where James had failed, and establishing the rights of English citizens, without agreeing their cause or offering solutions. In December 1689, this was incorporated into the Bill of Rights.

However, there were two areas that arguably broke new constitutional ground, both responses to what were viewed as specific abuses by James. First, the Declaration of Right made keeping a standing army without parliamentary consent illegal, overturning the 1661 and 1662 Militia Acts and vesting control of the military in Parliament, not the Crown. The second was the Coronation Oath Act 1688; the result of James&#x27;s perceived failure to comply with that taken in 1685, it established obligations owed by the monarchy to the people.

At their coronation on 11 April, William and Mary swore to &quot;govern the people of this kingdom of England, and the dominions thereunto belonging, according to the statutes in Parliament agreed on, and the laws and customs of the same&quot;. They were also to maintain the Protestant Reformed faith and &quot;preserve inviolable the settlement of the Church of England, and its doctrine, worship, discipline and government as by law established&quot;.

===Scotland===
While Scotland was not involved in the landing, by November 1688 only a tiny minority supported James. Many of those who accompanied William were Scots exiles, including the Earl of Melville, the Duke of Argyll, his personal chaplain William Carstares and Gilbert Burnet. News of James&#x27;s flight led to celebrations and anti-Catholic riots in Edinburgh and Glasgow. Most members of the Scottish Privy Council went to London. On 7 January 1689, they asked William to take over government. Elections were held in March for a Scottish Convention, which was also a contest between Presbyterians and Episcopalians for control of the Kirk. While only 50 of the 125 delegates were classed as Episcopalian, they were hopeful of victory since William supported the retention of bishops.

On 16 March a Letter from James was read out to the convention, demanding obedience and threatening punishment for non-compliance. Public anger at its tone meant some Episcopalians stopped attending the convention, claiming to fear for their safety and others changed sides. The 1689–1691 Jacobite Rising forced William to make concessions to the Presbyterians, ended Episcopacy in Scotland and excluded a significant portion of the political class. Many later returned to the Kirk but Non-Juring Episcopalianism was the key determinant of Jacobite support in 1715 and 1745.

The English Parliament held that James &#x27;abandoned&#x27; his throne. The Convention argued that he &#x27;forfeited&#x27; it by his actions, as listed in the Articles of Grievances. On 11 April, the Convention ended James&#x27;s reign and adopted the Articles of Grievances and the Claim of Right Act, making Parliament the primary legislative power in Scotland. On 11 May, William and Mary accepted the Crown of Scotland; after their acceptance, the &quot;Claim&quot; and the &quot;Articles&quot; were read aloud, leading to an immediate debate over whether or not an endorsement of these documents was implicit in that acceptance.

===Ireland===
After his flight from England in December 1688, James II had been given refuge by Louis XIV, who provided him financial and diplomatic assistance. Accompanied by 6,000 French troops, on 12 March 1689 he landed in Ireland, where he was backed by the majority Catholic population. His supporters were known as &quot;Jacobites&quot;, and the war in Ireland was accompanied by a rising in Scotland; for James, the main objective was to retake England and thus he viewed both Scotland and Ireland as strategic dead ends. On the other hand, Louis saw them as an opportunity to divert British resources from the Low Countries, a difference in aims that was never adequately resolved.

James&#x27; Catholic deputy, the Earl of Tyrconnell, had raised an Army of around 36,000, although many were poorly equipped and it was almost impossible to feed, pay and supply so many. Although they quickly occupied much of Ireland, including largely Protestant Ulster, they were unable to capture the key northern port of Derry and were forced to retreat at the end of July. In August, Williamite general Schomberg landed in Belfast Lough with 15,000 reinforcements, but logistics failures meant his army stalled at Dundalk and suffered heavily from sickness and desertion.

The Scottish Jacobites suffered heavy losses in securing victory at Killiecrankie in July 1689, including their leader Viscount Dundee. By May 1690 the rising had been largely suppressed, although pockets of resistance continued in the Highlands until early 1692. At the same time, William III assumed command of government troops in Ireland and gained an important success at The Battle of the Boyne in July 1690, before victory at Beachy Head gave the French temporary control of the English Channel. James returned to France to urge an immediate invasion of England, but the Anglo-Dutch fleet soon regained maritime supremacy, and the opportunity was lost.

By the end of 1690, French and Jacobite troops were confined to the south and west of Ireland. Although repulsed with heavy losses at Limerick in September, William transferred command to Godert de Ginkel and returned to Flanders. Despite receiving reinforcements and a new general in the Marquis de St Ruth, the Franco-Irish army was defeated at Aughrim on 12 July 1691; the war in Ireland ended with the Treaty of Limerick in October, allowing the bulk of the Williamite forces to be shipped to the Low Countries.

==Anglo-Dutch alliance==
Though he had carefully avoided making it public, William&#x27;s main motive in organising the expedition had been the opportunity to bring England into an alliance against France. On 9 December 1688 he had already asked the States General to send a delegation of three to negotiate the conditions. On 18 February (Julian calendar) he asked the convention to support the Republic in its war against France. It refused, only consenting to pay £600,000 for the continued presence of the 17,000 Dutch troops in England. On 9 March (Gregorian calendar) the States General responded to Louis&#x27;s earlier declaration of war by declaring war on France in return.

Before British forces could effectively take part in the war, the English army had to be reorganised. James&#x27; commander-in-chief Louis de Duras, Earl of Feversham, had disbanded the English army in December 1688 so it had to be effectively rebuilt from scratch. Many officers who had supported James&#x27; removal were unwilling to continue under his successor, while William was reluctant to trust those who had not already served under him. In addition, according to historian Jonathan Scott: &#x27;The state and discipline of the rank and file was ‘deplorable’. There was a dire lack of experience and competence at every level.&#x27; For the purpose of reforming the English army on the Dutch model William appointed Dutch officers to key positions. The English elite also failed to secure the most important governmental posts, while English Secretaries of State primarily served as executors rather than architects of foreign policy. The development of foreign policy was largely directed by William III and Anthonie Heinsius, who assumed the role of Grand Pensionary of Holland following Fagel&#x27;s death in late 1688. This situation caused considerable resentment in England.

On 19 April (Julian calendar) the Dutch delegation signed a naval treaty with England. It stipulated that the combined Anglo-Dutch fleet would always be commanded by an Englishman, even when of lower rank. The Dutch agreed to this to make their dominance over the English army more acceptable for the British. The treaty also specified that the two parties would contribute in the ratio of five English vessels against three Dutch vessels, meaning in practice that the Dutch navy in the future would be smaller than the English. Something that caused considerable unease in the Dutch Republic. The Navigation Acts were not repealed. On 18 May, the new Parliament allowed William to declare war on France. On 9 September 1689, (Gregorian calendar), William as King of England joined the League of Augsburg against France.

===The decline of the Dutch Republic===

Having England as an ally meant that the military situation of the Republic was strongly improved, which allowed William to be uncompromising in his position towards France. The Dutch successfully secured and expanded their positions in the Spanish Netherlands, while halting French territorial expansion, but these military campaigns were very expensive. In 1712, at the end of the War of the Spanish Succession, the Republic was financially exhausted and was forced to let its fleet deteriorate, making what was by then the Kingdom of Great Britain the dominant maritime power of the world.

The Dutch economy, already burdened by the high national debt and concomitant high taxation, suffered from the other European states&#x27; protectionist policies, which its weakened fleet was no longer able to resist. To make matters worse, the main Dutch trading and banking houses moved much of their activity from Amsterdam to London after 1688. Between 1688 and 1720, world trade dominance shifted from the Republic to Great Britain.

==Assessment and historiography==

While the 1688 revolution was labeled &quot;Glorious&quot; by Protestant preachers two decades later, its historiography is complex, and its assessment disputed. Thomas Macaulay&#x27;s account of the Revolution in &quot;The History of England from the Accession of James the Second&quot; exemplifies the &quot;Whig history&quot; narrative of the Revolution as a largely consensual and bloodless triumph of English common sense, confirming and strengthening its institutions of tempered popular liberty and limited monarchy. Edmund Burke set the tone for that interpretation when he proclaimed: &quot;The Revolution was made to preserve our ancient indisputable laws and liberties, and that ancient constitution of government which is our only security for law and liberty.&quot;

An alternative narrative emphasizes William&#x27;s successful foreign invasion from the Netherlands, and the size of the corresponding military operation. Several researchers have emphasized that aspect, particularly after the third centenary of the event in 1988. The historian J. R. Jones suggested that the invasion &quot;should be seen ... as the first and arguably the only decisive phase of the Nine Years&#x27; War.&quot; John Childs added that &quot;there was no natural political turmoil in England in 1688&quot;, or &quot;at least not of sufficient consequence to produce the overthrow of a king.&quot; Jonathan Israel also stresses the importance of the Dutch aspect by arguing that, due the Dutch occupation of London, parliament was hardly free when they decided to accept William as their king.

It has been argued that the invasion aspect had been downplayed as a result of British pride and effective Dutch propaganda, trying to depict the course of events as a largely internal English affair. As the invitation was initiated by figures who had little influence, the legacy of the Glorious Revolution has been described as a successful propaganda act by William to cover up and justify his invasion. The claim that William was fighting for the Protestant cause in England was used to great effect to disguise the military, cultural and political impact that the Dutch regime had on England.

A third version, proposed by Steven Pincus, underplays the invasion aspect but unlike the Whig narrative views the Revolution as a divisive and violent event that involved all classes of the English population, not just the main aristocratic protagonists. Pincus argues that his interpretation echoes the widely held view of the Revolution in its aftermath, starting with its revolutionary labelling. Pincus argues that it was momentous especially when looking at the alternative that James was trying to enact – a powerful centralised autocratic state, using French-style &quot;state-building&quot;. England&#x27;s role in Europe and the country&#x27;s political economy in the 17th century rebuts the view of many late-20th-century historians that nothing revolutionary occurred during the Glorious Revolution of 1688–89. Pincus says it was not a placid turn of events.

In diplomacy and economics William III transformed the English state&#x27;s ideology and policies. This occurred not because William III was an outsider who inflicted foreign notions on England but because foreign affairs and political economy were at the core of the English revolutionaries&#x27; agenda. The revolution of 1688–89 cannot be fathomed in isolation. It would have been inconceivable without the changes resulting from the events of the 1640s and 1650s. The ideas accompanying the Glorious Revolution were rooted in the mid-century upheavals. The 17th century was a century of revolution in England, deserving of the same scholarly attention that &#x27;modern&#x27; revolutions attract.

James II tried building a powerful militarised state on the mercantilist assumption that the world&#x27;s wealth was necessarily finite, and empires were created by taking land from other states. The East India Company was thus an ideal tool to create a vast new English imperial dominion by warring with the Dutch and the Mughal Empire in India. After 1689 came an alternative understanding of economics, which saw Britain as a commercial rather than an agrarian society. It led to the foundation of the Bank of England, the creation of Europe&#x27;s first widely circulating credit currency and the commencement of the &quot;Age of Projectors&quot;. This subsequently gave weight to the view, advocated most famously by Adam Smith in 1776, that wealth was created by human endeavour and was thus potentially infinite.

Karl Marx viewed the revolution as essentially conservative in nature, writing that it was shaped by an alliance between English commercial and industrial bourgeoisie and increasingly commercialized large land owners.

===Impact===
As a coup, albeit largely bloodless, its legitimacy rests in the will expressed separately by the Scottish and English Parliaments according to their respective legal processes. On this point, the Earl of Shaftesbury declared in 1689, &quot;The Parliament of England is that supreme and absolute power, which gives life and motion to the English government&quot;. The Revolution established the primacy of parliamentary sovereignty, a principle still relevant in consultation with the 15 Commonwealth realms regarding succession issues. The Bill of Rights 1689 formally established a system of constitutional monarchy and ended moves towards absolute monarchy by restricting the power of the monarch, who could no longer suspend laws, levy taxes, make royal appointments or maintain a standing army during peacetime without Parliament&#x27;s consent. The British Army remains the military arm of Parliament, not the monarch, although the Crown is the source of all military executive authority.

Unlike the 1639 to 1653 Wars of the Three Kingdoms, most ordinary people in England and Scotland were relatively untouched by the &quot;Glorious Revolution&quot;, the majority of the bloodshed taking place in Ireland. As a consequence, some historians suggest that in England at least it more closely resembles a coup d&#x27;état, rather than a social upheaval such as the French Revolution. This view is consistent with the original meaning of &quot;revolution&quot; as a circular process under which an old system of values is restored to its original position, with England&#x27;s supposed &quot;ancient constitution&quot; being reasserted, rather than formed anew. Contemporary English political thought, as expressed in John Locke&#x27;s then popular social contract theory, linked to George Buchanan&#x27;s view of the contractual agreement between the monarch and their subjects, an argument used by the Scottish Parliament as justification for the Claim of Right.

Under the Coronation Oath Act 1688, William had sworn to maintain the primacy of the Church of England, which both his native Dutch Reformed Church and the Church of Scotland viewed as ideologically suspect in both doctrine and use of bishops. This required a certain degree of religious flexibility on his part, especially as he needed to placate his Catholic allies, Spain and Emperor Leopold. Despite promising legal toleration for Catholics in his &quot;Declaration&quot; of October 1688, William failed due to domestic opposition. The Act of Toleration 1689 granted relief to Nonconformists but Catholic emancipation would be delayed until 1829.

News of the Glorious Revolution reached the English colonies in North America in 1689, leading to a revolt in Boston and the dissolution of the Dominion of New England.

==See also==
* Democracy in Europe

==Footnotes==
== Citations ==

==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
** 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
** 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
** 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
** 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* Beddard, Robert, ed. &quot;The Revolutions of 1688&quot;. Clarendon 1991. 
* 
* Dunn, Richard S. &quot;The Glorious Revolution and America&quot; in &quot;Oxford History of the British Empire. Vol. I. The Origins of Empire&quot;. Nicholas Canny, ed. New York: Oxford University Press 1998, 445-466. 
* 
* Lovejoy, David S. &quot;The Glorious Revolution in America&quot;. New York: Harper &amp; Row 1972. 
* 
* 
* 
* Sosin, J.M. &quot;English America and the Revolution of 1688: Royal Administration and the Structure of Provincial Government&quot;. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press 1982. 
* Webb, Stephen Saunders. &quot;Lord Churchill&#x27;s Coup: The Anglo-American Empire and the Glorious Revolution Recoonsidered&quot;. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press 1998. 

==External links==
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="4" end="23" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="39" end="61" title="Glorious Revolution" label="The Revolution of 1688"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="85" end="101" title="James II and VII" label="James II and VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q130812" start="152" end="159" title="Mary II" label="Mary II"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="183" end="204" title="William III of Orange" label="William III of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q13436425" start="339" end="353" title="joint monarchs" label="joint monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="357" end="364" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="366" end="374" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="380" end="387" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="465" end="475" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179840" start="565" end="580" title="House of Stuart" label="House of Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q15235213" start="682" end="701" title="invasion of England" label="invasion of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="721" end="732" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="847" end="857" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q164950" start="1091" end="1098" title="dynasty" label="dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q211681" start="1130" end="1150" title="James Francis Edward" label="James Francis Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954419" start="1209" end="1230" title="Invitation to William" label="Invitation to William"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371388" start="1274" end="1294" title="States General of the Netherlands" label="Dutch States General"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="1347" end="1366" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q152218" start="1374" end="1394" title="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="1492" end="1497" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="1635" end="1641" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166236" start="1709" end="1719" title="Convention Parliament (1689)" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q13436425" start="1742" end="1756" title="joint monarchs" label="joint monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571539" start="1783" end="1823" title="Glorious Revolution in Scotland" label="separate but similar Scottish settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q325380" start="2043" end="2054" title="stadtholder" label="stadtholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="2326" end="2336" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="2490" end="2519" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2549" end="2560" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q28404075" start="2697" end="2705" title="Argyll&amp;#x27;s Rising" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940446" start="2710" end="2717" title="Monmouth Rebellion" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q56304279" start="2872" end="2885" title="landed gentry" label="landed gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="2979" end="2986" title="Kingdom of England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="2991" end="2999" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="3005" end="3015" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="3048" end="3055" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="3113" end="3130" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="3279" end="3296" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="3301" end="3319" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3494" end="3519" title="Jacobitism#Ideology" label="Stuart political ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="3533" end="3547" title="James VI and I" label="James VI and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q839452" start="3639" end="3652" title="Divine right of kings" label="came from God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="3680" end="3690" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577772" start="3781" end="3806" title="War of the Three Kingdoms" label="War of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="3836" end="3854" title="Stuart Restoration" label="Stuart Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="3856" end="3866" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042529" start="3887" end="3904" title="Royal Prerogative" label="Royal Prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="4111" end="4128" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383566" start="4153" end="4169" title="Exclusion Crisis" label="Exclusion Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="4283" end="4288" title="British Whig Party" label="Whigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q499956" start="4318" end="4324" title="Tories (political faction)" label="Tories"/>
<link wikidata="Q232475" start="4626" end="4640" title="Mary of Modena" label="Mary of Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="4730" end="4734" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347378" start="5132" end="5145" title="Episcopal polity" label="Episcopalians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192203" start="5211" end="5223" title="Presbyterian polity" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="5631" end="5648" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="5699" end="5705" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="6125" end="6131" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="6562" end="6571" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694440" start="6930" end="6946" title="Loyal Parliament" label="Loyal Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q179840" start="6949" end="6955" title="House of Stuart" label="Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="7064" end="7081" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428908" start="7233" end="7241" title="Test Act" label="Test Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195178" start="7363" end="7381" title="English Dissenters" label="English Dissenters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="7609" end="7628" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q512443" start="7640" end="7662" title="Edict of Fontainebleau" label="Edict of Fontainebleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q179788" start="7681" end="7696" title="Edict of Nantes" label="Edict of Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="7713" end="7731" title="Huguenots" label="French Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q55632642" start="7953" end="7972" title="Savoyard-Waldensian Wars" label="Vaudois Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087864" start="8123" end="8134" title="Lord Deputy of Ireland" label="Lord Deputy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531564" start="8140" end="8158" title="Richard Talbot, 1st Earl of Tyrconnell" label="Earl of Tyrconnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347142" start="8837" end="8868" title="Henry Compton (bishop)" label="Henry Compton, Bishop of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182454" start="8904" end="8914" title="John Sharp (Archbishop of York)" label="John Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931116" start="9043" end="9076" title="Ecclesiastical Commission of 1686" label="Ecclesiastical Commission of 1686"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609477" start="9163" end="9181" title="Theophilus Hastings, 7th Earl of Huntingdon" label="Earl of Huntingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q81162" start="9267" end="9291" title="Magdalen College, Oxford" label="Magdalen College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772483" start="9331" end="9345" title="Anthony Farmer" label="Anthony Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404101" start="9417" end="9423" title="fellow" label="fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239968" start="9433" end="9443" title="John Hough (bishop)" label="John Hough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="9831" end="9845" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="Nonconformists"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="10024" end="10031" title="Quakers" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="10036" end="10054" title="Congregational church" label="Congregationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q73341" start="10262" end="10282" title="Lord Mayor of London" label="Lord Mayor of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="10556" end="10559" title="Member of parliament" label="MPs"/>
<link wikidata="Q914752" start="10590" end="10605" title="Lord Lieutenant" label="Lord Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365383" start="11172" end="11187" title="standing armies" label="standing armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022317" start="11311" end="11319" title="Hounslow" label="Hounslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353607" start="11403" end="11428" title="Declaration of Indulgence (1687)" label="Declaration of Indulgence"/>
<link wikidata="Q767960" start="11460" end="11484" title="William Sancroft" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445335" start="11539" end="11554" title="seditious libel" label="seditious libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="11575" end="11590" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q211681" start="11646" end="11673" title="James Francis Edward Stuart" label="James Francis Edward Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q10467412" start="11756" end="11769" title="Seven Bishops" label="Seven Bishops"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="11964" end="11985" title="William III of England" label="William III of Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q325380" start="11987" end="11998" title="stadtholder" label="stadtholder"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="12028" end="12042" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q622783" start="12156" end="12175" title="Spanish Netherlands" label="Spanish Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483985" start="12245" end="12251" title="Scots Brigade" label="troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940446" start="12278" end="12296" title="Monmouth Rebellion" label="Monmouth Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q646322" start="12347" end="12363" title="Franco-Dutch War" label="Franco-Dutch War"/>
<link wikidata="Q673556" start="12375" end="12391" title="War of the Reunions" label="French expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q512443" start="12397" end="12423" title="Edict of Fontainebleau" label="expulsion of the Huguenots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371388" start="12491" end="12524" title="States General of the Netherlands" label="States General of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q152727" start="12655" end="12696" title="Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburg" label="Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q577559" start="12812" end="12830" title="League of Augsburg" label="League of Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="12911" end="12921" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573060" start="13559" end="13569" title="Robert Spencer, 2nd Earl of Sunderland" label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679267" start="13571" end="13578" title="John Drummond, 1st Earl of Melfort" label="Melfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679370" start="13583" end="13588" title="James Drummond, 4th Earl of Perth" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428908" start="13671" end="13680" title="Test Acts" label="Test Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779786" start="13906" end="13914" title="Rampjaar" label="Rampjaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550262" start="14158" end="14171" title="William Nassau de Zuylestein, 1st Earl of Rochford" label="de Zuylestein"/>
<link wikidata="Q232475" start="14226" end="14240" title="Mary of Modena" label="Mary of Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q388711" start="14843" end="14853" title="A letter, writ by Mijn Heer Fagel (Pensioner of Holland) to Mr. James Stewart (Advocate); giving an account of the Prince and Princess of Orange&amp;#x27;s thoughts concerning the repeal of the test, and the penal laws" label="a pamphlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q699660" start="14893" end="14909" title="Grand Pensionary" label="Grand Pensionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q388711" start="14910" end="14922" title="Gaspar Fagel" label="Gaspar Fagel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="15115" end="15124" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127419" start="15152" end="15159" title="herring" label="herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="15219" end="15234" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427781" start="15450" end="15467" title="Dunkirkers" label="French privateers"/>
<link wikidata="Q333596" start="15706" end="15720" title="Edward Russell, 1st Earl of Orford" label="Edward Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250014" start="15794" end="15808" title="Gilbert Burnet" label="Gilbert Burnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954419" start="16453" end="16474" title="Invitation to William" label="Invitation to William"/>
<link wikidata="Q535313" start="16504" end="16516" title="Henry Sydney, 1st Earl of Romney" label="Henry Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q333662" start="16809" end="16814" title="Thomas Osborne, 1st Duke of Leeds" label="Danby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697139" start="16828" end="16838" title="William Cavendish, 1st Duke of Devonshire" label="Devonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q335817" start="16897" end="16907" title="Charles Talbot, Duke of Shrewsbury" label="Shrewsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934835" start="16912" end="16918" title="Richard Lumley, 1st Earl of Scarbrough" label="Lumley"/>
<link wikidata="Q336660" start="17122" end="17142" title="Arthur Herbert, 1st Earl of Torrington" label="Rear Admiral Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q336463" start="17205" end="17213" title="William Bentinck, 1st Earl of Portland" label="Bentinck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7904317" start="17748" end="17769" title="Electorate of Cologne" label="Electorate of Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779786" start="17826" end="17841" title="Rampjaar" label="nearly over-run"/>
<link wikidata="Q463742" start="17930" end="17957" title="Hochstift" label="ecclesiastical principality"/>
<link wikidata="Q101286" start="18022" end="18038" title="Pope Innocent XI" label="Pope Innocent XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q150494" start="18060" end="18077" title="Emperor Leopold I" label="Emperor Leopold I"/>
<link wikidata="Q76341" start="18288" end="18313" title="Joseph Clemens of Bavaria" label="Joseph Clemens of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q152243" start="18368" end="18377" title="Rhineland" label="Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q673556" start="18406" end="18425" title="War of the Reunions" label="War of the Reunions"/>
<link wikidata="Q22880" start="18465" end="18475" title="Electoral Palatinate" label="Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052" start="18506" end="18512" title="Landau" label="Landau"/>
<link wikidata="Q540919" start="18517" end="18532" title="Traben-Trarbach" label="Traben-Trarbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240425" start="19075" end="19092" title="Dutch States Army" label="Dutch States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483985" start="19290" end="19303" title="Scots Brigade" label="Scots Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q61718" start="19527" end="19536" title="Frederick Schomberg, 1st Duke of Schomberg" label="Schomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="19719" end="19727" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q699902" start="19787" end="19795" title="Siege of Belgrade (1688)" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q815188" start="19996" end="20008" title="Siege of Philippsburg (1688)" label="Philippsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15973400" start="20184" end="20196" title="Jean-Antoine de Mesmes (diplomat)" label="D&amp;#x27;Avaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q769041" start="21030" end="21047" title="States of Holland and West Friesland" label="States of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377327" start="21259" end="21277" title="pre-emptive strike" label="pre-emptive strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q5483588" start="21863" end="21885" title="Francisco Lopes Suasso" label="Francisco Lopes Suasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="23272" end="23276" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q25210889" start="23331" end="23347" title="Royal Irish Army" label="Royal Irish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5717994" start="23767" end="23783" title="Henry Belasyse (died 1717)" label="Colonel Belasyse"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="23866" end="23875" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824841" start="23960" end="23973" title="Thomas Buchan" label="Thomas Buchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718525" start="23978" end="23994" title="Alexander Cannon (general)" label="Alexander Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083024" start="24116" end="24132" title="Charles Trelawny" label="Charles Trelawny"/>
<link wikidata="Q153803" start="24134" end="24148" title="John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough" label="John Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167443" start="24154" end="24165" title="Percy Kirke" label="Percy Kirke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241459" start="25152" end="25160" title="Sir Jonathan Trelawny, 3rd Baronet" label="Jonathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344070" start="25271" end="25283" title="West Country" label="West Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q43382" start="25322" end="25330" title="Plymouth" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="25415" end="25419" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q128147" start="25450" end="25454" title="Kingston upon Hull" label="Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760572" start="25504" end="25513" title="George Legge, 1st Baron Dartmouth" label="Dartmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q538459" start="25674" end="25681" title="Henry FitzRoy, 1st Duke of Grafton" label="Grafton"/>
<link wikidata="Q892492" start="25963" end="25973" title="third rate" label="third rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q892562" start="25978" end="25989" title="fourth rate" label="fourth rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238161" start="26040" end="26049" title="the Downs (ship anchorage)" label="the Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087663" start="26276" end="26292" title="Chatham Historic Dockyard" label="Chatham Dockyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="26658" end="26664" title="Thames" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q5992806" start="27396" end="27410" title="Ignatius White" label="Ignatius White"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="27743" end="27761" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="28028" end="28034" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587771" start="28761" end="28777" title="Bishop of London" label="Bishop of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q81162" start="28807" end="28831" title="Magdalen College, Oxford" label="Magdalen College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428908" start="28891" end="28899" title="Test Act" label="Test Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="29527" end="29531" title="Old Style and New Style dates" label="4/14"/>
<link wikidata="Q33444372" start="30443" end="30457" title="Hellevoetsluis" label="Hellevoetsluis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="30603" end="30608" title="Old Style and New Style dates" label="14/24"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251624" start="30645" end="30660" title="Protestant Wind" label="Protestant Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735134" start="30770" end="30792" title="Admiralty of Amsterdam" label="Admiralty of Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q14740421" start="30895" end="30912" title="Dutch States Navy" label="Dutch States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q336660" start="30949" end="30963" title="Arthur Herbert, 1st Earl of Torrington" label="Arthur Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q931281" start="31003" end="31021" title="Lieutenant-Admiral" label="Lieutenant-Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133549" start="31022" end="31052" title="Cornelis Evertsen the Youngest" label="Cornelis Evertsen the Youngest"/>
<link wikidata="Q547419" start="31070" end="31089" title="Philips van Almonde" label="Philips van Almonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q2692652" start="31106" end="31132" title="Willem Bastiaensz Schepers" label="Willem Bastiaensz Schepers"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="31209" end="31216" title="frigate" label="frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="31242" end="31247" title="Old Style and New Style dates" label="16/26"/>
<link wikidata="Q33444372" start="31516" end="31530" title="Hellevoetsluis" label="Hellevoetsluis"/>
<link wikidata="Q990616" start="32112" end="32119" title="Harwich" label="Harwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q159898" start="32351" end="32366" title="Strait of Dover" label="Strait of Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="32580" end="32595" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078286" start="32753" end="32766" title="military band" label="military band"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="33205" end="33213" title="Huguenot" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q134672" start="34632" end="34638" title="Exeter" label="Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q160642" start="35077" end="35086" title="Salisbury" label="Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q11688250" start="35434" end="35443" title="Wincanton Skirmish" label="Wincanton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772463" start="35480" end="35487" title="Battle of Reading (1688)" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q43382" start="35603" end="35611" title="Plymouth" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915948" start="35753" end="35762" title="Louis de Duras, 2nd Earl of Feversham" label="Feversham"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="36111" end="36124" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Princess Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q317499" start="36140" end="36146" title="Prince George of Denmark" label="George"/>
<link wikidata="Q335280" start="36429" end="36436" title="George Savile, 1st Marquess of Halifax" label="Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619683" start="36438" end="36448" title="Daniel Finch, 2nd Earl of Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q947776" start="36453" end="36462" title="Sidney Godolphin, 1st Earl of Godolphin" label="Godolphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637841" start="36483" end="36493" title="Hungerford" label="Hungerford"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522484" start="37163" end="37175" title="Sir Edward Hales, 3rd Baronet" label="Edward Hales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000115" start="37214" end="37223" title="Faversham" label="Faversham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114830" start="37278" end="37288" title="Great Seal of the Realm" label="Great Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="37296" end="37308" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071690" start="37397" end="37404" title="Irish Fright" label="rumours"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827905" start="37564" end="37581" title="Laurence Hyde, 1st Earl of Rochester" label="Earl of Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528244" start="37637" end="37650" title="Privy Council" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q23311" start="37655" end="37669" title="City of London" label="City of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3524950" start="37819" end="37833" title="Thomas Bruce, 2nd Earl of Ailesbury" label="Lord Ailesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q15493126" start="38252" end="38265" title="Paul Barillon" label="Paul Barillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643819" start="38497" end="38500" title="Ham, London" label="Ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q507517" start="38562" end="38571" title="Rochester, Kent" label="Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166236" start="39379" end="39400" title="Convention Parliament (1689)" label="Convention Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914849" start="39478" end="39485" title="House of Commons of England" label="Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="39491" end="39496" title="House of Lords" label="Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807282" start="40420" end="40430" title="Timothy J. G. Harris" label="Tim Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="40828" end="40837" title="Reformed Christianity" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729518" start="40851" end="40871" title="Declaration of Right, 1689" label="Declaration of Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q219447" start="41085" end="41099" title="Bill of Rights 1689" label="Bill of Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744482" start="41359" end="41363" title="The King&amp;#x27;s Sole Right over the Militia Act 1661" label="1661"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123774" start="41368" end="41385" title="City of London Militia Act 1662" label="1662 Militia Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172219" start="41471" end="41495" title="Coronation Oath Act 1688" label="Coronation Oath Act 1688"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542399" start="42282" end="42302" title="George Melville, 1st Earl of Melville" label="the Earl of Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635358" start="42304" end="42322" title="Archibald Campbell, 1st Duke of Argyll" label="the Duke of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216105" start="42346" end="42363" title="William Carstares" label="William Carstares"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250014" start="42368" end="42382" title="Gilbert Burnet" label="Gilbert Burnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246348" start="42502" end="42524" title="Scottish Privy Council" label="Scottish Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166282" start="42639" end="42658" title="Convention of the Estates of Scotland" label="Scottish Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q627550" start="43381" end="43407" title="Nonjuring schism" label="Non-Juring Episcopalianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="43435" end="43443" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q12130474" start="43455" end="43459" title="Jacobite rising of 1715" label="1715"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049945" start="43464" end="43468" title="Jacobite rising of 1745" label="1745"/>
<link wikidata="Q12407381" start="43756" end="43774" title="Claim of Right Act 1689" label="Claim of Right Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="44436" end="44445" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320981" start="44461" end="44475" title="Williamite War in Ireland" label="war in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q48785102" start="44497" end="44515" title="Jacobite rising of 1689" label="rising in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531564" start="44833" end="44851" title="Richard Talbot, 1st Earl of Tyrconnell" label="Earl of Tyrconnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q25210889" start="44867" end="44871" title="Irish Army (1542-1801)" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="45064" end="45070" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776135" start="45125" end="45130" title="Siege of Derry" label="Derry"/>
<link wikidata="Q61718" start="45208" end="45217" title="Frederick Schomberg, 1st Duke of Schomberg" label="Schomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360948" start="45228" end="45241" title="Belfast Lough" label="Belfast Lough"/>
<link wikidata="Q204956" start="45319" end="45326" title="Dundalk" label="Dundalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888946" start="45446" end="45459" title="Battle of Killiecrankie" label="Killiecrankie"/>
<link wikidata="Q892818" start="45497" end="45512" title="John Graham, 1st Viscount Dundee" label="Viscount Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="45614" end="45623" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q644960" start="45755" end="45778" title="The Battle of the Boyne" label="The Battle of the Boyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248605" start="45811" end="45822" title="Battle of Beachy Head (1690)" label="Beachy Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="45864" end="45879" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713014" start="46173" end="46181" title="Siege of Limerick (1690)" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910657" start="46227" end="46243" title="Godert de Ginkel, 1st Earl of Athlone" label="Godert de Ginkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750100" start="46328" end="46346" title="Marquis de St Ruth" label="Marquis de St Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887916" start="46386" end="46393" title="battle of Aughrim" label="Aughrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860162" start="46445" end="46463" title="Treaty of Limerick" label="Treaty of Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q577559" start="46734" end="46745" title="Grand Alliance (League of Augsburg)" label="an alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q152218" start="47183" end="47201" title="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War" label="declaration of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915948" start="47374" end="47407" title="Louis de Duras, 2nd Earl of Feversham" label="Louis de Duras, Earl of Feversham"/>
<link wikidata="Q572597" start="48259" end="48276" title="Anthonie Heinsius" label="Anthonie Heinsius"/>
<link wikidata="Q318785" start="49030" end="49045" title="Navigation Acts" label="Navigation Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q577559" start="49218" end="49236" title="League of Augsburg" label="League of Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="49678" end="49707" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="49821" end="49845" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="50028" end="50041" title="protectionism" label="protectionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q315989" start="50525" end="50540" title="Thomas Babington Macaulay, 1st Baron Macaulay" label="Thomas Macaulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739784" start="50583" end="50644" title="The History of England from the Accession of James the Second" label="The History of England from the Accession of James the Second"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660437" start="50673" end="50685" title="Whig history" label="Whig history"/>
<link wikidata="Q165792" start="50887" end="50899" title="Edmund Burke" label="Edmund Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q23683464" start="51422" end="51433" title="J. R. Jones" label="J. R. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q27207858" start="51572" end="51583" title="John Childs (historian)" label="John Childs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101078" start="51756" end="51771" title="Jonathan Israel" label="Jonathan Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615148" start="52581" end="52594" title="Steven Pincus" label="Steven Pincus"/>
<link wikidata="Q162527" start="54187" end="54199" title="mercantilism" label="mercantilist"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="54327" end="54345" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="54450" end="54463" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="54632" end="54647" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q65047308" start="54754" end="54771" title="projector (business)" label="Age of Projectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="54849" end="54859" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="54948" end="54957" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="55103" end="55114" title="bourgeoisie" label="bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q335112" start="55377" end="55396" title="Anthony Ashley-Cooper, 3rd Earl of Shaftesbury" label="Earl of Shaftesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813642" start="55586" end="55611" title="parliamentary sovereignty" label="parliamentary sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q202686" start="55668" end="55686" title="Commonwealth realm" label="Commonwealth realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832870" start="55698" end="55708" title="Succession to the British throne" label="succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q219447" start="55721" end="55740" title="Bill of Rights 1689" label="Bill of Rights 1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="55774" end="55797" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="55822" end="55839" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="56035" end="56047" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577772" start="56200" end="56226" title="Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="Wars of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="56549" end="56566" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="56901" end="56911" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326430" start="56932" end="56947" title="social contract" label="social contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q715169" start="56966" end="56981" title="George Buchanan" label="George Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172219" start="57159" end="57183" title="Coronation Oath Act 1688" label="Coronation Oath Act 1688"/>
<link wikidata="Q515880" start="57275" end="57296" title="Dutch Reformed Church" label="Dutch Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585906" start="57689" end="57711" title="Act of Toleration 1689" label="Act of Toleration 1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602689" start="57749" end="57770" title="Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829" label="Catholic emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136592" start="57899" end="57917" title="1689 Boston revolt" label="a revolt in Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748571" start="57945" end="57968" title="Dominion of New England" label="Dominion of New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q127378018" start="57986" end="58005" title="Democracy in Europe" label="Democracy in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q20055579" start="58390" end="58426" title="Oxford History of the British Empire" label="Oxford History of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7025169" start="58465" end="58479" title="Nicholas Canny" label="Nicholas Canny"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12468" wikidata="Q3115961" url="?curid=12468" title="Great Lakes Colleges Association">
<text>The Great Lakes Colleges Association (GLCA) is a consortium of 13 liberal arts colleges located in the states around the Great Lakes. The GLCA&#x27;s offices are located in Ann Arbor, Michigan and its 13 schools are located in Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania and Indiana. It was chartered in the state of Michigan and incorporated as a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization in 1962. Its stated mission is to take actions that will help strengthen and preserve its colleges, being a leading force on behalf of education in the tradition of the liberal arts and sciences.

The organization is the founder and administrator of the Global Liberal Arts Alliance.

==Operations==
GLCA operates a Tuition Remission Exchange involving its 13 colleges plus Beloit College, Grinnell College, Willamette University, and Wittenberg University, by which students eligible for tuition remission because of parental employment at one of the colleges will receive tuition remission at any one of the other colleges in the Exchange.

GLCA awards three literary prizes annually to a poet, a fiction writer, and a creative nonfiction writer to honor their first books. Winning authors receive all-expense-paid trips to several of GLCA&#x27;s member colleges, at which they will be paid an honorarium of at least $500 to meet with students, give readings, and lead discussions.

The Philadelphia Center, which offers an off-campus study program with the opportunity to gain college credit while living and learning independently in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, is managed and operated by Albion College in partnership with the GLCA.

The consortium extended its first offer of membership in 46 years to Allegheny College in 2008.

==Member institutions==
The GLCA&#x27;s member institutions are:
*Albion College
*Allegheny College
*Antioch College
*Denison University
*DePauw University
*Earlham College
*Hope College
*Kalamazoo College
*Kenyon College
*Oberlin College
*Ohio Wesleyan University
*Wabash College
*College of Wooster

==External links==

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3115961" start="4" end="36" title="Great Lakes Colleges Association" label="Great Lakes Colleges Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3115961" start="38" end="42" title="Great Lakes Colleges Association" label="GLCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q194166" start="49" end="59" title="consortium" label="consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377182" start="66" end="86" title="liberal arts college" label="liberal arts college"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="103" end="109" title="U.S. state" label="states"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="121" end="132" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q485172" start="173" end="192" title="Ann Arbor, Michigan" label="Ann Arbor, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="227" end="235" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="237" end="241" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="243" end="255" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="260" end="267" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q240625" start="333" end="342" title="501(c)" label="501(c)(3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="343" end="366" title="non-profit organization" label="non-profit organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q19980665" start="621" end="649" title="Global Liberal Arts Alliance" label="Global Liberal Arts Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904557" start="741" end="755" title="Beloit College" label="Beloit College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982991" start="757" end="773" title="Grinnell College" label="Grinnell College"/>
<link wikidata="Q930291" start="775" end="796" title="Willamette University" label="Willamette University"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028571" start="802" end="823" title="Wittenberg University" label="Wittenberg University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1352" end="1375" title="The Philadelphia Center" label="The Philadelphia Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="1505" end="1531" title="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania" label="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4062566" start="1675" end="1692" title="Allegheny College" label="Allegheny College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831920" start="1769" end="1783" title="Albion College" label="Albion College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4062566" start="1785" end="1802" title="Allegheny College" label="Allegheny College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775012" start="1804" end="1819" title="Antioch College" label="Antioch College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493503" start="1821" end="1839" title="Denison University" label="Denison University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179599" start="1841" end="1858" title="DePauw University" label="DePauw University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326502" start="1860" end="1875" title="Earlham College" label="Earlham College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475371" start="1877" end="1889" title="Hope College" label="Hope College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6350383" start="1891" end="1908" title="Kalamazoo College" label="Kalamazoo College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797768" start="1910" end="1924" title="Kenyon College" label="Kenyon College"/>
<link wikidata="Q616591" start="1926" end="1941" title="Oberlin College" label="Oberlin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q194266" start="1943" end="1967" title="Ohio Wesleyan University" label="Ohio Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958639" start="1969" end="1983" title="Wabash College" label="Wabash College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109093" start="1985" end="2003" title="College of Wooster" label="College of Wooster"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12469" wikidata="Q56433" url="?curid=12469" title="Goidelic languages">
<text>The Goidelic ( ) or Gaelic languages (; ; ) form one of the two groups of Insular Celtic languages, the other being the Brittonic languages.

Goidelic languages historically formed a dialect continuum stretching from Ireland through the Isle of Man to Scotland. There are three modern Goidelic languages: Irish (&#x27;), [[Scottish Gaelic]] (&#x27;), and Manx (&quot;&quot;). Manx died out as a first language in the 20th century but has since been revived to some degree.

==Nomenclature==
&quot;Gaelic&quot;, by itself, is sometimes used to refer to Scottish Gaelic, especially in Scotland, and therefore is ambiguous. Irish and Manx are sometimes referred to as Irish Gaelic and Manx Gaelic (as they are Goidelic or Gaelic languages), but the use of the word &quot;Gaelic&quot; is unnecessary because the terms Irish and Manx, when used to denote languages, always refer to those languages. This is in contrast to Scottish Gaelic, for which &quot;Gaelic&quot; distinguishes the language from the Germanic language known as Scots. In English, it is common to have distinct pronunciations of the word, with Scottish &quot;Gaelic&quot; pronounced compared to Irish and Manx &quot;Gaelic&quot; pronounced .

The endonyms (, and in Irish, in Manx and in Scottish Gaelic) are derived from Old Irish , which in turn is derived from Old Welsh meaning &quot;wild men, savages&quot;. The medieval mythology of the places its origin in an eponymous ancestor of the Gaels and the inventor of the language, .

==Classification==
The family tree of the Goidelic languages, within the Insular Celtic branch of the Celtic language family, is as follows
*Primitive Irish
**Old Irish
***Middle Irish
****Early Modern Irish
*****Modern Irish
****Scottish Gaelic
****Manx
==Origin, history, and range==
During the historical era, Goidelic was restricted to Ireland and, possibly, the west coast of Scotland. Medieval Gaelic literature tells us that the kingdom of Dál Riata emerged in western Scotland during the 6th century. The mainstream view is that Dál Riata was founded by Irish migrants, but this is not universally accepted. Archaeologist Ewan Campbell says there is no archaeological evidence for a migration or invasion, and suggests strong sea links helped maintain a pre-existing Gaelic culture on both sides of the North Channel.

Dál Riata grew in size and influence, and Gaelic language and culture was eventually adopted by the neighbouring Picts (a group of peoples who may have spoken a Brittonic language) who lived throughout Scotland. Manx, the language of the Isle of Man, is closely akin to the Gaelic spoken in the Hebrides, the Irish spoken in northeast and eastern Ireland, and the now-extinct Galwegian Gaelic of Galloway (in southwest Scotland), with some influence from Old Norse through the Viking invasions and from the previous British inhabitants.

The oldest written Goidelic language is Primitive Irish, which is attested in Ogham inscriptions from about the 4th century. The forms of this speech are very close, and often identical, to the forms of Gaulish recorded before and during the time of the Roman Empire. The next stage, Old Irish, is found in glosses (i.e. annotations) to Latin manuscripts—mainly religious and grammatical—from the 6th to the 10th century, as well as in archaic texts copied or recorded in Middle Irish texts. Middle Irish, the immediate predecessor of the modern Goidelic languages, is the term for the language as recorded from the 10th to the 12th century; a great deal of literature survives in it, including the early Irish law texts.

Classical Gaelic, otherwise known as Early Modern Irish, covers the period from the 13th to the 18th century, during which time it was used as a literary standard in Ireland and Scotland. This is often called Classical Irish, while &quot;Ethnologue&quot; gives the name &quot;Hiberno-Scottish Gaelic&quot; to this standardised written language. As long as this written language was the norm, Ireland was considered the Gaelic homeland to the Scottish literati.

Later orthographic divergence has resulted in standardised pluricentristic orthographies. Manx orthography, which was introduced in the 16th and 17th centuries, was based loosely on English and Welsh orthography, and so never formed part of this literary standard.

===Proto-Goidelic===
Proto-Goidelic, or Proto-Gaelic, is the proposed proto-language for all branches of Goidelic. It is proposed as the predecessor of Goidelic, which then began to separate into different dialects before splitting during the Middle Irish period into the separate languages of Irish, Manx, and Scottish Gaelic.

==Irish==
Irish is one of the Republic of Ireland&#x27;s two official languages along with English. Historically the predominant language of the island, it is now mostly spoken in parts of the south, west, and northwest. The legally defined Irish-speaking areas are called the ; all government institutions of the Republic, in particular the parliament (&#x27;), its upper house (&#x27;) and lower house (&#x27;), and the prime minister (&#x27;) have official names in this language, and some are only officially referred to by their Irish names even in English. At present, the are primarily found in Counties Cork, Donegal, Mayo, Galway, Kerry, and, to a lesser extent, in Waterford and Meath. In the Republic of Ireland 1,774,437 (41.4% of the population aged three years and over) regard themselves as able to speak Irish to some degree. Of these, 77,185 (1.8%) speak Irish on a daily basis outside school. Irish is also undergoing a revival in Northern Ireland and has been accorded some legal status there under the 1998 Good Friday Agreement but its official usage remains divisive to certain parts of the population. The 2001 census in Northern Ireland showed that 167,487 (10.4%) people &quot;had some knowledge of Irish&quot;. Combined, this means that around one in three people () on the island of Ireland can understand Irish at some level.
Despite the ascent in Ireland of the English and Anglicised ruling classes following the 1607 Flight of the Earls (and the disappearance of much of the Gaelic nobility), Irish was spoken by the majority of the population until the later 18th century, with a huge impact from the Great Famine of the 1840s. Disproportionately affecting the classes among whom Irish was the primary spoken language, famine and emigration precipitated a steep decline in native speakers, which only recently has begun to reverse.

The Irish language has been recognised as an official and working language of the European Union. Ireland&#x27;s national language was the twenty-third to be given such recognition by the EU and previously had the status of a treaty language.

==Scottish Gaelic==


Some people in the north and west of mainland Scotland and many people in the Hebrides still speak Scottish Gaelic, but the language has been in decline. There are now believed to be approximately 60,000 native speakers of Scottish Gaelic in Scotland, plus around 1,000 speakers of the Canadian Gaelic dialect in Nova Scotia.

Its historical range was much larger. For example, it was the everyday language of most of the rest of the Scottish Highlands until little more than a century ago. Galloway was once also a Gaelic-speaking region, but the Galwegian dialect has been extinct there for approximately three centuries. It is believed to have been home to dialects that were transitional between Scottish Gaelic and the two other Goidelic languages. While Gaelic was spoken across the Scottish Borders and Lothian during the early High Middle Ages it does not seem to have been spoken by the majority and was likely the language of the ruling elite, land-owners and religious clerics. Some other parts of the Scottish Lowlands spoke Cumbric, and others Scots Inglis, the only exceptions being the Northern Isles of Orkney and Shetland where Norse was spoken. Scottish Gaelic was introduced across North America with Gaelic settlers. Their numbers necessitated North American Gaelic publications and print media from Cape Breton Island to California.

Scotland, known as Alba in Insular Celtic languages, takes its English language name from the Latin word for &#x27;Gael&#x27;, &#x27;, plural &#x27; (of uncertain etymology). &quot;Scotland&quot; originally meant &quot;Land of the Gaels&quot; in a cultural and social sense. (In early Old English texts, &quot;Scotland&quot; referred to Ireland.) Until late in the 15th century, &quot;Scottis&quot; in Scottish English (or &quot;Scots Inglis&quot;) was used to refer only to Gaelic, and the speakers of this language who were identified as &quot;Scots&quot;. As the ruling elite became Scots Inglis/English-speaking, &quot;Scottis&quot; was gradually associated with the land rather than the people, and the word &quot;Erse&quot; (&#x27;Irish&#x27;) was gradually used more and more as an act of culturo-political disassociation, with an overt implication that the language was not really Scottish, and therefore foreign. This was something of a propaganda label, as Gaelic has been in Scotland for at least as long as English, if not longer.

In the early 16th century the dialects of northern Middle English, also known as Early Scots, which had developed in Lothian and had come to be spoken elsewhere in the Kingdom of Scotland, themselves later appropriated the name Scots. By the 17th century Gaelic speakers were restricted largely to the Highlands and the Hebrides. Furthermore, the culturally repressive measures taken against the rebellious Highland communities by The Crown following the second Jacobite Rebellion of 1746 caused still further decline in the language&#x27;s use – to a large extent by enforced emigration (e.g. the Highland Clearances). Even more decline followed in the 19th and early 20th centuries.

The Scottish Parliament has afforded the language a secure statutory status and &quot;equal respect&quot; (but not full equality in legal status under Scots law) with English, sparking hopes that Scottish Gaelic can be saved from extinction and perhaps even revitalised.

==Manx==
Long the everyday language of most of the Isle of Man, Manx began to decline sharply in the 19th century. The last monolingual Manx speakers are believed to have died around the middle of the 19th century; in 1874 around 30% of the population were estimated to speak Manx, decreasing to 9.1% in 1901 and 1.1% in 1921. The last native speaker of Manx, Ned Maddrell, died in 1974.

At the end of the 19th century a revival of Manx began, headed by the Manx Language Society (&quot;&quot;). Both linguists and language enthusiasts searched out the last native speakers during the 20th century, recording their speech and learning from them. In the 2011 United Kingdom census, there were 1,823 Manx speakers on the island, representing 2.27% of the population of 80,398, following a steady increase in the number of speakers.

Today Manx is the sole medium for teaching at five of the island&#x27;s pre-schools by a company named &#x27; (&quot;little people&quot;), which also operates the sole Manx-medium primary school, the &#x27;. Manx is taught as a second language at all of the island&#x27;s primary and secondary schools and also at the University College Isle of Man and Centre for Manx Studies.

==Comparison==

===Numbers===
Comparison of Goidelic numbers, including Old Irish. Welsh numbers have been included for a comparison between Goidelic and Brythonic branches.
* and are no longer used in counting. Instead the suppletive forms and are normally used for counting. For comparative purposes, the historic forms are listed in the table above.

In the Welsh numbers, in cases where there are differences between masculine and feminine forms (marked ‡), the masculine forms are given.

===Common phrases===
‡ Singular forms.

==Influence on other languages==
There are several languages that show Goidelic influence, although they are not Goidelic languages themselves:
*Shelta language is sometimes thought to be a Goidelic language, but is in fact a cant based on Irish and English, with a primarily Irish-based grammar and English-based syntax.
*The Bungi dialect in Canada is an English dialect spoken by Métis that was influenced by Orkney English, Scots English, Cree, Ojibwe, and Scottish Gaelic.
*Beurla Reagaird is a cant spoken by Scottish travelling folk, which is to a large extent based on Scottish Gaelic.
* The Welsh language spoken in West Wales may still retain some influences of its Goidelic speaking past – the same applies to Cornish spoken in Western Cornwall and the English dialect of Merseyside Scouse.
*English and especially Highland English have numerous words of both Scottish Gaelic and Irish origin.

==See also==
* Comparison of Irish, Manx, and Scottish Gaelic
* Goidelic substrate hypothesis
* Proto-Celtic language
* Specific dialects of Irish:
** Connacht Irish
** Munster Irish
** Newfoundland Irish
** Ulster Irish
* Specific dialects of Scottish Gaelic:
** Canadian Gaelic
** Galwegian Gaelic
* Literature in the other languages of Britain

==References==
==External links==

* Scottish Gaelic Wikipedia
* Irish language Wikipedia
* Manx Wikipedia
* Comparison of Irish and Scottish Gaelic </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q56433" start="4" end="12" title="Goidelic languages" label="Goidelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56433" start="20" end="36" title="Goidelic languages" label="Gaelic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q214506" start="74" end="98" title="Insular Celtic languages" label="Insular Celtic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q156877" start="120" end="139" title="Brittonic languages" label="Brittonic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q215844" start="183" end="200" title="dialect continuum" label="dialect continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="217" end="224" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="237" end="248" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="252" end="260" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="305" end="310" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q56433" start="312" end="342" title="Goidelic languages" label="&amp;#x27;), [[Scottish Gaelic]] ("/>
<link wikidata="Q12175" start="355" end="359" title="Manx language" label="Manx"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="395" end="409" title="first language" label="first language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="621" end="626" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12175" start="631" end="635" title="Manx language" label="Manx"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="917" end="932" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="999" end="1016" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="1026" end="1031" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920493" start="1211" end="1218" title="endonym" label="endonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q35308" start="1286" end="1295" title="Old Irish" label="Old Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266723" start="1328" end="1337" title="Old Welsh" label="Old Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q692312" start="1457" end="1462" title="Gaels" label="Gaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320030" start="1641" end="1656" title="Primitive Irish" label="Primitive Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q35308" start="1659" end="1668" title="Old Irish" label="Old Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q36116" start="1672" end="1684" title="Middle Irish" label="Middle Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q102252955" start="1689" end="1707" title="Early Modern Irish" label="Early Modern Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="1713" end="1725" title="Irish language" label="Modern Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="1730" end="1745" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12175" start="1750" end="1754" title="Manx language" label="Manx"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="1840" end="1847" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="1881" end="1889" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q111471" start="1947" end="1956" title="Dál Riata" label="Dál Riata"/>
<link wikidata="Q19667388" start="2130" end="2143" title="Ewan Campbell" label="Ewan Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q209113" start="2311" end="2324" title="North Channel (Great Britain and Ireland)" label="North Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="2440" end="2445" title="Picts" label="Picts"/>
<link wikidata="Q856383" start="2486" end="2506" title="Pictish language" label="a Brittonic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q471148" start="2529" end="2537" title="history of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="2565" end="2576" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q123377" start="2622" end="2630" title="Hebrides" label="Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099827" start="2703" end="2719" title="Galwegian Gaelic" label="Galwegian Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342092" start="2723" end="2731" title="Galloway" label="Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="2804" end="2810" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320030" start="2905" end="2920" title="Primitive Irish" label="Primitive Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q184661" start="2943" end="2948" title="Ogham" label="Ogham"/>
<link wikidata="Q29977" start="3068" end="3075" title="Gaulish language" label="Gaulish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="3119" end="3131" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q35308" start="3149" end="3158" title="Old Irish" label="Old Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132324" start="3172" end="3179" title="gloss (annotation)" label="glosses"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3202" end="3207" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q87167" start="3208" end="3218" title="manuscript" label="manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q36116" start="3337" end="3349" title="Middle Irish" label="Middle Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q102252955" start="3588" end="3604" title="Classical Gaelic" label="Classical Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q102252955" start="3625" end="3643" title="Early Modern Irish" label="Early Modern Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q102252955" start="3797" end="3812" title="Classical Irish" label="Classical Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q14790" start="3826" end="3836" title="Ethnologue" label="Ethnologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q102252955" start="3864" end="3887" title="Hiberno-Scottish Gaelic" label="Hiberno-Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q58968" start="4039" end="4047" title="intellectual" label="literati"/>
<link wikidata="Q43091" start="4056" end="4068" title="orthography" label="orthographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q250858" start="4109" end="4124" title="pluricentric language" label="pluricentristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q206577" start="4386" end="4400" title="proto-language" label="proto-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36116" start="4559" end="4571" title="Middle Irish" label="Middle Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="4610" end="4615" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12175" start="4617" end="4621" title="Manx language" label="Manx"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="4627" end="4642" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="4675" end="4694" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="4736" end="4743" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q129821" start="4987" end="4997" title="Oireachtas" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127591" start="5012" end="5023" title="Seanad Éireann" label="upper house"/>
<link wikidata="Q651981" start="5037" end="5048" title="Dáil Éireann" label="lower house"/>
<link wikidata="Q191827" start="5067" end="5081" title="Taoiseach" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q162475" start="5256" end="5260" title="County Cork" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q179424" start="5262" end="5269" title="County Donegal" label="Donegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q178626" start="5271" end="5275" title="County Mayo" label="Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q169923" start="5277" end="5283" title="County Galway" label="Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q184469" start="5285" end="5290" title="County Kerry" label="Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q184594" start="5320" end="5329" title="County Waterford" label="Waterford"/>
<link wikidata="Q183544" start="5334" end="5339" title="County Meath" label="Meath"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="5594" end="5610" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q208958" start="5672" end="5693" title="Good Friday Agreement" label="Good Friday Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071608" start="5789" end="5812" title="Irish language in Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland showed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430504" start="6093" end="6112" title="Flight of the Earls" label="Flight of the Earls"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="6278" end="6290" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="6592" end="6606" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q123377" start="6854" end="6862" title="Hebrides" label="Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="7018" end="7026" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542210" start="7062" end="7077" title="Canadian Gaelic" label="Canadian Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="7089" end="7100" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="7210" end="7228" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Scottish Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342092" start="7267" end="7275" title="Galloway" label="Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099827" start="7324" end="7341" title="Galwegian Gaelic" label="Galwegian dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q211113" start="7565" end="7581" title="Scottish Borders" label="Scottish Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q642024" start="7586" end="7593" title="Lothian" label="Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986730" start="7611" end="7627" title="Scotland in the High Middle Ages" label="High Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q654252" start="7789" end="7806" title="Scottish Lowlands" label="Scottish Lowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q35965" start="7813" end="7820" title="Cumbric" label="Cumbric"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="7833" end="7845" title="Scots language" label="Scots Inglis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058774" start="7877" end="7891" title="Northern Isles" label="Northern Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="7895" end="7901" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="7906" end="7914" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36708" start="7921" end="7926" title="Norn language" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553250" start="8533" end="8549" title="Scottish English" label="Scottish English"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="9226" end="9240" title="Middle English" label="Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326738" start="9256" end="9267" title="Early Scots" label="Early Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q642024" start="9292" end="9299" title="Lothian" label="Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="9343" end="9362" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Kingdom of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="9403" end="9408" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="9606" end="9615" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="The Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="9637" end="9663" title="Jacobite risings" label="Jacobite Rebellion of 1746"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368217" start="9773" end="9792" title="Highland Clearances" label="Highland Clearances"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="9865" end="9884" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972557" start="10012" end="10021" title="Scots law" label="Scots law"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="10184" end="10195" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q467691" start="10493" end="10505" title="Ned Maddrell" label="Ned Maddrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q844244" start="10555" end="10562" title="language revitalization" label="revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="10787" end="10813" title="2011 United Kingdom census" label="2011 United Kingdom census"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445987" start="11283" end="11313" title="University College Isle of Man" label="University College Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445997" start="11318" end="11341" title="Centre for Manx Studies" label="Centre for Manx Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q324982" start="11568" end="11578" title="suppletion" label="suppletive"/>
<link wikidata="Q36705" start="12023" end="12038" title="Shelta language" label="Shelta language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33005" start="12104" end="12108" title="cant (language)" label="cant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="12128" end="12135" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="12192" end="12198" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q35114" start="12205" end="12218" title="Bungi dialect" label="Bungi dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="12222" end="12228" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q262457" start="12261" end="12266" title="Métis people (Canada)" label="Métis"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="12290" end="12296" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553250" start="12306" end="12319" title="Scots English" label="Scots English"/>
<link wikidata="Q33390" start="12321" end="12325" title="Cree language" label="Cree"/>
<link wikidata="Q33875" start="12327" end="12333" title="Anishinaabe language" label="Ojibwe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="12339" end="12354" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899291" start="12357" end="12372" title="Beurla Reagaird" label="Beurla Reagaird"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="12478" end="12492" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh language"/>
<link wikidata="Q25289" start="12599" end="12606" title="Cornish language" label="Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804441" start="12672" end="12678" title="Scouse" label="Scouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570199" start="12681" end="12688" title="List of English words of Scottish Gaelic origin" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758768" start="12704" end="12720" title="Highland English" label="Highland English"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997954" start="12799" end="12845" title="Comparison of Irish, Manx, and Scottish Gaelic" label="Comparison of Irish, Manx, and Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164094" start="12848" end="12877" title="Goidelic substrate hypothesis" label="Goidelic substrate hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q653649" start="12880" end="12901" title="Proto-Celtic language" label="Proto-Celtic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756705" start="12935" end="12949" title="Connacht Irish" label="Connacht Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778014" start="12953" end="12966" title="Munster Irish" label="Munster Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235215" start="12970" end="12988" title="Newfoundland Irish" label="Newfoundland Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q841756" start="12992" end="13004" title="Ulster Irish" label="Ulster Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542210" start="13048" end="13063" title="Canadian Gaelic" label="Canadian Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099827" start="13067" end="13083" title="Galwegian Gaelic" label="Galwegian Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886194" start="13086" end="13130" title="Literature in the other languages of Britain" label="Literature in the other languages of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13169" end="13194" title=":gd:" label="Scottish Gaelic Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13197" end="13221" title=":ga:" label="Irish language Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13224" end="13238" title=":gv:" label="Manx Wikipedia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12471" wikidata="Q48420" url="?curid=12471" title="Gnosticism">
<text>Gnosticism (from Ancient Greek: , &quot;gnōstikós&quot;, , &#x27;having knowledge&#x27;) is a collection of religious ideas and systems that coalesced in the late 1st century AD among early Christian sects. These diverse groups emphasized personal spiritual knowledge (&quot;gnosis&quot;) above the proto-orthodox teachings, traditions, and authority of religious institutions. Gnostic cosmogony generally presents a distinction between a supreme, hidden God and a malevolent lesser divinity (sometimes associated with the Hebrew Bible deity Yahweh) who is responsible for creating the material universe. Consequently, Gnostics considered material existence flawed or evil, and held the principal element of salvation to be direct knowledge of the hidden divinity, attained via mystical or esoteric insight. Many Gnostic texts deal not in concepts of sin and repentance, but with illusion and enlightenment.

Gnostic writings flourished among certain Christian groups in the Mediterranean world around the second century, when the Early Church Fathers denounced them as heresy. Efforts to destroy these texts proved largely successful, resulting in the survival of very little writing by Gnostic theologians. Nonetheless, early Gnostic teachers such as Valentinus saw themselves as Christians. In the Gnostic Christian tradition, Christ is seen as a divine being which has taken human form in order to lead humanity back to recognition of its own divine nature. However, Gnosticism is not a single standardized system, and the emphasis on direct experience allows for a wide variety of teachings, including distinct currents such as Valentinianism and Sethianism. In the Persian Empire, Gnostic ideas spread as far as China via the related movement Manichaeism, while Mandaeism, which is the only surviving Gnostic religion from antiquity, is found in Iraq, Iran and diaspora communities. Jorunn Buckley posits that the early Mandaeans may have been among the first to formulate what would go on to become Gnosticism within the community of early followers of Jesus.

For centuries, most scholarly knowledge about Gnosticism was limited to the anti-heretical writings of early Christian figures such as Irenaeus of Lyons and Hippolytus of Rome. There was a renewed interest in Gnosticism after the 1945 discovery of Egypt&#x27;s Nag Hammadi library, a collection of rare early Christian and Gnostic texts, including the Gospel of Thomas and the Apocryphon of John. Some scholars say Gnosticism may contain historical information about Jesus from the Gnostic viewpoint, though the majority predominantly conclude that apocryphal sources, Gnostic or not, are later than the canonical ones and many, such as the Gospel of Thomas, depend upon or use the Synoptic Gospels. Elaine Pagels has noted the influence of sources from Hellenistic Judaism, Zoroastrianism, and Middle Platonism on the Nag Hammadi texts.

Since the 1990s, the category of &quot;Gnosticism&quot; has come under increasing scrutiny from scholars. One such issue is whether Gnosticism ought to be considered one form of early Christianity, an interreligious phenomenon, or an independent religion. Going further than this, other contemporary scholars such as Michael Allen Williams, Karen Leigh King, and David G. Robertson contest whether &quot;Gnosticism&quot; is a valid or useful historical term, or if it was an artificial category framed by proto-orthodox theologians to target miscellaneous Christian heretics.

==Etymology==

 is a feminine Greek noun which means &quot;knowledge&quot; or &quot;awareness.&quot; It and the associated verb are often used for personal knowledge, as compared with intellectual knowledge (Greek verb ). A related term is the adjective , &quot;of or for knowledge&quot;, a reasonably common adjective in Classical Greek.

By the Hellenistic period, it began also to be associated with Greco-Roman mysteries, becoming synonymous with the Greek term . Consequentially, often refers to knowledge based on personal experience or perception. In a religious context, &quot;gnosis&quot; is mystical or esoteric knowledge based on direct participation with the divine. In most Gnostic systems, the sufficient cause of salvation is this &quot;knowledge of&quot; (&quot;acquaintance with&quot;) the divine. It is an inward &quot;knowing&quot;, comparable to that encouraged by Plotinus (neoplatonism), and differs from proto-orthodox Christian views. Gnostics are &quot;those who are oriented toward knowledge and understanding – or perception and learning – as a particular modality for living&quot;. The usual meaning of in Classical Greek texts is &quot;learned&quot; or &quot;intellectual&quot;, such as used by Plato in the comparison of &quot;practical&quot; () and &quot;intellectual&quot; (). Plato&#x27;s use of &quot;learned&quot; is fairly typical of Classical texts.

Sometimes employed in the Septuagint translation of the Hebrew Bible, the adjective is not used in the New Testament, but Clement of Alexandria who speaks of the &quot;learned&quot; (&quot;gnostikos&quot;) Christian quite often, uses it in complimentary terms. The use of &quot;gnostikos&quot; in relation to heresy originates with interpreters of Irenaeus. Some scholars consider that Irenaeus sometimes uses &quot;gnostikos&quot; to simply mean &quot;intellectual&quot;, whereas his mention of &quot;the intellectual sect&quot; is a specific designation. The term &quot;Gnosticism&quot; does not appear in ancient sources, and was first coined in the 17th century by Henry More in a commentary on the seven letters of the Book of Revelation, where More used the term &quot;Gnosticisme&quot; to describe the heresy in Thyatira. The term &quot;Gnosticism&quot; was derived from the use of the Greek adjective &quot;gnostikos&quot; (Greek γνωστικός, &quot;learned&quot;, &quot;intellectual&quot;) by St. Irenaeus (c. 185 AD) to describe the school of Valentinus as &quot;he legomene gnostike haeresis&quot; &quot;the heresy called Learned (gnostic)&quot;.

==Origins==
The origins of Gnosticism are obscure and still disputed. Alexandria was of central importance for the birth of Gnosticism. Gnosticism is strongly influenced by Middle Platonism and its theory of forms. Elaine Pagels has noted the influence of sources from Hellenistic Judaism, Zoroastrianism, and Middle Platonism on the Nag Hammadi texts. 

The Christian &quot;ecclesia&quot; (i. e. congregation, church) was of Jewish–Christian origin, but also attracted Greek members, and various strands of thought were available, such as &quot;Judaic apocalypticism, speculation on divine wisdom, Greek philosophy, and Hellenistic mystery religions.&quot;

The proto-orthodox Christian groups called Gnostics a heresy of Christianity.

While rejecting the underlying framing that proto-orthodox Christianity is the &#x27;original&#x27; and &#x27;true&#x27; Christianity from which Gnosticism and other &#x27;heresies&#x27; then deviated, scholars such as Simone Pétrement and David Brakke have argued that Gnosticism originated as an intra-Christian movement, being one of several responses to the life, death, and presumed resurrection of Jesus, with Pétrement tracing it specifically to tendencies in the letters of Paul and the Gospel of John. Within early Christianity, the teachings of Paul the Apostle and John the Evangelist may have been a starting point for Gnostic ideas, with a growing emphasis on the opposition between flesh and spirit, the value of charisma, and the disqualification of the Jewish law. The mortal body belonged to the world of inferior, worldly powers (the &quot;archons&quot;), and only the spirit or soul could be saved. The term &quot;gnostikos&quot; may have acquired a deeper significance here.

Other modern scholars hold that Gnosticism arose within Judaism and later incorporated stories about Jesus into pre-existing speculation about a cosmic Savior and Philo&#x27;s Jewish interpretation of Middle Platonic thought about the demiurge and the logos.

Still other scholars debate Gnosticism&#x27;s origins as having roots in Buddhism, due to similarities in beliefs. Ultimately, its origins are unknown.

Some scholars prefer to speak of &quot;gnosis&quot; when referring to first-century ideas that later developed into Gnosticism, and to reserve the term &quot;Gnosticism&quot; for the synthesis of these ideas into a coherent movement in the second century. According to James M. Robinson, no Gnostic texts clearly pre-date Christianity, and &quot;pre-Christian Gnosticism as such is hardly attested in a way to settle the debate once and for all.&quot;

===Jewish Christian origins===

A common position in the early 21st century was that Gnosticism has Jewish Christian origins, originating in the late first century AD in nonrabbinical Jewish sects and early Christian sects. Ethel S. Drower adds, &quot;heterodox Judaism in Galilee and Samaria appears to have taken shape in the form we now call Gnostic, and it may well have existed some time before the Christian era.&quot;

Many heads of Gnostic schools were identified as Jewish Christians by Church Fathers, and Hebrew words and names of God were applied in some Gnostic systems. The cosmogonic speculations among Christian Gnostics had partial origins in &quot;Maaseh Breshit&quot; and &quot;Maaseh Merkabah&quot;. This thesis is most notably put forward by Gershom Scholem (1897–1982) and Gilles Quispel (1916–2006). Scholem detected Jewish &quot;gnosis&quot; in the imagery of merkabah mysticism, which can also be found in certain Gnostic documents. Quispel sees Gnosticism as an independent Jewish development, tracing its origins to Alexandrian Jews, to which group Valentinus was also connected.

Many of the Nag Hammadi texts make reference to stories and characters from the Hebrew Bible, in some cases with a violent rejection of the Jewish God. Gershom Scholem once described Gnosticism as &quot;the Greatest case of metaphysical anti-Semitism&quot;, though Professor Steven Bayme said Gnosticism would be better characterized as anti-Judaism. However, recent research into the origins of Gnosticism shows a strong Jewish influence, particularly from Hekhalot literature.

===Angel christology===
Regarding the angel Christology of some early Christians, Darrell Hannah notes:
The pseudepigraphical Christian text &quot;Ascension of Isaiah&quot; identifies Jesus with angel Christology:
The Shepherd of Hermas is a Christian literary work considered as canonical scripture by some of the early Church fathers such as Irenaeus. Jesus is identified with angel Christology in parable 5, when the author mentions a Son of God, as a virtuous man filled with a Holy &quot;pre-existent spirit&quot;.

===Neoplatonic influences===

In the 1880s Gnostic connections with neo-Platonism were proposed. Ugo Bianchi, who organised the Congress of Messina of 1966 on the origins of Gnosticism, also argued for Orphic and Platonic origins. Gnostics borrowed significant ideas and terms from Platonism, using Greek philosophical concepts throughout their text, including such concepts as hypostasis (reality, existence), &quot;ousia&quot; (essence, substance, being), and demiurge (creator God). Both Sethian Gnostics and Valentinian Gnostics seem to have been influenced by Plato, Middle Platonism, and Neo-Pythagoreanism academies or schools of thought. Both schools attempted &quot;an effort towards conciliation, even affiliation&quot; with late antique philosophy, and were rebuffed by some Neoplatonists, including Plotinus.

===Persian origins or influences===
Early research into the origins of Gnosticism proposed Persian origins or influences, spreading to Europe and incorporating Jewish elements. According to Wilhelm Bousset (1865–1920), Gnosticism was a form of Iranian and Mesopotamian syncretism, and Richard August Reitzenstein (1861–1931) situated the origins of Gnosticism in Persia.

Carsten Colpe (b. 1929) has analyzed and criticised the Iranian hypothesis of Reitzenstein, showing that many of his hypotheses are untenable. Nevertheless, Geo Widengren (1907–1996) argued for the origin of Mandaean Gnosticism in Mazdean (Zoroastrianism) Zurvanism, in conjunction with ideas from the Aramaic Mesopotamian world.

However, scholars specializing in Mandaeism such as Kurt Rudolph, Mark Lidzbarski, Rudolf Macúch, Ethel S. Drower, James F. McGrath, Charles G. Häberl, Jorunn Jacobsen Buckley, and Şinasi Gündüz argue for a Judean–Israelite origin. The majority of these scholars believe that the Mandaeans likely have a historical connection with John the Baptist&#x27;s inner circle of disciples. Charles Häberl, who is also a linguist specializing in Mandaic, finds Palestinian and Samaritan Aramaic influence on Mandaic and accepts Mandaeans having a &quot;shared Palestinian history with Jews&quot;.

===Buddhist parallels===

In 1966, at the Congress of Median, Buddhologist Edward Conze noted phenomenological commonalities between Mahayana Buddhism and Gnosticism, in his paper &quot;Buddhism and Gnosis&quot;, following an early suggestion put forward by Isaac Jacob Schmidt. The influence of Buddhism in any sense on either the &quot;Gnostikos&quot; Valentinus (c.170) or the Nag Hammadi texts (3rd century) is not supported by modern scholarship, although Elaine Pagels called it a &quot;possibility&quot;.

==Characteristics==
===Cosmology===
The Syrian–Egyptian traditions postulate a remote, supreme Godhead, the Monad. From this highest divinity emanate lower divine beings, known as Aeons. The Demiurge arises among the Aeons and creates the physical world. Divine elements &quot;fall&quot; into the material realm, and are latent in human beings. Redemption from the fall occurs when the humans obtain Gnosis, or intuitive knowledge of the divine.

===Dualism and monism===

Gnostic systems postulate a dualism between God and the world, varying from the &quot;radical dualist&quot; systems of Manichaeism to the &quot;mitigated dualism&quot; of classic Gnostic movements. Radical dualism, or absolute dualism, posits two co-equal divine forces, while in &quot;mitigated dualism&quot; one of the two principles is in some way inferior to the other. In &quot;qualified monism&quot; the second entity may be divine or semi-divine. Valentinian Gnosticism is a form of monism, expressed in terms previously used in a dualistic manner.

===Moral and ritual practice===
Gnostics tended toward asceticism, especially in their sexual and dietary practice. In other areas of morality, Gnostics were less rigorously ascetic, and took a more moderate approach to correct behavior. In normative early Christianity, the Church administered and prescribed the correct behavior for Christians, while in Gnosticism it was the internalised motivation that was important. Ptolemy&#x27;s &quot;Epistle to Flora&quot; describes limited fasting, but maintains that true &quot;spiritual&quot; fasting is refraining from everything bad. For example, ritualistic behavior was not seen to possess as much importance as other practice, unless it was based on a personal, internal motivation.

=== Female representation ===
The role women played in Gnosticism is still being explored. The very few women in most Gnostic literature are portrayed as chaotic, disobedient, and enigmatic. However, the Nag Hammadi texts place women in roles of leadership and heroism.

==Concepts==

===Monad===

In many Gnostic systems, God is known as the &quot;Monad&quot;, the One. God is the high source of the pleroma, the region of light. The various emanations of God are called æons. According to Hippolytus, this view was inspired by the Pythagoreans, who called the first thing that came into existence the &quot;Monad&quot;, which begat the dyad, which begat the numbers, which begat the point, begetting lines, etc.

===Pleroma===

&quot;Pleroma&quot; (Greek πλήρωμα, &quot;fullness&quot;) refers to the totality of God&#x27;s powers. The heavenly pleroma is the center of divine life, a region of light &quot;above&quot; (the term is not to be understood spatially) our world, occupied by spiritual beings such as aeons (eternal beings) and sometimes archons. Jesus is interpreted as an intermediary aeon who was sent from the pleroma, with whose aid humanity can recover the lost knowledge of the divine origins of humanity. The term is thus a central element of Gnostic cosmology.

Pleroma is also used in the general Greek language and is used by the Greek Orthodox church in this general form since the word appears in the Epistle to the Colossians. Proponents of the view that Paul was actually a Gnostic, such as Elaine Pagels, view the reference in Colossians as a term that has to be interpreted in a Gnostic sense.

===Emanation===

The Supreme Light or Consciousness descends through a series of stages, gradations, worlds, or hypostases, becoming progressively more material and embodied. In time, it will turn around to return to the One (epistrophe), retracing its steps through spiritual knowledge and contemplation.

===Aeon===

In many Gnostic systems, the aeons are the various emanations of the superior God or Monad. Beginning in certain Gnostic texts with the hermaphroditic aeon Barbelo, the first emanated being, various interactions with the Monad occur which result in the emanation of successive pairs of aeons, often in male–female pairings called &quot;syzygies&quot;. The numbers of these pairings varied from text to text, though some identify their number as being thirty. The aeons as a totality constitute the &quot;pleroma&quot;, the &quot;region of light&quot;. The lowest regions of the pleroma are closest to the darkness, that is, the physical world.

Two of the most commonly paired æons were Christ and &quot;Sophia&quot; (Greek: &quot;Wisdom&quot;); the latter refers to Christ as her &quot;consort&quot; in &quot;A Valentinian Exposition&quot;.

===Sophia===

In Gnostic tradition, the name Sophia (Σοφία, Greek for &quot;wisdom&quot;) refers to the final emanation of God, and is identified with the &quot;anima mundi&quot; or world-soul. She is occasionally referred to by the Hebrew equivalent of &quot;Achamoth&quot; (this is a feature of Ptolemy&#x27;s version of the Valentinian Gnostic myth). Jewish Gnosticism with a focus on Sophia was active by 90 AD. In most, if not all, versions of the Gnostic myth, Sophia births the demiurge, who in turn brings about the creation of materiality. The positive and negative depictions of materiality depend on the myth&#x27;s depictions of Sophia&#x27;s actions. Sophia, in this highly patriarchal narrative, is described as unruly and disobedient, which is due to her bringing a creation of chaos into the world. The creation of the Demiurge was an act done without her counterpart&#x27;s consent. Because of the predefined hierarchy between them, this action contributed to the narrative that she was unruly and disobedient.

&quot;Sophia&quot;, emanating without her partner, resulted in the production of the &quot;Demiurge&quot; (Greek: lit. &quot;public builder&quot;), who is also referred to as &quot;Yaldabaoth&quot; and variations thereof in some Gnostic texts. This creature is concealed outside the pleroma; in isolation, and thinking itself alone, it creates materiality and a host of co-actors, referred to as archons. The demiurge is responsible for the creation of humankind, trapping elements of the pleroma stolen from Sophia inside human bodies. In response, the Godhead emanates two savior aeons, &quot;Christ&quot; and &quot;the Holy Spirit&quot;; Christ then embodies itself in the form of Jesus, in order to be able to teach humans how to achieve gnosis, by which they may return to the pleroma.

===Demiurge===

The term &quot;demiurge&quot; derives from the Latinized form of the Greek term &quot;dēmiourgos&quot;, δημιουργός, literally &quot;public or skilled worker&quot;. This figure is also called &quot;Yaldabaoth&quot;, Samael (Aramaic: &quot;sæmʻa-ʼel&quot;, &quot;blind god&quot;), or &quot;Saklas&quot; (Syriac: &quot;sækla&quot;, &quot;the foolish one&quot;), who is sometimes ignorant of the superior god, and sometimes opposed to it; thus in the latter case he is correspondingly malevolent. Other names or identifications are Ahriman, El, Satan, and Yahweh.

The demiurge creates the physical universe and the physical aspect of human nature. The demiurge typically creates a group of co-actors named archons who preside over the material realm and, in some cases, present obstacles to the soul seeking ascent from it. The inferiority of the demiurge&#x27;s creation may be compared to the technical inferiority of a work of art, painting, sculpture, etc. to the thing the art represents. In other cases, it takes on a more ascetic tendency to view material existence negatively, which then becomes more extreme when materiality, including the human body, is perceived as evil and constrictive, a deliberate prison for its inhabitants.

Moral judgments of the demiurge vary from group to group within the broad category of Gnosticism, viewing materiality as inherently evil or as merely flawed and as good as its passive constituent matter allows.

===Archon===

In late antiquity, some variants of Gnosticism used the term archon to refer to several servants of the demiurge. According to Origen&#x27;s &quot;Contra Celsum&quot;, a sect called the Ophites posited the existence of seven archons, beginning with Iadabaoth or Ialdabaoth, who created the six that follow: Iao, Sabaoth, Adonaios, Elaios, Astaphanos, and Horaios. Ialdabaoth had a head of a lion.

===Other concepts===
Other Gnostic concepts are:
* sarkic – earthly, hidebound, ignorant, uninitiated. The lowest level of human thought is the fleshly, instinctive level of thinking. 
* hylic – lowest order of the three types of humans. They cannot be saved since their thinking is entirely material, incapable of understanding the gnosis. 
* psychic – &quot;soulful&quot;, partially initiated. Matter-dwelling spirits
* pneumatic – &quot;spiritual&quot;, fully initiated, immaterial souls escaping the doom of the material world via gnosis.
* kenoma – the visible or manifest cosmos, &quot;lower&quot; than the pleroma
* charisma – gift, or energy, bestowed by pneumatics through oral teaching and personal encounters
* logos – the divine ordering principle of the cosmos; personified as Christ.
* hypostasis – literally &quot;that which stands beneath&quot; the inner reality, emanation (appearance) of God, known to psychics
* ousia – the essence of God, known to pneumatics. Specific individual things or being.

==Jesus as Gnostic saviour==
Jesus is identified by some Gnostics as an embodiment of the supreme being who became incarnate to bring &quot;gnōsis&quot; to the earth, while others adamantly denied that the supreme being came in the flesh, claiming Jesus to be merely a human who attained enlightenment through gnosis and taught his disciples to do the same. Others believed Jesus was divine, although did not have a physical body, reflected in the later Docetist movement. Among the Mandaeans, Jesus was considered a &quot;mšiha kdaba&quot; or &quot;false messiah&quot; who perverted the teachings entrusted to him by John the Baptist. Still other traditions identify Mani, the founder of Manichaeism, and Seth, third son of Adam and Eve, as salvific figures.

==Development==
Three periods can be discerned in the development of Gnosticism:
* Late-first century and early second century: development of Gnostic ideas, contemporaneous with the writing of the New Testament;
* mid-second century to early third century: high point of the classical Gnostic teachers and their systems, &quot;who claimed that their systems represented the inner truth revealed by Jesus&quot;;
* end of the second century to the fourth century: reaction by the proto-orthodox church and condemnation as heresy, and subsequent decline.

During the first period, three types of tradition developed:
* Genesis was reinterpreted in Jewish milieux, viewing Yahweh as a jealous God who enslaved people; freedom was to be obtained from this jealous God;
* A wisdom tradition developed, in which Jesus&#x27; sayings were interpreted as pointers to an esoteric wisdom, in which the soul could be divinized through identification with wisdom. Some of Jesus&#x27; sayings may have been incorporated into the gospels to put a limit on this development. The conflicts described in 1 Corinthians may have been inspired by a clash between this wisdom tradition and Paul&#x27;s gospel of crucifixion and resurrection;
* A mythical story developed about the descent of a heavenly creature to reveal the Divine world as the true home of human beings. Jewish Christianity saw the Messiah, or Christ, as &quot;an eternal aspect of God&#x27;s hidden nature, his &quot;spirit&quot; and &quot;truth&quot;, who revealed himself throughout sacred history&quot;.

The movement spread in areas controlled by the Roman Empire and Arian Goths, and the Persian Empire. It continued to develop in the Mediterranean and Middle East before and during the 2nd and 3rd centuries, but decline also set in during the third century, due to a growing aversion from the Nicene Church, and the economic and cultural deterioration of the Roman Empire. Conversion to Islam, and the Albigensian Crusade (1209–1229), greatly reduced the remaining number of Gnostics throughout the Middle Ages, though Mandaean communities still exist in Iraq, Iran and diaspora communities. Gnostic and pseudo-Gnostic ideas became influential in some of the philosophies of various esoteric mystical movements of the 19th and 20th centuries in Europe and North America, including some that explicitly identify themselves as revivals or even continuations of earlier Gnostic groups.

==Relation with early Christianity==

Dillon notes that Gnosticism raises questions about the development of early Christianity.

===Orthodoxy and heresy===

The Christian heresiologists, most notably Irenaeus, regarded Gnosticism as a Christian heresy. Modern scholarship notes that early Christianity was diverse, and Christian orthodoxy only settled in the 4thcentury, when the Roman Empire declined and Gnosticism lost its influence. Gnostics and proto-orthodox Christians shared some terminology. Initially, they were hard to distinguish from each other.

According to Walter Bauer, &quot;heresies&quot; may well have been the original form of Christianity in many regions. This theme was further developed by Elaine Pagels, who argues that &quot;the proto-orthodox church found itself in debates with Gnostic Christians that helped them to stabilize their own beliefs.&quot; According to Gilles Quispel, Catholicism arose in response to Gnosticism, establishing safeguards in the form of the monarchic episcopate, the creed, and the canon of holy books. 
On the other hand, Larry Hurtado argues that proto-orthodox Christianity was rooted into first-century Christianity:
...to a remarkable extent early-second-century protoorthodox devotion to Jesus represents a concern to preserve, respect, promote, and develop what were by then becoming traditional expressions of belief and reverence, and that had originated in earlier years of the Christian movement. That is, proto-orthodox faith tended to affirm and develop devotional and confessional tradition [...] Arland Hultgren has shown that the roots of this appreciation of traditions of faith actually go back deeply and widely into first-century Christianity.

===Historical Jesus===

The Gnostic movements may contain information about the historical Jesus, since some texts preserve sayings which show similarities with canonical sayings. The Gospel of Thomas in particular has a significant amount of parallel sayings. Yet, a striking difference is that the canonical sayings center on the coming endtime, while the Thomas-sayings center on a kingdom of heaven that is already here, and not a future event. According to Helmut Koester, this is because the Thomas-sayings are older, implying that in the earliest forms of Christianity, Jesus was regarded as a wisdom-teacher. An alternative hypothesis states that the Thomas authors wrote in the second century, changing existing sayings and eliminating the apocalyptic concerns. According to April DeConick, such a change occurred when the end time did not come, and the Thomasine tradition turned toward a &quot;new theology of mysticism&quot; and a &quot;theological commitment to a fully-present kingdom of heaven here and now, where their church had attained Adam and Eve&#x27;s divine status before the Fall.&quot; According to scholar-priest John P. Meier, scholars predominantly conclude that the gospel of Thomas depends on or parallels the Synoptics. Meier has repeatedly argued against the historicity of the Gospel of Thomas, stating that it cannot be a reliable source for the quest of the historical Jesus and also considers it a Gnostic text. He has also argued against the authenticity of the parables found exclusively in the Gospel of Thomas. According to James Dunn, the Gnostic emphasis on an inherent difference between flesh and spirit represented a significant departure from the teachings of the Historical Jesus and his earliest followers.

===Johannine literature===
The prologue of the Gospel of John describes the incarnated Logos, the light that came to earth, in the person of Jesus. The &quot;Apocryphon of John&quot; contains a scheme of three descendants from the heavenly realm, the third one being Jesus, just as in the Gospel of John. The similarities probably point to a relationship between Gnostic ideas and the Johannine community. According to Raymond Brown, the Gospel of John shows &quot;the development of certain gnostic ideas, especially Christ as heavenly revealer, the emphasis on light versus darkness, and anti-Jewish animus.&quot; The Johannine material reveals debates about the redeemer myth. The Johannine letters show that there were different interpretations of the gospel story, and the Johannine images may have contributed to second-century Gnostic ideas about Jesus as a redeemer who descended from heaven. According to DeConick, the Gospel of John shows a &quot;transitional system from early Christianity to gnostic beliefs in a God who transcends our world.&quot; According to DeConick, &quot;John&quot; may show a bifurcation of the idea of the Jewish God into Jesus&#x27; Father in Heaven and the Jews&#x27; father, &quot;the Father of the Devil&quot; (most translations say &quot;of [your] father the Devil&quot;), which may have developed into the Gnostic idea of the Monad and the Demiurge.

===Paul and Gnosticism===
Tertullian calls Paul &quot;the apostle of the heretics&quot;, because Paul&#x27;s writings were attractive to Gnostics, and interpreted in a Gnostic way, while Jewish Christians found him to stray from the Jewish roots of Christianity. In I Corinthians (), Paul refers to some church members as &quot;having knowledge&quot; (, &quot;ton echonta gnosin&quot;). James Dunn writes that in some cases, Paul affirmed views that were closer to Gnosticism than to proto-orthodox Christianity.

According to Clement of Alexandria, the disciples of Valentinus said that Valentinus was a student of a certain Theudas, who was a student of Paul, and Elaine Pagels notes that Paul&#x27;s epistles were interpreted by Valentinus in a Gnostic way, and Paul could be considered a proto-gnostic and a proto-Catholic. Many Nag Hammadi texts, including, for example, the &quot;Prayer of Paul&quot; and the Coptic &quot;Apocalypse of Paul&quot;, consider Paul to be &quot;the great apostle&quot;. The fact that he claimed to have received his gospel directly by revelation from God appealed to the Gnostics, who claimed &quot;gnosis&quot; from the risen Christ. The Naassenes, Cainites, and Valentinians referred to Paul&#x27;s epistles. Timothy Freke and Peter Gandy have expanded upon this idea of Paul as a Gnostic teacher; although their premise that Jesus was invented by early Christians based on an alleged Greco-Roman mystery cult has been dismissed by scholars. However, his revelation was different from the Gnostic revelations.

== Major movements ==

=== Judean–Israelite Gnosticism===
Although Elkesaites and Mandaeans were found mainly in Mesopotamia in the first few centuries of the common era, their origins appear to be Judean–Israelite in the Jordan valley.

====Elkesaites====

The Elkesaites were a Judeo-Christian baptismal sect that originated in the Transjordan and were active between 100 and 400 AD. The members of this sect performed frequent baptisms for purification and had a Gnostic disposition. The sect is named after its leader &quot;Elkesai&quot;.

According to Joseph Lightfoot, the Church Father Epiphanius (writing in the 4th century AD) seems to make a distinction between two main groups within the Essenes: &quot;Of those that came before his [Elxai (Elkesai), an Ossaean prophet] time and during it, the Ossaeans and the Nasaraeans.&quot;

==== Mandaeism ====

Mandaeism is a Gnostic, monotheistic and ethnic religion. The Mandaeans are an ethnoreligious group that speak a dialect of Eastern Aramaic known as Mandaic. They are the only surviving Gnostics from antiquity. Their religion has been practiced primarily around the lower Karun, Euphrates and Tigris and the rivers that surround the Shatt-al-Arab waterway, part of southern Iraq and Khuzestan province in Iran. Mandaeism is still practiced in small numbers, in parts of southern Iraq and the Iranian province of Khuzestan, and there are thought to be between 60,000 and 70,000 Mandaeans worldwide.

The name &#x27;Mandaean&#x27; comes from the Aramaic &quot;manda&quot; meaning knowledge. John the Baptist is a key figure in the religion, as an emphasis on baptism is part of their core beliefs. According to Nathaniel Deutsch, &quot;Mandaean anthropogony echoes both rabbinic and gnostic accounts.&quot; Mandaeans revere Adam, Abel, Seth, Enos, Noah, Shem, Aram, and especially John the Baptist. Significant amounts of original Mandaean Scripture, written in Mandaean Aramaic, survive in the modern era. The most important holy scripture is known as the Ginza Rabba and has portions identified by some scholars as being copied as early as the 2nd–3rd centuries, while others such as S. F. Dunlap place it in the 1st century. There is also the Qulasta (Mandaean prayerbook) and the Mandaean Book of John (Sidra ḏ&#x27;Yahia) and other scriptures.

Mandaeans believe that there is a constant battle or conflict between the forces of good and evil. The forces of good are represented by &quot;Nhura&quot; (Light) and &quot;Maia Hayyi&quot; (Living Water) and those of evil are represented by &quot;Hshuka&quot; (Darkness) and &quot;Maia Tahmi&quot; (dead or rancid water). The two waters are mixed in all things in order to achieve a balance. Mandaeans also believe in an afterlife or heaven called &quot;Alma d-Nhura&quot; (World of Light).

In Mandaeism, the World of Light is ruled by a Supreme God, known as Hayyi Rabbi (&#x27;The Great Life&#x27; or &#x27;The Great Living God&#x27;). God is so great, vast, and incomprehensible that no words can fully depict how immense God is. It is believed that an innumerable number of Uthras (angels or guardians), manifested from the light, surround and perform acts of worship to praise and honor God. They inhabit worlds separate from the lightworld and some are commonly referred to as emanations and are subservient beings to the Supreme God who is also known as &#x27;The First Life&#x27;. Their names include Second, Third, and Fourth Life (i.e. Yōšamin, Abathur, and Ptahil).

The Lord of Darkness (Krun) is the ruler of the World of Darkness formed from dark waters representing chaos. A main defender of the darkworld is a giant monster, or dragon, with the name Ur, and an evil, female ruler also inhabits the darkworld, known as Ruha. The Mandaeans believe these malevolent rulers created demonic offspring who consider themselves the owners of the seven planets and twelve zodiac constellations.

According to Mandaean beliefs, the material world is a mixture of light and dark created by Ptahil, who fills the role of the demiurge, with help from dark powers, such as Ruha the Seven, and the Twelve. Adam&#x27;s body (believed to be the first human created by God in Abrahamic tradition) was fashioned by these dark beings, however his soul (or mind) was a direct creation from the Light. Therefore, Mandaeans believe the human soul is capable of salvation because it originates from the World of Light. The soul, sometimes referred to as the &#x27;inner Adam&#x27; or Adam kasia, is in dire need of being rescued from the dark, so it may ascend into the heavenly realm of the World of Light.

Baptisms are a central theme in Mandaeism, believed to be necessary for the redemption of the soul. Mandaeans do not perform a single baptism, as in religions such as Christianity; rather, they view baptisms as a ritual act capable of bringing the soul closer to salvation. Therefore, Mandaeans are baptized repeatedly during their lives. Mandaeans consider John the Baptist to have been a Nasoraean Mandaean. John is referred to as their greatest and final teacher.

Jorunn J. Buckley and other scholars specializing in Mandaeism believe that the Mandaeans originated about two thousand years ago in the Judean region and moved east due to persecution. Others claim a southwestern Mesopotamia origin. However, some scholars take the view that Mandaeism is older and dates from pre-Christian times. Mandaeans assert that their religion predates Judaism, Christianity, and Islam as a monotheistic faith. Mandaeans believe that they descend directly from Shem, Noah&#x27;s son, and also from John the Baptist&#x27;s original disciples.

Due to paraphrases and word-for-word translations from the Mandaean originals found in the &quot;Psalms of Thomas&quot;, it is now believed that the pre-Manichaean presence of the Mandaean religion is more than likely. The Valentinians embraced a Mandaean baptismal formula in their rituals in the 2nd century CE. Birger A. Pearson compares the &quot;Five Seals&quot; of Sethianism, which he believes is a reference to quintuple ritual immersion in water, to Mandaean &quot;masbuta&quot;. According to Jorunn J. Buckley, &quot;Sethian Gnostic literature ... is related, perhaps as a younger sibling, to Mandaean baptism ideology.&quot;

In addition to accepting Mandaeism&#x27;s Israelite or Judean origins, Buckley adds:
==== Samaritan Baptist sects ====
According to Magris, Samaritan Baptist sects trace back to John the Baptist. One offshoot was in turn headed by Dositheus, Simon Magus, and Menander. It was in this milieu that the idea emerged that the world was created by ignorant angels. Their baptismal ritual removed the consequences of sin, and led to a regeneration by which natural death, which was caused by these angels, was overcome. The Samaritan leaders were viewed as &quot;the embodiment of God&#x27;s power, spirit, or wisdom, and as the redeemer and revealer of &#x27;true knowledge.

The Simonians were centered on Simon Magus, the magician baptised by Philip and rebuked by Peter in Acts 8, who became in early Christianity the archetypal false teacher. The ascription by Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, and others of a connection between schools in their time and the individual in Acts 8 may be as legendary as the stories attached to him in various apocryphal books. Justin Martyr identifies Menander of Antioch as Simon Magus&#x27; pupil. According to Hippolytus, Simonianism is an earlier form of the Valentinian doctrine.

The Quqites were a group who followed a Samaritan, Iranian type of Gnosticism in 2nd-century AD Erbil and in the vicinity of what is today northern Iraq. The sect was named after their founder Quq, known as &quot;the potter&quot;. The Quqite ideology arose in Edessa, Syria, in the 2nd century. The Quqites stressed the Hebrew Bible, made changes in the New Testament, associated twelve prophets with twelve apostles, and held that the latter corresponded to the same number of gospels. Their beliefs seem to have been eclectic, with elements of Judaism, Christianity, paganism, astrology, and Gnosticism.

=== Syrian-Egyptian Gnosticism ===
Syrian-Egyptian Gnosticism includes Sethianism, Valentinianism, Basilideans, Thomasine traditions, and Serpent Gnostics, and a number of other minor groups and writers. Hermeticism is also a western Gnostic tradition, though it differs in some respects from these other groups. The Syrian–Egyptian school derives much of its outlook from Platonist influences. It depicts creation in a series of emanations from a primal monadic source, finally resulting in the creation of the material universe. These schools tend to view evil in terms of matter that is markedly inferior to goodness and lacking spiritual insight and goodness rather than as an equal force.

Many of these movements used texts related to Christianity, with some identifying themselves as specifically Christian, though quite different from the Orthodox or Roman Catholic forms. Jesus and several of his apostles, such as Thomas the Apostle, claimed as the founder of the Thomasine form of Gnosticism, figure in many Gnostic texts. Mary Magdalene is respected as a Gnostic leader, and is considered superior to the twelve apostles by some Gnostic texts, such as the Gospel of Mary. John the Evangelist is claimed as a Gnostic by some Gnostic interpreters, as is even St. Paul. Most of the literature from this category is known to us through the Nag Hammadi Library.

==== Sethite-Barbeloite ====

Sethianism was one of the main currents of Gnosticism during the 2nd to 3rd centuries, and the prototype of Gnosticism as condemned by Irenaeus. Sethianism attributed its &quot;gnosis&quot; to Seth, third son of Adam and Eve and &quot;Norea&quot;, wife of Noah, who also plays a role in Mandaeism and Manicheanism. Their main text is the &quot;Apocryphon of John&quot;, containing two earlier myths. Earlier texts such as Apocalypse of Adam show signs of being pre-Christian and focus on Seth. Later Sethian texts continue to interact with Platonism. Sethian texts such as Zostrianos and Allogenes draw on the imagery of older Sethian texts, but use &quot;a large fund of philosophical conceptuality derived from contemporary Platonism, (that is, late middle Platonism) with no traces of Christian content.&quot;

According to John D. Turner, German and American scholarship views Sethianism as &quot;a distinctly inner-Jewish, albeit syncretistic and heterodox, phenomenon&quot;, while British and French scholarship tends to see Sethianism as &quot;a form of heterodox Christian speculation&quot;. Roelof vandenBroek notes that &quot;Sethianism&quot; may never have been a separate religious movement, and that the term refers rather to a set of mythological themes which occur in various texts.

According to Smith, Sethianism may have begun as a pre-Christian tradition, possibly a syncretic cult that incorporated elements of Christianity and Platonism as it grew. According to Temporini, Vogt, and Haase, early Sethians may be identical to or related to the Nazarenes, the Ophites, or the sectarian group called heretics by Philo.

According to Turner, Sethianism was influenced by Christianity and Middle Platonism, and originated in the second century as a fusion of a Jewish baptizing group of possibly priestly lineage, the so-called &quot;Barbeloites&quot;, named after Barbelo, the first emanation of the Highest God, and a group of Biblical exegetes, the &quot;Sethites&quot;, the &quot;seed of Seth&quot;. At the end of the second century, Sethianism grew apart from the developing Christian orthodoxy, which rejected the Docetic view of the Sethians on Christ. In the early third century, Sethianism was fully rejected by Christian heresiologists, as Sethianism shifted toward the contemplative practices of Platonism while losing interest in their primal origins. In the late third century, Sethianism was attacked by neo-Platonists like Plotinus, and Sethianism became alienated from Platonism. In the early to mid-fourth century, Sethianism fragmented into various sectarian Gnostic groups such as the Archontics, Audians, Borborites, and Phibionites, and perhaps Stratiotici, and Secundians. Some of these groups existed into the Middle Ages.

==== Valentinianism ====

Valentinianism was named after its founder Valentinus (), who was a candidate for bishop of Rome but started his own group when another was chosen. Valentinianism flourished after mid-second century. The school was popular, spreading to Northwest Africa and Egypt, and through to Asia Minor and Syria in the east, and Valentinus is specifically named as &quot;gnostikos&quot; by Irenaeus. It was an intellectually vibrant tradition, with an elaborate and philosophically &quot;dense&quot; form of Gnosticism. Valentinus&#x27; students elaborated on his teachings and materials, and several varieties of their central myth are known.

Valentinian Gnosticism may have been monistic rather than dualistic. In the Valentinian myths, the creation of a flawed materiality is not due to any moral failing on the part of the Demiurge, but due to the fact that he is less perfect than the superior entities from which he emanated. Valentinians treat physical reality with less contempt than other Gnostic groups, and conceive of materiality not as a separate substance from the divine, but as attributable to an &quot;error of perception&quot; which becomes symbolized mythopoetically as the act of material creation.

The followers of Valentinus attempted to systematically decode the Epistles, claiming that most Christians made the mistake of reading the Epistles literally rather than allegorically. Valentinians understood the conflict between &quot;Jews&quot; and &quot;Gentiles&quot; in Romans to be a coded reference to the differences between &quot;Psychics&quot; (people who are partly spiritual but have not yet achieved separation from carnality) and &quot;Pneumatics&quot; (totally spiritual people). The Valentinians argued that such codes were intrinsic in Gnosticism, secrecy being important to ensuring proper progression to true inner understanding.

According to Bentley Layton &quot;Classical Gnosticism&quot; and &quot;The School of Thomas&quot; antedated and influenced the development of Valentinus, whom Layton called &quot;the great [Gnostic] reformer&quot; and &quot;the focal point&quot; of Gnostic development. While in Alexandria, where he was born, Valentinus probably would have had contact with the Gnostic teacher Basilides, and may have been influenced by him. Simone Petrement, while arguing for a Christian origin of Gnosticism, places Valentinus after Basilides, but before the Sethians. According to Petrement, Valentinus represented a moderation of the anti-Judaism of the earlier Hellenized teachers; the demiurge, widely regarded as a mythological depiction of the Old Testament God of the Hebrews (i.e. Jehova), is depicted as more ignorant than evil.

==== Basilideans ====

The Basilidians or Basilideans were founded by Basilides of Alexandria in the second century. Basilides claimed to have been taught his doctrines by Glaucus, a disciple of St. Peter, but could also have been a pupil of Menander. Basilidianism survived until the end of the 4thcentury as Epiphanius knew of Basilidians living in the Nile Delta. It was, however, almost exclusively limited to Egypt, though according to Sulpicius Severus it seems to have found an entrance into Spain through a certain Mark from Memphis. St. Jerome states that the Priscillianists were infected with it.

==== Thomasine traditions ====
The &quot;Thomasine Traditions&quot; refers to a group of texts which are attributed to the apostle Thomas. Karen L. King notes that &quot;Thomasine Gnosticism&quot; as a separate category is being criticised, and may &quot;not stand the test of scholarly scrutiny&quot;.

==== Marcion ====
Marcion was a Church leader from Sinope (a city on the south shore of the Black Sea in present-day Turkey), who preached in Rome around 150CE, but was expelled and started his own congregation, which spread throughout the Mediterranean. He rejected the Old Testament, and followed a limited Christian canon, which included only a redacted version of Luke, and ten edited letters of Paul. Some scholars do not consider him to be a Gnostic, but his teachings clearly resemble some Gnostic teachings. He preached a radical difference between the God of the Old Testament, the Demiurge, the &quot;evil creator of the material universe&quot;, and the highest God, the &quot;loving, spiritual God who is the father of Jesus&quot;, who had sent Jesus to the earth to free mankind from the tyranny of the Jewish Law. Like the Gnostics, Marcion argued that Jesus was essentially a divine spirit appearing to men in the shape of a human form, and not someone in a true physical body. Marcion held that the heavenly Father (the father of Jesus Christ) was an utterly alien god; he had no part in making the world, nor any connection with it.

==== Hermeticism ====
Hermeticism is closely related to Gnosticism, but its orientation is more positive.

==== Other Gnostic groups ====
* Serpent Gnostics. The Naassenes, Ophites and the Serpentarians gave prominence to snake symbolism, and snake handling played a role in their ceremonies.
* Cerinthus (c. 100), the founder of a school with gnostic elements. Like a Gnostic, Cerinthus depicted Christ as a heavenly spirit separate from the man Jesus, and he cited the demiurge as creating the material world. Unlike the Gnostics, Cerinthus taught Christians to observe the Jewish law; his demiurge was holy, not lowly; and he taught the Second Coming. His gnosis was a secret teaching attributed to an apostle. Some scholars believe that the First Epistle of John was written as a response to Cerinthus.
* The Cainites are so-named since Hippolytus of Rome claims that they worshiped Cain, and Esau, Korah, and the Sodomites. There is little evidence concerning the nature of this group. Hippolytus claims that they believed that indulgence in sin was the key to salvation because since the body is evil, one must defile it through immoral activity (see libertinism). The name Cainite is used as the name of a religious movement, and not in the usual Biblical sense of people descended from Cain.
* The Carpocratians, a libertine sect following only the Gospel according to the Hebrews.
* The school of Justin, which combined gnostic elements with the ancient Greek religion.
* The Borborites, a libertine Gnostic sect, said to be descended from the Nicolaitans

=== Persian Gnosticism ===
The Persian schools, which appeared in the western Persian Sasanian province of Asoristan, and whose writings were originally produced in the Eastern Aramaic dialects spoken in Mesopotamia at the time, are representative of what is believed to be among the oldest of the Gnostic thought forms. These movements are considered by most to be religions in their own right and are not emanations from Christianity or Judaism.

==== Manichaeism ====
Manichaeism was founded by Mani (216–276). Mani&#x27;s father was a member of the Jewish Christian sect of the Elcesaites, a subgroup of the Gnostic Ebionites. At ages 12 and 24, Mani had visionary experiences of a &quot;heavenly twin&quot; of his, calling him to leave his father&#x27;s sect and preach the true message of Christ. In 240–241, Mani travelled to the Indo-Greek Kingdom of the Sakas in what is now Afghanistan, where he studied Hinduism and its various extant philosophies. Returning in 242, he joined the court of Shapur I, to whom he dedicated his only work written in Persian, known as the &quot;Shabuhragan&quot;. The original writings were written in Syriac, an Eastern Aramaic language, in a unique Manichaean script.

Manichaeism conceives of two coexistent realms of light and darkness that become embroiled in conflict. Certain elements of the light became entrapped within darkness, and the purpose of material creation is to engage in the slow process of extraction of these individual elements. In the end, the kingdom of light will prevail over darkness. Manicheanism inherits this dualistic mythology from Zurvanist Zoroastrianism, in which the eternal spirit Ahura Mazda is opposed by his antithesis, Angra Mainyu. This dualistic teaching embodied an elaborate cosmological myth that included the defeat of a primal man by the powers of darkness that devoured and imprisoned the particles of light.

According to Kurt Rudolph, the decline of Manichaeism that occurred in Persia in the 5th century was too late to prevent the spread of the movement into the east and the west. In the west, the teachings of the school moved into Syria, Northern Arabia, Egypt and North Africa. There is evidence for Manicheans in Rome and Dalmatia in the 4th century, and also in Gaul and Spain. From Syria, it progressed further into Syria Palestina, Anatolia, and Byzantine and Persian Armenia.

The influence of Manicheanism was attacked by imperial edicts and polemical writings, but the religion remained prevalent until the 6th century, and still exerted influence in the emergence of Paulicianism, Bogomilism, and Catharism in the Middle Ages, until it was ultimately stamped out by the Catholic Church.

In the east, Rudolph relates, Manicheanism was able to bloom, because the religious monopoly position previously held by Christianity and Zoroastrianism had been broken by nascent Islam. In the early years of the Arab conquest, Manicheanism again found followers in Persia (mostly amongst educated circles), but flourished most in Central Asia, to which it had spread through Iran. There, in 762, Manicheanism became the state religion of the Uyghur Khaganate.

=== Middle Ages ===
After its decline in the Mediterranean world, Gnosticism lived on in the periphery of the Byzantine Empire, and resurfaced in the western world. The Paulicians, an Adoptionist group which flourished between 650 and 872 in Armenia and the Eastern Themes of the Byzantine Empire, were accused by orthodox medieval sources of being Gnostic and quasi Manichaean Christian. The Bogomils, emerged in Bulgaria between 927 and 970 and spread throughout Europe. It was as synthesis of Armenian Paulicianism and the Bulgarian Orthodox Church reform movement.

The Cathars (Cathari, Albigenses or Albigensians) were also accused by their enemies of the traits of Gnosticism; though whether or not the Cathari possessed direct historical influence from ancient Gnosticism is disputed. If their critics are reliable the basic conceptions of Gnostic cosmology are to be found in Cathar beliefs (most distinctly in their notion of a lesser, Satanic, creator god), though they did not apparently place any special relevance upon knowledge (&quot;gnosis&quot;) as an effective salvific force.

==== Islam ====
The Quran, like Gnostic cosmology, makes a sharp distinction between this world and the afterlife. God is commonly thought of as being beyond human comprehension. In some Islamic schools of thought, God is identifiable with the Monad.

However, according to Islam and unlike most Gnostic sects, it is not rejection of this world but the performing of good deeds that leads to Paradise. According to the Islamic belief in tawhid (&quot;unification of God&quot;), there was no room for a lower deity such as the demiurge.

Islam also integrated traces of an entity given authority over the lower world in some early writings: Iblis is regarded by some Sufis as the owner of this world and humans must avoid the treasures of this world since they would belong to him.

In the Isma&#x27;ili Shi&#x27;i work &quot;Umm al-Kitab&quot;, Azazil&#x27;s role resembles whose of the demiurge. Like the demiurge, he is endowed with the ability to create a world and seeks to imprison humans in the material world, but here, his power is limited and depends on the higher God. Such anthropogenic can be found frequently among Isma&#x27;ili traditions. In fact, Isma&#x27;ilism has been often criticised as non-Islamic. Al-Ghazali characterized them as a group who are outwardly Shia but were adherents of a dualistic and philosophical religion.

Further traces of Gnostic ideas can be found in Sufi anthropogeny. Like the Gnostic conception of human beings imprisoned in matter, Sufi traditions acknowledge that the human soul is an accomplice of the material world and subject to bodily desires similar to the way archontic spheres envelop the pneuma. The ruh (pneuma, spirit) must therefore gain victory over the lower and material-bound nafs (psyche, soul, or anima) to overcome its animal nature. A human being captured by its animal desires, mistakenly claims autonomy and independence from the &quot;higher God&quot;, thus resembling the lower deity in classical Gnostic traditions. However, since the goal is not to abandon the created world, but just to free oneself from lower desires, it can be disputed whether this can still be Gnostic, but rather a completion of the message of Muhammad.

It seems that Gnostic ideas were an influential part of early Islamic development but later lost its influence. However light metaphors and the idea of unity of existence () still prevailed in later Islamic thought, such as that of ibn Sina.

==== Kabbalah ====
Gershom Scholem, a historian of Jewish philosophy, wrote that several core Gnostic ideas reappear in medieval Kabbalah, where they are used to reinterpret earlier Jewish sources. In these cases, according to Scholem, texts such as the Zohar adapted Gnostic precepts for the interpretation of the Torah, while not using the language of Gnosticism. Scholem further proposed that there was a Jewish Gnosticism which influenced the early origins of Christian Gnosticism.

Given that some of the earliest dated Kabbalistic texts emerged in medieval Provence, at which time Cathar movements were also supposed to have been active, Scholem and other mid-20th century scholars argued that there was mutual influence between the two groups. According to Dan Joseph, this hypothesis has not been substantiated by any extant texts.

Moshe Idel however has argued that the Gnostic or esoteric ideas found in Kabbalah have Jewish roots from ancient times, though we do not have written records of them.

=== Modern times ===

Found today in Iraq, Iran and diaspora communities, the Mandaeans are an ancient Gnostic ethnoreligious group that follow John the Baptist and have survived from antiquity. Their name comes from the Aramaic &quot;manda&quot; meaning knowledge or gnosis. There are thought to be 60,000 to 70,000 Mandaeans worldwide. A number of modern Gnostic ecclesiastical bodies have been set up or re-founded since the discovery of the Nag Hammadi library, including the Ecclesia Gnostica, Apostolic Johannite Church, Ecclesia Gnostica Catholica, the Gnostic Church of France, the Thomasine Church, the Alexandrian Gnostic Church, and the North American College of Gnostic Bishops. A number of 19th-century thinkers such as Arthur Schopenhauer, Albert Pike and Madame Blavatsky studied Gnostic thought extensively and were influenced by it, and even figures like Herman Melville and W. B. Yeats were more tangentially influenced. Jules Doinel &quot;re-established&quot; a Gnostic church in France in 1890, which altered its form as it passed through various direct successors (Fabre des Essarts as &quot;Tau Synésius&quot; and Joanny Bricaud as &quot;Tau Jean II&quot; most notably), and, though small, is still active today.

Early 20th-century thinkers who heavily studied and were influenced by Gnosticism include Carl Jung (who supported Gnosticism), Eric Voegelin (who opposed it), Jorge Luis Borges (who included it in many of his short stories), and Aleister Crowley, with figures such as Hermann Hesse being more moderately influenced. René Guénon founded the Gnostic review, &quot;La Gnose&quot; in 1909, before moving to a more Perennialist position, and founding his Traditionalist School. Gnostic Thelemite organizations, such as Ecclesia Gnostica Catholica and Ordo Templi Orientis, trace themselves to Crowley&#x27;s thought. The discovery and translation of the Nag Hammadi library after 1945 has had a huge effect on Gnosticism since World War II. Intellectuals who were heavily influenced by Gnosticism in this period include Lawrence Durrell, Hans Jonas, Philip K. Dick and Harold Bloom, with Albert Camus and Allen Ginsberg being more moderately influenced. Celia Green has written on Gnostic Christianity in relation to her own philosophy. Alfred North Whitehead was aware of the existence of the newly discovered Gnostic scrolls. Accordingly, Michel Weber has proposed a Gnostic interpretation of his late metaphysics.

==Sources==

===Heresiologists===
Prior to the discovery of the Nag Hammadi library in 1945 Gnosticism was known primarily through the works of heresiologists, Church Fathers who opposed those movements. These writings had an antagonistic bias against Gnostic teachings, and were incomplete. Several heresiological writers, such as Hippolytus, made little effort to exactly record the nature of the sects they reported on, or transcribe their sacred texts. Reconstructions of incomplete Gnostic texts were attempted in modern times, but research on Gnosticism was coloured by the orthodox views of those heresiologists.

Justin Martyr () wrote the &quot;First Apology&quot;, addressed to Roman emperor Antoninus Pius, which criticised Simon Magus, Menander and Marcion. Since then, both Simon and Menander have been considered as &#x27;proto-Gnostic&#x27;. Irenaeus (died ) wrote &quot;Against Heresies&quot; (), which identifies Simon Magus from Flavia Neapolis in Samaria as the inceptor of Gnosticism. Irenaeus charted an apparent spread of the teachings of Simon through the ancient &quot;knowers&quot; into the teachings of Valentinus and other contemporaneous Gnostic sects. Hippolytus (170–235) wrote the ten-volume &quot;Refutation Against all Heresies&quot;, of which eight have been found. It also focuses on the connection between pre-Socratic ideas and the false beliefs of early Gnostic leaders. Thirty-three of the groups he reported on are considered Gnostic by modern scholars, including &#x27;the foreigners&#x27; and &#x27;the Seth people&#x27;. Hippolytus further presents individual teachers such as Simon, Valentinus, Secundus, Ptolemy, Heracleon, Marcus and Colorbasus. Tertullian () from Carthage wrote &quot;Adversus Valentinianos&quot; (&#x27;Against the Valentinians&#x27;), c.206, and five books around 207–208 chronicling and refuting the teachings of Marcion.

===Gnostic texts===

Prior to the discovery at Nag Hammadi, a limited number of texts were available to students of Gnosticism. Reconstructions were attempted from the records of the heresiologists, but these were necessarily coloured by the motivation behind the source accounts. The Nag Hammadi library is a collection of mostly Gnostic texts discovered in 1945 near Nag Hammadi, Upper Egypt. Twelve leather-bound papyrus codices buried in a sealed jar were found by a local farmer named Muhammed al-Samman. The writings in these codices comprised fifty-two mostly Gnostic treatises, but they also include three works belonging to the &quot;Corpus Hermeticum&quot; and a partial translation/alteration of Plato&#x27;s &quot;Republic&quot;. These codices may have belonged to a nearby Pachomian monastery, and buried after Bishop Athanasius condemned the use of non-canonical books in his Festal Letter of 367. Though the original language of composition was probably Greek, the various codices contained in the collection were written in Coptic. A 1st- or 2nd-century date of composition for the lost Greek originals has been proposed, though this is disputed; the manuscripts themselves date from the 3rd and 4th centuries. The Nag Hammadi texts demonstrated the fluidity of early Christian scripture and early Christianity itself.

==Academic studies==

===Development===
Prior to the discovery of Nag Hammadi, the Gnostic movements were largely perceived through the lens of the early church heresiologists. Johann Lorenz von Mosheim (1694–1755) proposed that Gnosticism developed on its own in Greece and Mesopotamia, spreading to the west and incorporating Jewish elements. According to Mosheim, Jewish thought took Gnostic elements and used them against Greek philosophy. J.Horn and Ernest Anton Lewald proposed Persian and Zoroastrian origins, while Jacques Matter described Gnosticism as an intrusion of eastern cosmological and theosophical speculation into Christianity.

In the 1880s, Gnosticism was placed within Greek philosophy, especially neo-Platonism. Adolf von Harnack (1851–1930), who belonged to the History of Dogma school and proposed a &quot;Kirchengeschichtliches Ursprungsmodell&quot;, saw Gnosticism as an internal development within the church under the influence of Greek philosophy. According to Harnack, Gnosticism was the &quot;acute Hellenization of Christianity&quot;.

The &quot;Religionsgeschichtliche Schule&quot; (&quot;history of religions school&quot;, 19th century) had a profound influence on the study of Gnosticism. The &quot;Religionsgeschichtliche Schule&quot; saw Gnosticism as a pre-Christian phenomenon, and Christian &quot;gnosis&quot; as only one, and even marginal instance of this phenomenon. According to Wilhelm Bousset (1865–1920), Gnosticism was a form of Iranian and Mesopotamian syncretism, and Eduard Norden (1868–1941) also proposed pre-Christian origins, while Richard August Reitzenstein (1861–1931), and Rudolf Bultmann (1884–1976) also situated the origins of Gnosticism in Persia. Hans Heinrich Schaeder (1896–1957) and Hans Leisegang (1890–1951) saw Gnosticism as an amalgam of eastern thought in a Greek form.

Hans Jonas (1903–1993) took an intermediate approach, using both the comparative approach of the &quot;Religionsgeschichtliche Schule&quot; and the existentialist hermeneutics of Rudolph Bultmann. Jonas emphasized the duality between the Gnostic God and the world. Jonas concluded that Gnosticism cannot be derived from Platonism, nor from Judaism. Instead, he proposed that Gnosticism manifested an existential situation triggered by the conquests of Alexander The Great. Following Weber and Spengler, he noted the impact of the conquests on Greek city-states (in the &quot;West&quot;) and castes of priest-intellectuals (in the Persian &quot;East&quot;). Following Jonas&#x27;s existential lead and some of his methods, scholarship contemporary to Jonas advocated a different proposal, claiming that Gnosticism has Jewish or Judeo-Christian origins; These theses were notably put forward by Gershom Scholem (1897–1982) and Gilles Quispel (1916–2006).

The study of Gnosticism and of early Alexandrian Christianity received a strong impetus from the discovery of the Coptic Nag Hammadi library in 1945. A great number of translations have been published, and the works of Elaine Pagels, especially &quot;The Gnostic Gospels&quot;, which detailed the suppression of some of the writings found at Nag Hammadi by early bishops of the Christian church, have popularized Gnosticism in mainstream culture, but also provoked strong responses and condemnations from clerical writers. As of the 1970s, these and other publications applied the revised version of Jonas&#x27;s proposal and criticized it, mostly relating to the evidence regarding &quot;Pre-Cristian&quot; Gnosticism.

A prominent shift of emphasis surfaced during the mid-1990s and the early years of the 21st century. In 1996, Michael Williams published his landmark Rethinking &quot;Gnosticism&quot; where he doubted the applicability of &quot;Gnosticism&quot; as a socio-historical category. Instead, and somewhat to the converse, he proposed the use of &quot;Biblical-Demiurgic tradition&quot;, where &quot;tradition&quot; is read as a collective religious choice that competes on the religious &quot;marketplace&quot;. In 2004, Karen Leigh King published her equally important &quot;What is Gnosticism?&quot;. Broadly, King&#x27;s book traces elements of the history of research, arguing that the term and its typical connotations do injustice to the diversity and breadth of early Christianity. Thus, in King&#x27;s reading, it is not precisely the category of Gnosticism that is flawed, but the way in which it was conceived and applied, a form of self/other rhetoric that rendered the remaining portion of Christianity less diverse for centuries to come.

The effects of Williams and King cannot be understated, to the point that &quot;Gnostic studies&quot; often became &quot;Nag Hammadi studies&quot;. Nevertheless, some scholars seem to retain either a nuanced version of the term, considered &quot;the Gnostic school of thought,&quot; or as a unique phenomenon regardless of defamation campaigns.

===Definitions of Gnosticism===
According to Matthew J. Dillon, six trends can be discerned in the definitions of Gnosticism:
* Typologies, &quot;a catalogue of shared characteristics that are used to classify a group of objects together.&quot;
* Traditional approaches, viewing Gnosticism as a Christian heresy
* Phenomenological approaches, most notably Hans Jonas
* Restricting Gnosticism, &quot;identifying which groups were explicitly called gnostics&quot;, or which groups were clearly sectarian
* Deconstructing Gnosticism, abandoning the category of &quot;Gnosticism&quot;
* Psychology and cognitive science of religion, approaching Gnosticism as a psychological phenomenon

====Typologies====
The 1966 Messina conference on the origins of gnosis and Gnosticism proposed to designate
This definition has now been abandoned. It created a religion, &quot;Gnosticism&quot;, from the &quot;gnosis&quot; which was a widespread element of ancient religions, suggesting a homogeneous conception of gnosis by these Gnostic religions, which did not exist at the time.

According to Dillon, the texts from Nag Hammadi made clear that this definition was limited, and that they are &quot;better classified by movements (such as Valentinian), mythological similarity (Sethian), or similar tropes (presence of a Demiurge).&quot; Dillon further notes that the Messina-definition &quot;also excluded pre-Christian Gnosticism and later developments, such as the Mandaeans and the Manichaeans.&quot;

Hans Jonas discerned two main currents of Gnosticism, namely Syrian-Egyptian, and Persian, which includes Manicheanism and Mandaeism. Among the Syrian-Egyptian schools and the movements they spawned are a typically more Monist view. Persian Gnosticism possesses more dualist tendencies, reflecting a strong influence from the beliefs of the Persian Zurvanist Zoroastrians. Those of the medieval Cathars, Bogomils, and Carpocratians seem to include elements of both categories. However, scholars such as Kurt Rudolph, Mark Lidzbarski, Rudolf Macúch, Ethel S. Drower and Jorunn Jacobsen Buckley argue for a Palestinian origin for Mandaeism.

Gilles Quispel divided Syrian-Egyptian Gnosticism further into Jewish Gnosticism (the &quot;Apocryphon of John&quot;) and Christian Gnosis (Marcion, Basilides, Valentinus). This &quot;Christian Gnosticism&quot; was Christocentric, and influenced by Christian writings such as the Gospel of John and the Pauline epistles. Other authors speak rather of &quot;Gnostic Christians&quot;, noting that Gnostics were a prominent substream in the early church.

====Traditional approaches – Gnosticism as Christian heresy====
The best known example of this approach is Adolf von Harnack (1851–1930), who stated that &quot;Gnosticism is the acute Hellenization of Christianity.&quot; According to Dillon, &quot;many scholars today continue in the vein of Harnack in reading gnosticism as a late and contaminated version of Christianity&quot;, notably Darrell Block, who criticises Elaine Pagels for her view that early Christianity was wildly diverse.

====Phenomenological approaches====
Hans Jonas (1903–1993) took an existential phenomenological approach to Gnosticism. According to Jonas, alienation is a distinguishing characteristic of Gnosticism, making it different from contemporary religions. Jonas compares this alienation with the existentialist notion of &quot;geworfenheit&quot;, Martin Heidegger&#x27;s &quot;thrownness&quot;, as in being thrown into a hostile world.

====Restricting Gnosticism====
In the late 1980s scholars voiced concerns about the broadness of &quot;Gnosticism&quot; as a meaningful category. Bentley Layton proposed to categorize Gnosticism by delineating which groups were marked as Gnostic in ancient texts. According to Layton, this term was mainly applied by heresiologists to the myth described in the &quot;Apocryphon of John&quot;, and was used mainly by the Sethians and the Ophites. According to Layton, texts which refer to this myth can be called &quot;classical Gnostic&quot;.

In addition, Alastair Logan uses social theory to identify Gnosticism. He uses Rodney Stark and William Bainbridge&#x27;s sociological theory on traditional religion, sects and cults. According to Logan, the Gnostics were a cult, at odds with the society at large.

===Criticism of &quot;Gnosticism&quot; as a category===
According to the Westar Institute&#x27;s Fall 2014 Christianity Seminar Report on Gnosticism, there is no group that possesses all of the usually-attributed features. Nearly every group possesses one or more of them, or some modified version of them. There was no particular relationship among any set of groups which one could distinguish as &quot;Gnostic&quot;, as if they were in opposition to some other set of groups. For instance, every sect of Christianity on which we have any information on this point believed in a separate Logos who created the universe at God&#x27;s behest. Likewise, they believed some kind of secret knowledge (&quot;gnosis&quot;) was essential to ensuring one&#x27;s salvation. Likewise, they had a dualist view of the cosmos, in which the lower world was corrupted by meddling divine beings and the upper world&#x27;s God was awaiting a chance to destroy it and start over, thereby helping humanity to escape its corrupt bodies and locations by fleeing into celestial ones.

According to Michael Allen Williams, the concept of Gnosticism as a distinct religious tradition is questionable, since &quot;gnosis&quot; was a pervasive characteristic of many religious traditions in antiquity, and not restricted to the so-called Gnostic systems. According to Williams, the conceptual foundations on which the category of Gnosticism rests are the remains of the agenda of the heresiologists. The early church heresiologists created an interpretive definition of Gnosticism, and modern scholarship followed this example and created a &quot;categorical&quot; definition. According to Williams the term needs replacing to more accurately reflect those movements it comprises, and suggests to replace it with the term &quot;the Biblical demiurgical tradition&quot;.

According to Karen King, scholars have &quot;unwittingly continued the project of ancient heresiologists&quot;, searching for non-Christian influences, thereby continuing to portray a pure, original Christianity.

In light of such increasing scholarly rejection and restriction of the concept of Gnosticism, David G. Robertson has written on the distortions which misapplications of the term continue to perpetuate in religious studies.

==Psychological approaches==
Carl Jung approached Gnosticism from a psychological perspective, which was followed by Gilles Quispel. According to this approach, Gnosticism is a map for the human development in which an undivided person, centered on the Self, develops out of the fragmentary personhood of young age. According to Quispel, gnosis is a third force in western culture, alongside faith and reason, which offers an experiential awareness of this Self.

According to Ioan Culianu, gnosis is made possible through universal operations of the mind, which can be arrived at &quot;anytime, anywhere&quot;. A similar suggestion has been made by Edward Conze, who suggested that the similarities between &quot;prajñā&quot; and &quot;sophia&quot; may be due to &quot;the actual modalities of the human mind&quot;, which in certain conditions result in similar experiences.

==Notes==
===Subnotes===
==References==
===Citations===
===Works cited===
====Printed sources====


* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 



* 
* 
* 

* 

* 
* 
* 


* 
* 
* 

* 
* 
* 

* 
* 


* 
* 
====Web sources====
==Further reading==
Primary sources
* 

General
* 
* 
* Translated as 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==


Texts
* Gnostic Society Library – primary sources and commentaries
* Early Christian Writings – primary texts
* Gnostic texts at sacred-texts.com

Encyclopedias
* Gnosticism, by Edward Moore, Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
* Gnosticism by Kurt Rudolph, Encyclopædia Iranica
* Gnosticism Catholic Encyclopedia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="0" end="10" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnosticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="17" end="30" title="Ancient Greek language" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="184" end="199" title="Early Christianity" label="early Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q421261" start="275" end="281" title="gnosis" label="gnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543814" start="299" end="313" title="Proto-orthodox Christianity" label="proto-orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q170835" start="386" end="395" title="cosmogony" label="cosmogony"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="455" end="458" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q183488" start="476" end="491" title="Demiurge" label="lesser divinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="523" end="535" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q766677" start="542" end="548" title="Yahweh" label="Yahweh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860" start="586" end="603" title="Nature" label="material universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q192054" start="708" end="717" title="salvation" label="salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="790" end="798" title="esoteric" label="esoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q60227" start="851" end="854" title="sin" label="sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q497263" start="859" end="869" title="repentance" label="repentance"/>
<link wikidata="Q182593" start="880" end="888" title="illusion" label="illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284165" start="893" end="906" title="Divine illumination" label="enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="975" end="988" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="1031" end="1051" title="Early Church Fathers" label="Early Church Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="1070" end="1076" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q309864" start="1253" end="1263" title="Valentinus (Gnostic)" label="Valentinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="1330" end="1336" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q204603" start="1633" end="1647" title="Valentinianism" label="Valentinianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209468" start="1652" end="1662" title="Sethianism" label="Sethianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="1671" end="1685" title="Sassanian Empire" label="Persian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q131165" start="1749" end="1760" title="Manichaeism" label="Manichaeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q205754" start="1768" end="1777" title="Mandaeism" label="Mandaeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="1852" end="1856" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="1858" end="1862" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="1867" end="1875" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747710" start="1926" end="1935" title="Mandaeans" label="Mandaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q182123" start="2203" end="2220" title="Irenaeus of Lyons" label="Irenaeus of Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q207113" start="2225" end="2243" title="Hippolytus of Rome" label="Hippolytus of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q222999" start="2329" end="2348" title="Nag Hammadi library" label="Nag Hammadi library"/>
<link wikidata="Q131546" start="2420" end="2436" title="Gospel of Thomas" label="Gospel of Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q618874" start="2445" end="2463" title="Apocryphon of John" label="Apocryphon of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="2535" end="2540" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q131546" start="2709" end="2725" title="Gospel of Thomas" label="Gospel of Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q106046" start="2750" end="2766" title="Synoptic Gospels" label="Synoptic Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q263099" start="2768" end="2781" title="Elaine Pagels" label="Elaine Pagels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602777" start="2822" end="2841" title="Hellenistic Judaism" label="Hellenistic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="2843" end="2857" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757391" start="2863" end="2879" title="Middle Platonism" label="Middle Platonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="3085" end="3103" title="early Christianity" label="early Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491981" start="3248" end="3264" title="Karen Leigh King" label="Karen Leigh King"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912496" start="3473" end="3481" title="Heresy in Christianity" label="heretics"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="3831" end="3849" title="Hellenistic period" label="Hellenistic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q505821" start="3887" end="3908" title="Greco-Roman mysteries" label="Greco-Roman mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="4085" end="4093" title="Mysticism" label="mystical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9081" start="4106" end="4115" title="knowledge" label="knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q134189" start="4369" end="4377" title="Plotinus" label="Plotinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q162145" start="4379" end="4391" title="neoplatonism" label="neoplatonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543814" start="4411" end="4435" title="proto-orthodox Christianity" label="proto-orthodox Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="4708" end="4713" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="4898" end="4908" title="Septuagint" label="Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="4928" end="4940" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q188883" start="4994" end="5015" title="Clement of Alexandria" label="Clement of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q182123" start="5220" end="5228" title="Irenaeus" label="Irenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q528802" start="5541" end="5551" title="Henry More" label="Henry More"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="5596" end="5614" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135603" start="5691" end="5699" title="Thyatira" label="Thyatira"/>
<link wikidata="Q309864" start="5922" end="5932" title="Valentinus (Gnostic)" label="Valentinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="6098" end="6108" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757391" start="6201" end="6217" title="Middle Platonism" label="Middle Platonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068658" start="6226" end="6241" title="theory of forms" label="theory of forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q263099" start="6243" end="6256" title="Elaine Pagels" label="Elaine Pagels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602777" start="6297" end="6316" title="Hellenistic Judaism" label="Hellenistic Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="6318" end="6332" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757391" start="6338" end="6354" title="Middle Platonism" label="Middle Platonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q618859" start="6581" end="6595" title="apocalypticism" label="apocalypticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027409" start="6597" end="6625" title="Wisdom (personification)" label="speculation on divine wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q505821" start="6649" end="6678" title="Greco-Roman mysteries" label="Hellenistic mystery religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543814" start="6810" end="6837" title="proto-orthodox Christianity" label="proto-orthodox Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6985" end="7001" title="Simone Pétrement" label="Simone Pétrement"/>
<link wikidata="Q93233692" start="7006" end="7018" title="David Brakke" label="David Brakke"/>
<link wikidata="Q265283" start="7237" end="7252" title="letters of Paul" label="letters of Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q36766" start="7261" end="7275" title="Gospel of John" label="Gospel of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="7321" end="7337" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q328804" start="7342" end="7361" title="John the Evangelist" label="John the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614157" start="7624" end="7631" title="Archon (Gnosticism)" label="archons"/>
<link wikidata="Q189597" start="7925" end="7930" title="Philo" label="Philo"/>
<link wikidata="Q183488" start="7997" end="8005" title="demiurge" label="demiurge"/>
<link wikidata="Q180832" start="8014" end="8019" title="logos" label="logos"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="8095" end="8103" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916843" start="8444" end="8461" title="James M. Robinson" label="James M. Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q262109" start="8728" end="8744" title="Jewish Christian" label="Jewish Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322139" start="8852" end="8867" title="E. S. Drower" label="Ethel S. Drower"/>
<link wikidata="Q83241" start="8901" end="8908" title="Galilee" label="Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294629" start="8913" end="8920" title="Samaria" label="Samaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998321" start="9216" end="9226" title="religious cosmology" label="cosmogonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65064982" start="9288" end="9346" title="Maaseh Breishit and Maaseh Merkavah" label="&amp;quot;Maaseh Breshit&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;Maaseh Merkabah&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q138850" start="9391" end="9406" title="Gershom Scholem" label="Gershom Scholem"/>
<link wikidata="Q606363" start="9423" end="9437" title="Gilles Quispel" label="Gilles Quispel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573644" start="9512" end="9530" title="merkabah mysticism" label="merkabah mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q97354069" start="9671" end="9687" title="History of the Jews in Alexandria" label="Alexandrian Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q222999" start="9748" end="9765" title="Nag Hammadi texts" label="Nag Hammadi texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q575970" start="10073" end="10085" title="anti-Judaism" label="anti-Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010619" start="10194" end="10213" title="Hekhalot literature" label="Hekhalot literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q827597" start="10324" end="10341" title="Pseudepigrapha" label="pseudepigraphical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234994" start="10363" end="10382" title="Ascension of Isaiah" label="Ascension of Isaiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q898808" start="10430" end="10452" title="The Shepherd of Hermas" label="The Shepherd of Hermas"/>
<link wikidata="Q51623" start="10496" end="10515" title="biblical canon" label="canonical scripture"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="10537" end="10551" title="Church fathers" label="Church fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q651118" start="11115" end="11125" title="hypostasis (philosophy)" label="hypostasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411075" start="11154" end="11159" title="ousia" label="ousia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209468" start="11228" end="11235" title="Sethian" label="Sethian"/>
<link wikidata="Q309864" start="11249" end="11260" title="Valentinius" label="Valentinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="11302" end="11307" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757391" start="11309" end="11325" title="Middle Platonism" label="Middle Platonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147651" start="11331" end="11349" title="Neo-Pythagoreanism" label="Neo-Pythagoreanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q162145" start="11523" end="11536" title="Neoplatonism" label="Neoplatonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q66715" start="11749" end="11764" title="Wilhelm Bousset" label="Wilhelm Bousset"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="11828" end="11838" title="syncretism" label="syncretism"/>
<link wikidata="Q66614" start="11844" end="11871" title="Richard August Reitzenstein" label="Richard August Reitzenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502802" start="12088" end="12101" title="Geo Widengren" label="Geo Widengren"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="12162" end="12169" title="Mazdean" label="Mazdean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423009" start="12187" end="12196" title="Zurvanism" label="Zurvanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q95888" start="12314" end="12326" title="Kurt Rudolph" label="Kurt Rudolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q86998" start="12328" end="12343" title="Mark Lidzbarski" label="Mark Lidzbarski"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013032" start="12345" end="12358" title="Rudolf Macúch" label="Rudolf Macúch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322139" start="12360" end="12375" title="E. S. Drower" label="Ethel S. Drower"/>
<link wikidata="Q28407857" start="12377" end="12393" title="James F. McGrath" label="James F. McGrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079259" start="12395" end="12412" title="Charles G. Häberl" label="Charles G. Häberl"/>
<link wikidata="Q96630735" start="12414" end="12437" title="Jorunn Jacobsen Buckley" label="Jorunn Jacobsen Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6079947" start="12443" end="12456" title="Şinasi Gündüz" label="Şinasi Gündüz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12644" end="12658" title="Charles Häberl" label="Charles Häberl"/>
<link wikidata="Q33500" start="12699" end="12706" title="Mandaic language" label="Mandaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q72390" start="12926" end="12938" title="Edward Conze" label="Edward Conze"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="12984" end="13001" title="Mahayana Buddhism" label="Mahayana Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q213754" start="13109" end="13128" title="Isaac Jacob Schmidt" label="Isaac Jacob Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q263099" start="13312" end="13325" title="Elaine Pagels" label="Elaine Pagels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897848" start="13472" end="13477" title="monad (Gnosticism)" label="Monad"/>
<link wikidata="Q846856" start="13506" end="13513" title="emanationism" label="emanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5833688" start="13544" end="13549" title="Aeon (Gnosticism)" label="Aeons"/>
<link wikidata="Q183488" start="13555" end="13563" title="Demiurge" label="Demiurge"/>
<link wikidata="Q189222" start="13775" end="13794" title="Intuition (psychology)" label="intuitive knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310255" start="13865" end="13872" title="Dualistic cosmology" label="dualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131165" start="13956" end="13967" title="Manichaeism" label="Manichaeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178801" start="14327" end="14333" title="monism" label="monism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="14449" end="14459" title="asceticism" label="asceticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q430051" start="14816" end="14823" title="Ptolemy (gnostic)" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259165" start="14837" end="14853" title="Letter to Flora" label="Epistle to Flora"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15491" end="15498" title="Neoplatonism#The One" label="the One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192850" start="15530" end="15537" title="pleroma" label="pleroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q207113" start="15620" end="15630" title="Hippolytus of Rome" label="Hippolytus"/>
<link wikidata="Q191359" start="15662" end="15674" title="Pythagoreans" label="Pythagoreans"/>
<link wikidata="Q44946" start="15814" end="15819" title="Point (geometry)" label="point"/>
<link wikidata="Q37105" start="15831" end="15836" title="Line (geometry)" label="lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614157" start="16179" end="16186" title="Archon (Gnosticism)" label="archons"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="16400" end="16409" title="cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970362" start="16482" end="16503" title="Greek Orthodox Church" label="Greek Orthodox church"/>
<link wikidata="Q131095" start="16555" end="16580" title="Epistle to the Colossians" label="Epistle to the Colossians"/>
<link wikidata="Q303479" start="17208" end="17222" title="hermaphrodite" label="hermaphroditic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19921036" start="17228" end="17235" title="Barbelo" label="Barbelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932135" start="17960" end="17966" title="Sophia (Gnosticism)" label="Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147295" start="18076" end="18087" title="anima mundi" label="anima mundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="18148" end="18154" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603125" start="19125" end="19135" title="Yaldabaoth" label="Yaldabaoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="19799" end="19804" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q779725" start="19967" end="19973" title="Samael" label="Samael"/>
<link wikidata="Q28602" start="19975" end="19982" title="Aramaic" label="Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="20054" end="20060" title="Syriac language" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q223805" start="20280" end="20287" title="Ahriman" label="Ahriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316633" start="20289" end="20291" title="El (deity)" label="El"/>
<link wikidata="Q35230" start="20293" end="20298" title="Satan" label="Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q766677" start="20304" end="20310" title="Yahweh" label="Yahweh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="20338" end="20355" title="physical universe" label="physical universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q742609" start="20383" end="20395" title="human nature" label="human nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614157" start="20455" end="20462" title="archon (Gnosticism)" label="archons"/>
<link wikidata="Q468427" start="20731" end="20741" title="mimesis" label="represents"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="20778" end="20785" title="ascetic" label="ascetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170472" start="21344" end="21350" title="Origen" label="Origen"/>
<link wikidata="Q917141" start="21364" end="21377" title="Contra Celsum" label="Contra Celsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193062" start="21403" end="21410" title="Ophites" label="Ophites"/>
<link wikidata="Q821090" start="21529" end="21536" title="Sabaoth" label="Sabaoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424210" start="21666" end="21672" title="sarkic" label="sarkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205956" start="22037" end="22046" title="Pneumatic (Gnosticism)" label="pneumatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16851948" start="22160" end="22166" title="kenoma" label="kenoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q118157" start="22238" end="22246" title="charisma" label="charisma"/>
<link wikidata="Q180832" start="22337" end="22342" title="logos" label="logos"/>
<link wikidata="Q651118" start="22415" end="22425" title="Hypostasis (religion)" label="hypostasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411075" start="22546" end="22551" title="ousia" label="ousia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205956" start="22583" end="22593" title="Pneumatic (Gnosticism)" label="pneumatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="22723" end="22736" title="God" label="supreme being"/>
<link wikidata="Q41374" start="22748" end="22757" title="incarnate" label="incarnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284165" start="22921" end="22934" title="Divine illumination" label="enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q207674" start="23087" end="23095" title="Docetism" label="Docetist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747710" start="23116" end="23125" title="Mandaeans" label="Mandaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289748" start="23183" end="23196" title="false messiah" label="false messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="23251" end="23267" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q203922" start="23301" end="23305" title="Mani (prophet)" label="Mani"/>
<link wikidata="Q107626" start="23339" end="23343" title="Seth" label="Seth"/>
<link wikidata="Q58701" start="23358" end="23370" title="Adam and Eve" label="Adam and Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q766677" start="24064" end="24070" title="Yahweh" label="Yahweh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="24997" end="25009" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="25014" end="25019" title="Arianism" label="Arian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986139" start="25035" end="25049" title="Parthian Empire" label="Persian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q51657" start="25351" end="25370" title="Albigensian Crusade" label="Albigensian Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="25641" end="25649" title="mystical" label="mystical"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="25942" end="25960" title="early Christianity" label="early Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365310" start="26005" end="26019" title="Heresiology" label="heresiologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q182123" start="26034" end="26042" title="Irenaeus" label="Irenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347378" start="26831" end="26851" title="Episcopal polity" label="monarchic episcopate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140925" start="26857" end="26862" title="creed" label="creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q51623" start="26872" end="26877" title="Christian biblical canons" label="canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6491248" start="26913" end="26926" title="Larry Hurtado" label="Larry Hurtado"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543814" start="26939" end="26966" title="proto-orthodox Christianity" label="proto-orthodox Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302871" start="26983" end="27009" title="Christianity in the 1st century" label="first-century Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q131546" start="27739" end="27755" title="Gospel of Thomas" label="Gospel of Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q96837" start="28017" end="28031" title="Helmut Koester" label="Helmut Koester"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728461" start="28339" end="28353" title="April DeConick" label="April DeConick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548382" start="28695" end="28708" title="John P. Meier" label="John P. Meier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759060" start="28932" end="28965" title="The Quest of the Historical Jesus" label="the quest of the historical Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928179" start="29120" end="29130" title="James Dunn (theologian)" label="James Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q51666" start="29266" end="29282" title="Historical Jesus" label="Historical Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36766" start="29359" end="29373" title="Gospel of John" label="Gospel of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q766575" start="29399" end="29404" title="Logos (Christianity)" label="Logos"/>
<link wikidata="Q618874" start="29470" end="29488" title="Apocryphon of John" label="Apocryphon of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285436" start="29731" end="29744" title="Raymond E. Brown" label="Raymond Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q174929" start="30732" end="30742" title="Tertullian" label="Tertullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="30749" end="30753" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q80355" start="30972" end="30985" title="I Corinthians" label="I Corinthians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928179" start="31093" end="31103" title="James Dunn (theologian)" label="James Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q188883" start="31233" end="31254" title="Clement of Alexandria" label="Clement of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258813" start="31332" end="31339" title="Theudas (teacher of Valentinus)" label="Theudas"/>
<link wikidata="Q111949187" start="31498" end="31511" title="Proto-Gnosticism" label="proto-gnostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="31524" end="31532" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118352" start="31880" end="31889" title="Naassenes" label="Naassenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077762" start="31891" end="31898" title="Cainite" label="Cainite"/>
<link wikidata="Q204603" start="31905" end="31917" title="Valentinianism" label="Valentinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743162" start="31952" end="31981" title="The Jesus Mysteries" label="Timothy Freke and Peter Gandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="32367" end="32378" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463859" start="32476" end="32489" title="Jordan valley" label="Jordan valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706574" start="32811" end="32827" title="Joseph Lightfoot" label="Joseph Lightfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q313922" start="32847" end="32857" title="Epiphanius of Salamis" label="Epiphanius"/>
<link wikidata="Q189204" start="32953" end="32960" title="Essenes" label="Essenes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33077" end="33087" title="Nazarene (sect)#Nasoraean Mandaeans" label="Nasaraeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159" start="33141" end="33153" title="Monotheism" label="monotheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189816" start="33158" end="33173" title="ethnic religion" label="ethnic religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197007" start="33196" end="33216" title="ethnoreligious group" label="ethnoreligious group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410322" start="33241" end="33256" title="Eastern Aramaic languages" label="Eastern Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33500" start="33266" end="33273" title="Mandaic language" label="Mandaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q461557" start="33389" end="33394" title="Karun" label="Karun"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="33396" end="33405" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q35591" start="33410" end="33416" title="Tigris" label="Tigris"/>
<link wikidata="Q166966" start="33450" end="33463" title="Shatt-al-Arab" label="Shatt-al-Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q241119" start="33500" end="33518" title="Khuzestan province" label="Khuzestan province"/>
<link wikidata="Q241119" start="33629" end="33638" title="Khuzestan" label="Khuzestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q110933630" start="33775" end="33780" title="Manda (Mandaeism)" label="manda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33806" end="33822" title="John the Baptist#Mandaeism" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33874" end="33881" title="Baptism#Mandaean Baptism" label="baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969585" start="33926" end="33943" title="Nathaniel Deutsch" label="Nathaniel Deutsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747710" start="34022" end="34031" title="Mandaeans" label="Mandaeans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34039" end="34043" title="Adam#In Mandaeism" label="Adam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34045" end="34049" title="Abel#Mandaean interpretation" label="Abel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34051" end="34055" title="Seth#Mandaeism" label="Seth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34057" end="34061" title="Enos (biblical figure)#In Mandaeism" label="Enos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34063" end="34067" title="Noah#Gnosticism" label="Noah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34069" end="34073" title="Shem#In Mandaeism" label="Shem"/>
<link wikidata="Q625667" start="34075" end="34079" title="Aram, son of Shem" label="Aram"/>
<link wikidata="Q33500" start="34177" end="34193" title="Mandaean Aramaic" label="Mandaean Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940534" start="34272" end="34283" title="Ginza Rabba" label="Ginza Rabba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295789" start="34461" end="34468" title="Qulasta" label="Qulasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6580333" start="34499" end="34520" title="Mandaean Book of John" label="Mandaean Book of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861106" start="34552" end="34562" title="List of Mandaean scriptures" label="scriptures"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34756" end="34768" title="Living Water#In Gnosticism" label="Living Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q5940634" start="35040" end="35054" title="World of Light" label="World of Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q5704272" start="35127" end="35138" title="Hayyi Rabbi" label="Hayyi Rabbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503273" start="35345" end="35350" title="Uthra" label="Uthra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445207" start="35713" end="35720" title="Yushamin" label="Yōšamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q305678" start="35722" end="35729" title="Abathur" label="Abathur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116115" start="35735" end="35741" title="Ptahil" label="Ptahil"/>
<link wikidata="Q20743776" start="35767" end="35771" title="Krun" label="Krun"/>
<link wikidata="Q108914808" start="35793" end="35810" title="World of Darkness (Mandaeism)" label="World of Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748456" start="35933" end="35935" title="Ur (Mandaeism)" label="Ur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536438" start="36001" end="36005" title="Ruha" label="Ruha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135397" start="36121" end="36134" title="seven planets" label="seven planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q40540" start="36139" end="36167" title="zodiac" label="twelve zodiac constellations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116115" start="36262" end="36268" title="Ptahil" label="Ptahil"/>
<link wikidata="Q183488" start="36296" end="36304" title="demiurge" label="demiurge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536438" start="36342" end="36346" title="Ruha" label="Ruha"/>
<link wikidata="Q351267" start="36743" end="36753" title="Adam kasia" label="Adam kasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q108581862" start="36868" end="36876" title="masbuta" label="Baptisms"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37258" end="37276" title="Nazarene (sect)#Nasoraean Mandaeans" label="Nasoraean Mandaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q96630735" start="37336" end="37353" title="Jorunn J. Buckley" label="Jorunn J. Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7253952" start="38000" end="38016" title="Psalms of Thomas" label="Psalms of Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904463" start="38217" end="38234" title="Birger A. Pearson" label="Birger A. Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q111723864" start="38254" end="38264" title="Five Seals" label="Five Seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q108581862" start="38377" end="38384" title="masbuta" label="masbuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q96630735" start="38405" end="38422" title="Jorunn J. Buckley" label="Jorunn J. Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="38718" end="38734" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q897499" start="38771" end="38780" title="Dositheos (Samaritan)" label="Dositheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q294795" start="38782" end="38793" title="Simon Magus" label="Simon Magus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10328616" start="38799" end="38807" title="Menander (gnostic)" label="Menander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920074" start="39215" end="39224" title="Simonians" label="Simonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q204603" start="39727" end="39747" title="Valentinianism" label="Valentinian doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272909" start="39754" end="39761" title="Quqites" label="Quqites"/>
<link wikidata="Q182651" start="39790" end="39799" title="Samaritan" label="Samaritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463386" start="39801" end="39808" title="Iranian religions" label="Iranian"/>
<link wikidata="Q132754" start="39846" end="39851" title="Erbil" label="Erbil"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="39898" end="39902" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190403" start="40010" end="40016" title="Edessa" label="Edessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="40018" end="40023" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q732870" start="40070" end="40082" title="Hebrew Bible" label="Hebrew Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="40228" end="40235" title="gospels" label="gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209468" start="40428" end="40438" title="Sethianism" label="Sethianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q204603" start="40440" end="40454" title="Valentinianism" label="Valentinianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185815" start="40456" end="40467" title="Basilideans" label="Basilideans"/>
<link wikidata="Q766852" start="40469" end="40478" title="Acts of Thomas" label="Thomasine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193062" start="40495" end="40511" title="Ophites" label="Serpent Gnostics"/>
<link wikidata="Q846856" start="40787" end="40797" title="Emanationism" label="emanations"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="41204" end="41212" title="Eastern Christianity" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="41216" end="41230" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="41238" end="41243" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43669" start="41281" end="41299" title="Thomas the Apostle" label="Thomas the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q63070" start="41391" end="41405" title="Mary Magdalene" label="Mary Magdalene"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="41474" end="41489" title="twelve apostles" label="twelve apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q604981" start="41525" end="41539" title="Gospel of Mary" label="Gospel of Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q328804" start="41541" end="41560" title="John the Evangelist" label="John the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="41626" end="41634" title="Paul of Tarsus" label="St. Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q107626" start="41950" end="41954" title="Seth" label="Seth"/>
<link wikidata="Q58701" start="41969" end="41981" title="Adam and Eve" label="Adam and Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998963" start="41992" end="41997" title="Norea" label="Norea"/>
<link wikidata="Q81422" start="42013" end="42017" title="Noah" label="Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q205754" start="42044" end="42053" title="Mandaeism" label="Mandaeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131165" start="42058" end="42070" title="Manicheanism" label="Manicheanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q618874" start="42101" end="42119" title="Apocryphon of John" label="Apocryphon of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q618858" start="42179" end="42197" title="Apocalypse of Adam" label="Apocalypse of Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282598" start="42330" end="42340" title="Zostrianos" label="Zostrianos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2118802" start="42345" end="42354" title="Allogenes" label="Allogenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6228346" start="42584" end="42598" title="John D. Turner" label="John D. Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="43143" end="43152" title="syncretic" label="syncretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618381" start="43240" end="43249" title="Hildegard Temporini-Gräfin Vitzthum" label="Temporini"/>
<link wikidata="Q929001" start="43321" end="43330" title="Nazarenes (sect)" label="Nazarenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193062" start="43336" end="43343" title="Ophites" label="Ophites"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="43375" end="43383" title="Heresy" label="heretics"/>
<link wikidata="Q189597" start="43387" end="43392" title="Philo" label="Philo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="43445" end="43457" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757391" start="43462" end="43478" title="Middle Platonism" label="Middle Platonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19921036" start="43638" end="43645" title="Barbelo" label="Barbelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q107626" start="43765" end="43769" title="Seth" label="Seth"/>
<link wikidata="Q207674" start="43893" end="43900" title="Docetism" label="Docetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134189" start="44211" end="44219" title="Plotinus" label="Plotinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q636180" start="44377" end="44387" title="Archontics" label="Archontics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13263919" start="44398" end="44408" title="Borborites" label="Borborites"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622214" start="44439" end="44450" title="Stratiotici" label="Stratiotici"/>
<link wikidata="Q309864" start="44589" end="44599" title="Valentinus (Gnostic)" label="Valentinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="44628" end="44634" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q48203" start="46031" end="46037" title="Epistle to the Romans" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205956" start="46206" end="46216" title="Pneumatic (Gnosticism)" label="Pneumatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4890483" start="46419" end="46433" title="Bentley Layton" label="Bentley Layton"/>
<link wikidata="Q345277" start="46784" end="46793" title="Basilides" label="Basilides"/>
<link wikidata="Q3678579" start="47182" end="47188" title="Jehova" label="Jehova"/>
<link wikidata="Q345277" start="47302" end="47311" title="Basilides" label="Basilides"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="47315" end="47325" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="47427" end="47436" title="Saint Peter" label="St. Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q313922" start="47542" end="47552" title="Epiphanius of Salamis" label="Epiphanius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="47587" end="47591" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="47646" end="47651" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q336704" start="47673" end="47690" title="Sulpicius Severus" label="Sulpicius Severus"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="47731" end="47736" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5715" start="47765" end="47772" title="Memphis, Egypt" label="Memphis"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="47774" end="47784" title="St. Jerome" label="St. Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q639356" start="47801" end="47816" title="Priscillianists" label="Priscillianists"/>
<link wikidata="Q201346" start="48163" end="48170" title="Marcion of Sinope" label="Marcion"/>
<link wikidata="Q599416" start="48196" end="48202" title="Sinop, Turkey" label="Sinope"/>
<link wikidata="Q183488" start="48736" end="48744" title="Demiurge" label="Demiurge"/>
<link wikidata="Q192933" start="49317" end="49328" title="Hermeticism" label="Hermeticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118352" start="49457" end="49466" title="Naassenes" label="Naassenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193062" start="49468" end="49475" title="Ophites" label="Ophites"/>
<link wikidata="Q447428" start="49590" end="49599" title="Cerinthus" label="Cerinthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077762" start="50108" end="50116" title="Cainites" label="Cainites"/>
<link wikidata="Q205365" start="50182" end="50186" title="Cain" label="Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q220822" start="50192" end="50196" title="Esau" label="Esau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337316" start="50198" end="50203" title="Korah" label="Korah"/>
<link wikidata="Q180141" start="50213" end="50222" title="Sodom and Gomorrah" label="Sodomites"/>
<link wikidata="Q744443" start="50452" end="50463" title="libertinism" label="libertinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8339487" start="50601" end="50614" title="Carpocratians" label="Carpocratians"/>
<link wikidata="Q744443" start="50618" end="50627" title="libertine" label="libertine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231372" start="50652" end="50683" title="Gospel of the Hebrews" label="Gospel according to the Hebrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q25420924" start="50701" end="50707" title="Justin (gnostic)" label="Justin"/>
<link wikidata="Q855270" start="50750" end="50772" title="ancient Greek religion" label="ancient Greek religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13263919" start="50780" end="50790" title="Borborites" label="Borborites"/>
<link wikidata="Q19097" start="50812" end="50816" title="sect" label="sect"/>
<link wikidata="Q605184" start="50848" end="50859" title="Nicolaism" label="Nicolaitans"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="50947" end="50964" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Sasanian province"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627700" start="50968" end="50977" title="Asoristan" label="Asoristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410322" start="51030" end="51045" title="Eastern Aramaic" label="Eastern Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="51065" end="51076" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="51300" end="51307" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q203922" start="51359" end="51363" title="Mani (prophet)" label="Mani"/>
<link wikidata="Q262109" start="51414" end="51430" title="Jewish Christian" label="Jewish Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331657" start="51443" end="51453" title="Elcesaites" label="Elcesaites"/>
<link wikidata="Q208171" start="51473" end="51490" title="Gnostic Ebionites" label="Gnostic Ebionites"/>
<link wikidata="Q215643" start="51698" end="51716" title="Indo-Greek Kingdom" label="Indo-Greek Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q673001" start="51724" end="51728" title="Saka" label="Saka"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="51745" end="51756" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="51775" end="51783" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q191455" start="51862" end="51870" title="Shapur I" label="Shapur I"/>
<link wikidata="Q900603" start="51946" end="51957" title="Shabuhragan" label="Shabuhragan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="52003" end="52009" title="Syriac language" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544702" start="52052" end="52069" title="Manichaean script" label="Manichaean script"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423009" start="52467" end="52491" title="Zurvanism" label="Zurvanist Zoroastrianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179575" start="52521" end="52532" title="Ahura Mazda" label="Ahura Mazda"/>
<link wikidata="Q223805" start="52563" end="52575" title="Angra Mainyu" label="Angra Mainyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q131165" start="52804" end="52815" title="Manichaeism" label="Manichaeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="53083" end="53091" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669578" start="53179" end="53194" title="Syria Palestina" label="Syria Palestina"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="53196" end="53204" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741275" start="53210" end="53219" title="Byzantine Armenia" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571688" start="53224" end="53239" title="Persian Armenia" label="Persian Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8090" start="53374" end="53385" title="6th century" label="6th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q334727" start="53435" end="53447" title="Paulicianism" label="Paulicianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q204095" start="53449" end="53459" title="Bogomilism" label="Bogomilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q161696" start="53465" end="53474" title="Catharism" label="Catharism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="53538" end="53553" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q831218" start="53999" end="54015" title="Uyghur Khaganate" label="Uyghur Khaganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q334727" start="54187" end="54197" title="Paulicianism" label="Paulicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q366287" start="54202" end="54213" title="Adoptionist" label="Adoptionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="54298" end="54314" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q131165" start="54385" end="54395" title="Manichaeism" label="Manichaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q204095" start="54411" end="54419" title="Bogomils" label="Bogomils"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="54432" end="54440" title="First Bulgarian Empire" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54501" end="54510" title="Syncretism#Religious syncretism" label="synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q334727" start="54523" end="54535" title="Paulicianism" label="Paulicianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q242758" start="54544" end="54569" title="Bulgarian Orthodox Church" label="Bulgarian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q161696" start="54592" end="54599" title="Catharism" label="Cathars"/>
<link wikidata="Q623282" start="55219" end="55228" title="afterlife" label="afterlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q12370437" start="55359" end="55364" title="Monad (philosophy)" label="Monad"/>
<link wikidata="Q835143" start="55507" end="55515" title="Jannah" label="Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q174495" start="55552" end="55558" title="tawhid" label="tawhid"/>
<link wikidata="Q273101" start="55755" end="55760" title="Iblis" label="Iblis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="55781" end="55786" title="Sufism" label="Sufis"/>
<link wikidata="Q230386" start="55904" end="55928" title="Ismailism" label="Isma&amp;#x27;ili Shi&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q48734189" start="55940" end="55952" title="Umm al-Kitab (Ismaili book)" label="Umm al-Kitab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3460708" start="55960" end="55966" title="Azazil" label="Azazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q83944" start="56199" end="56212" title="anthropogeny" label="anthropogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q230386" start="56243" end="56256" title="Isma&amp;#x27;ili" label="Isma&amp;#x27;ili"/>
<link wikidata="Q962658" start="56309" end="56334" title="takfir" label="criticised as non-Islamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9546" start="56336" end="56346" title="Al-Ghazali" label="Al-Ghazali"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="56395" end="56399" title="Shia" label="Shia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193379" start="56732" end="56738" title="archon" label="archon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942579" start="56774" end="56777" title="ruh" label="ruh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963451" start="56857" end="56861" title="nafs" label="nafs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638897" start="57471" end="57489" title="Sufi metaphysics" label="unity of existence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011" start="57551" end="57559" title="ibn Sina" label="ibn Sina"/>
<link wikidata="Q837795" start="57613" end="57630" title="Jewish philosophy" label="Jewish philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="57691" end="57699" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalah"/>
<link wikidata="Q205388" start="57816" end="57821" title="Zohar" label="Zohar"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="57877" end="57882" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q101081" start="58125" end="58133" title="Provence" label="Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q161696" start="58149" end="58155" title="Cathar" label="Cathar"/>
<link wikidata="Q953339" start="58403" end="58413" title="Moshe Idel" label="Moshe Idel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747710" start="58650" end="58659" title="Mandaeans" label="Mandaeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197007" start="58683" end="58703" title="ethnoreligious group" label="ethnoreligious group"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="58716" end="58732" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q110933630" start="58807" end="58812" title="Manda (Mandaeism)" label="manda"/>
<link wikidata="Q421261" start="58840" end="58846" title="gnosis" label="gnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q222999" start="59017" end="59036" title="Nag Hammadi library" label="Nag Hammadi library"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642913" start="59052" end="59069" title="Ecclesia Gnostica" label="Ecclesia Gnostica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59071" end="59097" title="Johannite Church#Apostolic Johannite Church" label="Apostolic Johannite Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046915" start="59099" end="59126" title="Ecclesia Gnostica Catholica" label="Ecclesia Gnostica Catholica"/>
<link wikidata="Q21008369" start="59132" end="59156" title="Gnostic Church of France" label="Gnostic Church of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q648601" start="59162" end="59178" title="Saint Thomas Christians" label="Thomasine Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q38193" start="59305" end="59324" title="Arthur Schopenhauer" label="Arthur Schopenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q366639" start="59326" end="59337" title="Albert Pike" label="Albert Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q189454" start="59342" end="59358" title="Helena Petrovna Blavatsky" label="Madame Blavatsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985" start="59444" end="59459" title="Herman Melville" label="Herman Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q40213" start="59464" end="59475" title="W. B. Yeats" label="W. B. Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188544" start="59511" end="59523" title="Jules Doinel" label="Jules Doinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q21008369" start="59553" end="59577" title="Gnostic Church of France" label="Gnostic church in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="59898" end="59907" title="Carl Jung" label="Carl Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q704039" start="59936" end="59949" title="Eric Voegelin" label="Eric Voegelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q909" start="59968" end="59985" title="Jorge Luis Borges" label="Jorge Luis Borges"/>
<link wikidata="Q172684" start="60038" end="60054" title="Aleister Crowley" label="Aleister Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q25973" start="60077" end="60090" title="Hermann Hesse" label="Hermann Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q496850" start="60125" end="60136" title="René Guénon" label="René Guénon"/>
<link wikidata="Q657488" start="60219" end="60231" title="Perennial philosophy" label="Perennialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q50685643" start="60259" end="60280" title="Traditionalist School" label="Traditionalist School"/>
<link wikidata="Q745955" start="60290" end="60299" title="Thelema" label="Thelemite"/>
<link wikidata="Q33237" start="60355" end="60375" title="Ordo Templi Orientis" label="Ordo Templi Orientis"/>
<link wikidata="Q219784" start="60624" end="60640" title="Lawrence Durrell" label="Lawrence Durrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q57255" start="60642" end="60652" title="Hans Jonas" label="Hans Jonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q171091" start="60654" end="60668" title="Philip K. Dick" label="Philip K. Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q345612" start="60673" end="60685" title="Harold Bloom" label="Harold Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q34670" start="60692" end="60704" title="Albert Camus" label="Albert Camus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711" start="60709" end="60723" title="Allen Ginsberg" label="Allen Ginsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057998" start="60758" end="60769" title="Celia Green" label="Celia Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q183372" start="60841" end="60863" title="Alfred North Whitehead" label="Alfred North Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469018" start="60945" end="60957" title="Michel Weber" label="Michel Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365310" start="61166" end="61179" title="heresiologist" label="heresiologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="61182" end="61196" title="Church Fathers" label="Church Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19097" start="61421" end="61425" title="sect" label="sect"/>
<link wikidata="Q185117" start="61643" end="61656" title="Justin Martyr" label="Justin Martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780761" start="61676" end="61689" title="First Apology" label="First Apology"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="61710" end="61723" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429" start="61724" end="61738" title="Antoninus Pius" label="Antoninus Pius"/>
<link wikidata="Q294795" start="61757" end="61768" title="Simon Magus" label="Simon Magus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10328616" start="61770" end="61778" title="Menander (gnostic)" label="Menander"/>
<link wikidata="Q201346" start="61783" end="61790" title="Marcion" label="Marcion"/>
<link wikidata="Q182123" start="61879" end="61887" title="Irenaeus" label="Irenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281900" start="61908" end="61924" title="On the Detection and Overthrow of the So-Called Gnosis" label="Against Heresies"/>
<link wikidata="Q294795" start="61952" end="61963" title="Simon Magus" label="Simon Magus"/>
<link wikidata="Q214178" start="61969" end="61984" title="Flavia Neapolis" label="Flavia Neapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294629" start="61988" end="61995" title="Samaria" label="Samaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q207113" start="62203" end="62213" title="Hippolytus (writer)" label="Hippolytus"/>
<link wikidata="Q966546" start="62251" end="62282" title="Refutatio Omnium Haeresium" label="Refutation Against all Heresies"/>
<link wikidata="Q107626" start="62567" end="62571" title="Seth" label="Seth"/>
<link wikidata="Q309864" start="62649" end="62659" title="Valentinus (Gnostic)" label="Valentinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q430051" start="62671" end="62678" title="Ptolemy (gnostic)" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q946929" start="62680" end="62689" title="Heracleon" label="Heracleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q864925" start="62691" end="62697" title="Marcus (Marcosian)" label="Marcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141902" start="62702" end="62712" title="Colorbasus" label="Colorbasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q174929" start="62714" end="62724" title="Tertullian" label="Tertullian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="62733" end="62741" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q201346" start="62902" end="62909" title="Marcion" label="Marcion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3831124" start="63243" end="63256" title="Gnostic texts" label="Gnostic texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q125576" start="63328" end="63335" title="papyrus" label="papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q213924" start="63336" end="63343" title="codex" label="codices"/>
<link wikidata="Q384515" start="63487" end="63495" title="treatise" label="treatise"/>
<link wikidata="Q14941935" start="63555" end="63572" title="Hermetica" label="Corpus Hermeticum"/>
<link wikidata="Q126370167" start="63698" end="63717" title="Pachomian monastery" label="Pachomian monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q44024" start="63736" end="63753" title="Athanasius" label="Bishop Athanasius"/>
<link wikidata="Q51623" start="63775" end="63788" title="Biblical canon" label="non-canonical"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329918" start="63802" end="63822" title="Easter letter" label="Festal Letter of 367"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="63881" end="63886" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q36155" start="63952" end="63958" title="Coptic language" label="Coptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65260" start="64425" end="64450" title="Johann Lorenz von Mosheim" label="Johann Lorenz von Mosheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q164699" start="64983" end="65000" title="Adolf von Harnack" label="Adolf von Harnack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142745" start="65327" end="65357" title="Religionsgeschichtliche Schule" label="Religionsgeschichtliche Schule"/>
<link wikidata="Q66715" start="65672" end="65687" title="Wilhelm Bousset" label="Wilhelm Bousset"/>
<link wikidata="Q67561" start="65767" end="65780" title="Eduard Norden" label="Eduard Norden"/>
<link wikidata="Q66614" start="65836" end="65863" title="Richard August Reitzenstein" label="Richard August Reitzenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q76327" start="65881" end="65896" title="Rudolf Bultmann" label="Rudolf Bultmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q77997" start="65960" end="65982" title="Hans Heinrich Schaeder" label="Hans Heinrich Schaeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q57255" start="66092" end="66102" title="Hans Jonas" label="Hans Jonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q76327" start="66271" end="66287" title="Rudolph Bultmann" label="Rudolph Bultmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="66544" end="66563" title="Alexander The Great" label="Alexander The Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q21449756" start="66585" end="66593" title="Spengler" label="Spengler"/>
<link wikidata="Q138850" start="66985" end="67000" title="Gershom Scholem" label="Gershom Scholem"/>
<link wikidata="Q606363" start="67017" end="67031" title="Gilles Quispel" label="Gilles Quispel"/>
<link wikidata="Q36155" start="67160" end="67166" title="Coptic language" label="Coptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q222999" start="67167" end="67186" title="Nag Hammadi library" label="Nag Hammadi library"/>
<link wikidata="Q263099" start="67265" end="67278" title="Elaine Pagels" label="Elaine Pagels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316699" start="67917" end="67950" title="Rethinking &amp;quot;Gnosticism&amp;quot;" label="Rethinking &amp;quot;Gnosticism&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491981" start="68282" end="68298" title="Karen Leigh King" label="Karen Leigh King"/>
<link wikidata="Q57255" start="69515" end="69525" title="Hans Jonas" label="Hans Jonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570453" start="69757" end="69786" title="cognitive science of religion" label="cognitive science of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13666" start="69870" end="69877" title="Messina" label="Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q131165" start="70757" end="70769" title="Manichaeism" label="Manicheanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q205754" start="70774" end="70783" title="Mandaeism" label="Mandaeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423009" start="71000" end="71022" title="Zurvanism" label="Zurvanist Zoroastrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q618874" start="71383" end="71401" title="Apocryphon of John" label="Apocryphon of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q164699" start="71851" end="71868" title="Adolf von Harnack" label="Adolf von Harnack"/>
<link wikidata="Q57255" start="72270" end="72280" title="Hans Jonas" label="Hans Jonas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357573" start="72301" end="72329" title="Existential phenomenology" label="existential phenomenological"/>
<link wikidata="Q545825" start="72374" end="72384" title="Social alienation" label="alienation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798564" start="72555" end="72567" title="geworfenheit" label="geworfenheit"/>
<link wikidata="Q48301" start="72575" end="72591" title="Martin Heidegger" label="Martin Heidegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193062" start="73102" end="73109" title="Ophites" label="Ophites"/>
<link wikidata="Q971756" start="73288" end="73300" title="Rodney Stark" label="Rodney Stark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987108" start="73548" end="73564" title="Westar Institute" label="Westar Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316699" start="74552" end="74574" title="Michael Allen Williams" label="Michael Allen Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365310" start="74934" end="74948" title="heresiology" label="heresiologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="75788" end="75797" title="Carl Jung" label="Carl Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q606363" start="75876" end="75890" title="Gilles Quispel" label="Gilles Quispel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982425" start="76012" end="76016" title="Self in Jungian psychology" label="Self"/>
<link wikidata="Q602192" start="76236" end="76248" title="Ioan Petru Culianu" label="Ioan Culianu"/>
<link wikidata="Q849649" start="76473" end="76479" title="Prajñā (Buddhism)" label="prajñā"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12472" wikidata="Q633088" url="?curid=12472" title="Gregor Aichinger">
<text>Gregor Aichinger (c. 1565 – 21 January 1628) was a German composer.

==Life==
He was organist to the Fugger family of Augsburg in 1584. In 1599 he went for a two-year visit to Rome for musical, rather than religious reasons, although he had taken holy orders before his appointment under the Fuggers. Proske, in the preface to vol. 2 of his &quot;Musica Divina&quot;, calls him a priest of Regensburg, and is inclined to give him the palm for the devout and ingenuous mastery of his style. Certainly this impression is fully borne out by the beautiful and somewhat quaint works included in that great anthology.

==Notes==
==References==
*

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q633088" start="0" end="16" title="Gregor Aichinger" label="Gregor Aichinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q765778" start="85" end="93" title="organist" label="organist"/>
<link wikidata="Q155834" start="101" end="107" title="Fugger" label="Fugger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749" start="118" end="126" title="Augsburg" label="Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="176" end="180" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q662862" start="247" end="258" title="holy orders" label="holy orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q75028" start="301" end="307" title="Karl Proske" label="Proske"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978" start="390" end="400" title="Regensburg" label="Regensburg"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12474" wikidata="Q808428" url="?curid=12474" title="Gospel of Barnabas">
<text>The Gospel of Barnabas is a non-canonical, pseudepigraphical gospel, written during the Late Middle Ages and attributed to the early Christian disciple Barnabas, who (in this work) is one of the apostles of Jesus. It is about the same length as the four canonical gospels combined and largely harmonizes stories in the canonical gospels with Islamic elements such as the denial of Jesus&#x27; crucifixion. The gospel presents a detailed account of the life of Jesus. It begins with the nativity of Jesus, which includes the annunciation by the archangel Gabriel to Mary which precedes Jesus&#x27; birth. The gospel follows his ministry, ending with the message of Jesus to spread his teachings around the world. Judas Iscariot replaced Jesus at the crucifixion.

The gospel survives in two manuscripts (in Italian and Spanish), both dated to the Middle Ages. It is one of three works with Barnabas&#x27; name; the others are the Epistle of Barnabas and the Acts of Barnabas, although they are not related to each other. The earliest known mention of the Gospel of Barnabas has been discovered in a 1634 manuscript by a Morisco which was found in Madrid, and the earliest published reference to it was in the 1715 book &quot;Menagiana&quot; by the French poet Bernard de la Monnoye. 

The gospel&#x27;s origins and author have been debated; several theories are speculative, and none has general acceptance. The Gospel of Barnabas is dated to the 13th to 15th centuries, much too late to have been written by Barnabas (). Many of its teachings are synchronous with those in the Quran and oppose the Bible, especially the New Testament.

== Contents ==
The Gospel of Barnabas, as long as the four canonical gospels (Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John) combined, contains 222 chapters and about 75,000 words. Its original title, appearing on the cover of the Italian manuscript, is &quot;The True Gospel of Jesus, Called Christ, a New Prophet Sent by God to the World: According to the Description of Barnabas His Apostle&quot;; The author, who claims to be the biblical Barnabas, wishes &quot;peace and consolation to all them that dwell upon the earth.&quot; Then a critique follows of those (including Paul the Apostle) who are &quot;deceived by Satan into preaching a &#x27;most impious doctrine&#x27; by &#x27;calling Jesus son of God, repudiating the circumcision [...] and permitting every unclean meat&#x27;.&quot;

It appears to be a gospel harmony, focusing on the ministry and passion of Jesus. The gospel begins with combined elements of Matthew and Luke, such as the annunciation by the archangel Gabriel to Mary, the Adoration of the Magi, the massacre of the Innocents, the circumcision of Jesus, and his finding in the Temple. It then jumps to Jesus at age 30, when he goes to the Mount of Olives with his mother to gather olives; while praying there, he received the gospel from Gabriel. After this revelation, he tells his mother that he will no longer live with her. Jesus later goes to Jerusalem and begins preaching there. He appoints twelve apostles to accompany him during his ministry; the gospel mentions only ten, including Barnabas. The gospel follows teachings attributed to Jesus about the origins of circumcision, condemnation of the uncircumcised, and the life of Abraham (including his destruction of idols and the sacrifice of his son Ishmael).

The gospel recounts the transfiguration of Jesus and his proclamation of the prophet, Muhammad, who will come after him. After a number of his parables and teachings it describes his passion, beginning with his confrontations with the scribes and Pharisees about the woman taken in adultery. Mary is told by Gabriel about her son&#x27;s forthcoming crucifixion and his protection from it; the high priest, Herod Antipas, and Pontius Pilate discuss what to do about him. Jesus and his disciples hide in Nicodemus&#x27; house, where they have the Last Supper. Judas Iscariot betrays him for thirty pieces of silver; God then commands Gabriel, Michael, Raphael, and Uriel to save Jesus by taking him &quot;out by the window that looketh toward the South&quot; to the third heaven.

Judas, whose face and speech are changed to resemble those of Jesus, returns to the house while the other disciples are sleeping. He is surprised to know that they think he is Jesus, and he is arrested. Pilate orders his crucifixion, and he is placed in Joseph of Arimathea&#x27;s tomb. Jesus prays for the ability to see his mother and disciples and tell them what actually happened. He turns to Barnabas, whom he charges with writing about what occurred. The gospel ends with the dispersion of the disciples and another criticism of Paul.

== Textual history ==

The Gospel of Barnabas is dated from the 14th to the 17th centuries,:57 too late to have been written by the biblical Barnabas ().:3 It is one of three extant works bearing his name, along with the Epistle of Barnabas and the Acts of Barnabas.:53–60 A &quot;Gospel according to Barnabas&quot; was first mentioned in the sixth-century Gelasian Decree, and was condemned as apocryphal. Another mention of a gospel using his name is in the seventh-century &quot;List of the Sixty Books&quot;, or the &quot;Catalogue of the Sixty Canonical Books&quot;. Historians are uncertain whether these refer to this Gospel of Barnabas, since no quotes have been preserved for confirmation. Jomier believes a forger could have taken the title after the publishing of the Gelasian Decree by printing press.

The earliest reference to the gospel may have been in a 1634 letter in the Biblioteca Nacional de España written in Tunisia by Ibrahim al-Taybil (Juan Pérez in Spanish), an Arabic-Spanish translator and author. He referred to the &quot;Gospel of Saint Barnabas, where one can find the light&quot;. The first published reference to the gospel was by the French poet Bernard de la Monnoye in his 1715 book, &quot;Menagiana&quot;. Dutch orientalist Adriaan Reland referred to the gospel&#x27;s Spanish version in his 1717 (&quot;On the Mohammedan Religion&quot;). The following year, a reference to the Italian version appeared in the Irish philosopher John Toland&#x27;s . British Orientalist George Sale cited the Italian and Spanish manuscripts in his 1734 &quot;The Preliminary Discourse to the Koran&quot;.

=== Manuscripts ===
==== Italian ====

In , Toland said that he was shown the manuscript he called the &quot;Mahometan Gospel&quot; in 1709 in Amsterdam through an ambassador in the city and the anti-Trinitarian scholar Jean Frederic Cramer (counsellor of Frederick I of Prussia). His description is not detailed, and provides no information about the gospel&#x27;s general contents. However, he quotes the opening of the gospel (&quot;The true Gospel of Jesus called Christ, a new prophet sent by God to the world, according to the relation of Barnabas his apostle&quot;); a fragment (&quot;The Apostle Barnabas says, &#x27;He gets the worst of it who overcomes in evil contentions; because he thus comes to have the more sin), and the ending:

Jesus being gone, the Disciples scattered themselves into many parts of Palestine, and of the rest of the world; and the truth, being hated of Satan, was persecuted by falshood, as it ever happens. For certain wicked men, under pretence of being Disciples, preached that Jesus was dead, and not risen again: others preached that Jesus was truly dead, and risen again: others preached, and still continued to preach, that Jesus is the Son of God, among which persons Paul has been deceived. We therefore, according to the measure of our knowledge, do preach to those who fear God, to the end that they may be saved at the last day of divine judgment; Amen. The end of the Gospel.

Dated to the end of the sixteenth century, the manuscript was anonymous. Toland observed that it was written on a &quot;Turkish paper delicately gummed and polished&quot;, bound in the &quot;Turkish manner&quot;, and the fine quality of its ink and orthography led him to assume that it was at least three hundred years old. In the appendix of his book, Toland wrote: &quot;[I]t was an octavo volume six inches long, four broad, and one-and-a-half thick, and containing 229 leaves, each of about eighteen and nineteen lines.&quot; The manuscript was obtained by Prince Eugene of Savoy in 1738 through Cramer, who wrote in a dedicatory preface that no Christian had ever been allowed to see it &quot;although they strove with all means at their disposal to find it and take a look at it&quot;. It is currently held by the Austrian National Library.

The scholars Lonsdale and Laura Ragg published an English translation of the Italian manuscript by Oxford University Press in 1907. An Arabic translation, at the initiative of the Egyptian scholar Rashid Rida, was published the following year and became popular in the Muslim world; Saʿādeh, a Christian, translated it. Rida began publishing promotional excerpts and information about the Arabic translation before its publication in July 1907 in his magazine, . The Raggs&#x27; English translation (without their critical preface) became popular in 1973 in Pakistan, when it was published by M. A. Rahim and promoted as the &quot;true gospel of Jesus&quot; by local newspapers. In Indonesia, it was translated in 1969, 1970, and 1980; the 1970 translation, by and Abubakar Basymeleh, was republished with additional footnotes in 1987. Translations in Dutch (1990), German (1994), modern Italian, Persian (1927), Spanish, Turkish, and Urdu (1916) have also been published.

==== Spanish ====

The Spanish manuscript was lost for more than a century; Sale became the only source for a detailed description in his 1734 book, &quot;The Koran&quot;. He wrote, &quot;The book is a moderate quarto [...] written in a very legible hand, but a little damaged towards the latter end. It contains two hundred and twenty-two chapters of unequal length, and four hundred and twenty pages.&quot; Sale saw the manuscript while it was still in the possession of rector George Holme. It later passed to Thomas Monkhouse, a fellow of The Queen&#x27;s College, Oxford, and was seen by the Reverend Joseph White. White quoted several extracts from the English translation in a 1784 lecture, before the gospel&#x27;s whereabouts became unknown.

A Spanish Gospel of Barnabas was found at the University of Sydney&#x27;s Fisher Library, among the books of Australian politician Charles Nicholson, in 1976. A copy of Sale&#x27;s manuscript, made between 1736 and 1745, is incomplete and has differences from the Italian manuscript; the subheaders of chapters 1–27 are missing. Only the first third of chapter 120 exists, ending on page 116 with a note: &quot;Cap. 121 to 200 wanting&quot;. The next page continues with chapter 200, chapter 199 in the Italian manuscript (a discrepancy which continues until chapter 222 in the Spanish manuscript, 221 in the Italian). The Spanish 218th chapter has different lines, and the subheader (&quot;In which the passion of Judas the Betrayer is recounted&quot;). The Italian chapter 222 is missing from the Spanish manuscript. J. E. Fletcher, who discovered the latter, published his findings in the October 1976 issue of .

Scholars note parallels in the manuscript to a series of Morisco forgeries (collectively known as the Lead Books of Sacromonte), which may date it to the 16th century. Claiming to be a translation of an Italian manuscriptprobably not the extant oneit opens with a prologue by Fra Marino (likely a pseudonym). According to Fra Marino, he first encountered writings by the Church Father Irenaeus which criticized Paul and referred to the Gospel of Barnabas. While with his friend Pope Sixtus V at a Vatican City library, he then found a copy of the Gospel of Barnabas and converted to Islam after reading it. Mustafa de Aranda, an Aragonese Muslim who lived in Istanbul (then Constantinople), is identified in the translator&#x27;s note as the translator of the Italian manuscript into Spanish. Nothing further is known about this, and none of Irenaeus&#x27; writings mentioned the gospel. Through the University of Granada, Luis Bernabé Pons published the incomplete Spanish manuscript (with missing parts derived from the Italian manuscript) in a 1998 book entitled (&quot;The Moorish Text of the Gospel of Saint Barnabas&quot;).

==== Syriac ====
In 1985, Turkish media reported that an alleged Syriac-language copy of the Gospel of Barnabas had been found in the city of Hakkâri. 
In February 2012, the Turkish press reported that the Ministry of Culture and Tourism confirmed that a 52-page biblical manuscript thought to be the Gospel of Barnabas had been deposited at the Ethnography Museum of Ankara. The manuscript was reportedly found in Cyprus in 2000 in a police anti-smuggling operation, and had been in a police repository since then. Photographs of a cover page were widely published, on which can be read an inscription in a neo-Aramaic hand: &quot;In the name of our Lord, this book is written on the hands of the monks of the high monastery in Nineveh, in the 1,500th year of our Lord.&quot;

== Authorship and origins ==

The Gospel of Barnabas is probably of late-medieval or later origin, since its author is familiar with works written during this period. Nothing is known about its author, however; many hypotheses have been made, but none are conclusive. Researchers who argue for an Italian origin note its similarities to Dante Alighieri&#x27;s early-14th-century &quot;Divine Comedy&quot;. Barnabas says that God made nine heavens, in contrast to the Quran&#x27;s seven, and uses Dante&#x27;s catchphrase (&quot;false and lying gods&quot;) three times. Others also find textual similarities between passages in the gospel and late-medieval vernacular harmonies of the canonical gospels.

The gospel has been hypothesized as having Spanish origins or connections. Spanish academic Mikel de Epalza suggested that the Italian manuscript was created by a Spaniard, with elements of Tuscan and Venetian dialects. Epalza said that the author may have been a Spanish student at the University of Bologna (where the dialects were spoken), since Spaniards commonly studied there during the Middle Ages. Analysis indicates linguistic errors in the manuscript, demonstrating the author&#x27;s unfamiliarity with Italian. Author David Fox wrote about Arabic gospel forgeries written in 1588 by two Moriscos in Granada, theorizing that the Gospel of Barnabas may have been another Morisco forgery.

This theory also leads other researchers to advocate a Spanish priority; they believe that the preface in the Spanish manuscript was a fabrication, a &quot;mere literary device&quot;. According to Luis Bernabé Pons, the Lead Books of Sacromonte (found in Granada in 1595) were meant to begin the Gospel of Barnabas. The books, written on round lead leaves, deal with the arrival of James the Great and his disciples in Spain. The books say that James was tasked to hide them in Spain, where a priest (helped by Arabs) would discover them. The &quot;great conqueror king of the Arab kings&quot;probably referring to the Ottoman Empirelater summoned a council in Cyprus, the traditional site of Barnabas&#x27; martyrdom. Pons said that Barnabas&#x27; name was used because the Lead Books were &quot;suspected and scrutinized&quot; for Islamic content, including the . The plan failed when the Moriscos were expelled between 1609 and 1614.
A comparison of the Italian and Spanish texts indicates several places where the Spanish reading appears secondary; words or phrases necessary for meaning are missing from the Spanish text, but appear in the Italian. Biblical scholar Jan Joosten hypothesized a lost Italian original, which he dated to the mid-14th century and may have been used by both manuscripts. Joosten noted that the Spanish text adapts a number of &quot;Italianisms&quot;. The Italian text uses the conjunction (&quot;therefore&quot;), and the Spanish text reads (&quot;however&quot;); the Italian word is the one required in the context. Only the Spanish reading makes sense in several passages, however, and many features of the Italian text are not found in the Spanish.

Jan Slomp wrote in &quot;Islamochristiana&quot; that the names in the Spanish manuscript (Fra Marino and Mustafa de Aranda) may refer to the same person, since converts at the time often changed their names. Slomp said that they may have been a Jew, with the name &quot;Fra Marino&quot; based on : a derisive term for (Jewish converts to Catholicism). Other theories about an Arabic original are based on Sale&#x27;s description of an Arabic gospel popular among Muslims, attributed to Barnabas, which he had never seen. The Raggs assumed that Sale misunderstood Toland&#x27;s challenge to Muslims in &quot;Nazarenus&quot; to produce a gospel similar to Barnabas&#x27;. No further proof for it exists, and Sale&#x27;s conjecture has been generally dismissed by researchers.

== Analysis ==

=== Anachronisms and factual errors ===

The Gospel of Barnabas contains historic anachronisms, as well as geographical and other factual errors. According to the Raggs, they prove its medieval origins and the author&#x27;s ignorance of first-century Judea. Anachronisms include:

* In chapter three, Pontius Pilate is said to have governed Judea and Annas and Caiaphas were the high priests when Jesus was born (). Annas became high priest in AD 6, and his son-in-law Caiaphas succeeded him in AD 18. Pilate did not become procurator until AD 26–27.
* In chapter 15, during the first year of Jesus&#x27; ministry, it is said that the &quot;feast of Tabernacles was near&quot;. In chapter 30, the author writes of the Senofegia which would also take place that year; Tabernacles and Senofegia are synonymous. 
* In chapters 20–21, it is said that Jesus and his disciples arrived in Nazareth after embarking on the Sea of Galilee and &quot;went up to Capernaum&quot;; Capernaum was on the shore, and Nazareth more than 15 miles inland.
* In chapters 42 and 96, Jesus said: &quot;I am not the Messiah&quot;. The authors appear to not realise that the Greek &quot;Christ&quot; and the Hebrew &quot;Messiah&quot; are synonymous; both mean &quot;the anointed one&quot;.
* In chapter 63, Nineveh is described as near the Mediterranean Sea; it was away, in Mesopotamia (modern Iraq).
* In chapter 65, Jesus is said to go to the &quot;Probatica&quot; pool. According to the author, it is so called &quot;because the angel of God every day troubled the water, and whosoever first entered the water after its movement was cured of every kind of infirmity&quot;; , Greek for the Aramaic , means &quot;of the sheep&quot;.
* In chapter 82, it is said that a jubilee occurs every hundred years; the Jewish jubilee is every fifty years. Pope Boniface VIII proclaimed 1300 as the first Christian jubilee, and the next jubilee would take place a hundred years later.
* In chapter 99, Tyre is said to be near the Jordan River; in reality, it is more than away.
* In chapter 144, the word &quot;Pharisee&quot; is said to mean &quot;seeking God&quot;; derived from the Hebrew, it means &quot;separated&quot;. In the next chapter, it is said that the Pharisees began when the Canaanites had power in Judea; this would have been in the 11th century BC or earlier; the Pharisees, a Jewish religious movement, began no earlier than the second century BC.
* In chapter 152, it is said that wine barrels were in use during Jesus&#x27; time; large jars (pithoi) were used then to store wine.
* In chapters 214 and 217, the &quot;pagan&quot; Herod Antipas is said to rule Jerusalem and Judea; his authority was in Galilee, and he followed the Jewish religion.

=== Anti-Pauline tone ===
Scholarly analysis indicates that the Gospel of Barnabas had an anti-Pauline tone, most clearly shown in its prologue and epilogue; these depict Paul preaching a perverted version of Jesus&#x27; teachings, and as &quot;deceived&quot; in thinking that Jesus was God (or the Son of God). In his &quot;Connecting with Muslims: A Guide to Communicating Effectively&quot; (2014), Lebanese author and Christian missionary Fouad Masri called the gospel anachronistic; in the Acts of the Apostles, Barnabas was Paul&#x27;s best friend and not an enemy. For the &quot;Journal of Higher Criticism&quot;, R. Blackhirst wrote that the Epistle to the Galatians account of conflict between Paul and Barnabas may have been why the gospel&#x27;s author attributed it to Barnabas.

=== Parallels with the Quran ===

==== Crucifixion of Jesus ====

In the Gospel of Barnabas, Jesus was not crucified. Judas Iscariot (whose face was made to resemble his) replaced him on the cross, and Jesus was raised into heaven by God. This agrees with the mainstream interpretations of An-Nisa 157–158, affirming that Jesus was not crucified but instead his lookalike was:

and for boasting, “We killed the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, the messenger of Allah.” But they neither killed nor crucified him—it was only made to appear so. Even those who argue for this ˹crucifixion˺ are in doubt. They have no knowledge whatsoever—only making assumptions. They certainly did not kill him. Rather, Allah raised him up to Himself. And Allah is Almighty, All-Wise.

— Qur&#x27;ān 4:157-158

In its narrative of Jesus&#x27; crucifixion, the gospel is thought to be influenced by (or adopt) docetism: a heterodox doctrine that Jesus&#x27; human form was an illusion. David Sox wrote that the Gospel of Barnabas&#x27; portrayal of Judas Iscariot is more sympathetic than that in the canonical gospels, where he is cast as a villainous betrayer; in Christian tradition, his name is synonymous with one who deceives under the guise of friendship. The Raggs said that since the alleged substitution in the Quran is unnamed and unexplained, the author of the gospel attempted to fill this void.

Ghulam Murtaza Azad described the gospel as a medieval forgery in &quot;Islamic Studies&quot;, but found its narrative more reasonable than that of the canonical gospels: &quot;A man who is not religious minded can hardly believe that a person who wrought such great miracles could not save himself from humiliation and cross. The Christians say that he was crucified in order to save mankind from their sins. This explanation of crucifixion is strange and difficult to understand. And stranger than that is that the traitor was saved and the master was hanged.&quot; Although it would appear that the canonical gospels do not portray Judas as being saved. In his &quot;Understand My Muslim People&quot; (2004), Abraham Sarker wrote that the narrative is popular in Quranic exegesis.

==== Prediction of Muhammad ====

In accordance with As-Saff 6, Muslims believe that Jesus was the forerunner of Muhammad and predicted Muhammad&#x27;s coming:

And ˹remember˺ when Jesus, son of Mary, said, “O children of Israel! I am truly Allah’s messenger to you, confirming the Torah which came before me, and giving good news of a messenger after me whose name will be Aḥmad.” Yet when the Prophet came to them with clear proofs, they said, “This is pure magic.”
—Qur&#x27;ān 61:6 

In Islam, the word (Arabic for &quot;the praised one&quot;) refers to Muhammad. The Gospel of Barnabas contains a number of sayings attributed to Jesus, who Muslims believe predicted the coming of Muhammad. The gospel places Jesus as being a forerunner for Muhammad;

==== Nontrinitarianism ====

According to the Nicene Creed, the concept of the Trinity means that God is one and also exists consubstantially as three persons (Father, Son, and Holy Spirit); Jesus is the Son. Trinitarianism is rejected by Islam, which believes in the concept of (indivisible oneness) and considers the Trinity a equating God with his creation. Muslims believe that, like other Islamic prophets, Jesus was human and never claimed to be God. The Gospel of Barnabas contains statements, attributed to Jesus, in which he denies being the Son of God. The gospel says that Jesus appeared to be crucified as punishment for people who claimed his divinity, and Muhammad was sent later to expose the transgressions by the Christians for worshipping Jesus.

== Perspectives==

=== Christian ===
The Gospel of Barnabas was not accepted by Christians, who consider it inferior to the four canonical gospels and a forgery. According to Togardo Siburian of the , it is often used &quot;by [Muslim] propagandists in a guerrilla manner to prey on Christians with weak theological commitments. This is what is said to be the efficacy of the book, as new material for the stealth &#x27;Islamization&#x27; of Christian churches today.&quot; Jan Joosten called it a &quot;hotchpotch of Christian, Jewish, and Muslim materials&quot;. J. N. J. Kritzinger wrote for &quot;Religion in Southern Africa&quot; that the gospel is an obstacle to Christian–Muslim interfaith dialogue, and neither side should use it to discredit the other&#x27;s religion. Christian theologian Norman Geisler criticised Muslims who use it to validate their arguments:

It is not surprising that Muslim apologists appeal to the Gospel of Barnabas in that it supports a central Islamic teaching in contrast to the New Testament. It claims that Jesus did not die on the cross [...] Rather, it argues that Judas Iscariot died in Jesus&#x27; stead [...] having been substituted for him at the last minute. This view has been adopted by many Muslims, since the vast majority of them believe that someone else was substituted on the cross for Jesus.

Jan Slomp wrote that it was difficult to understand the absence of mentions of the gospel in early Islamic writings if it had existed since antiquity, a view shared by A. H. Mathias Zahniser in his &quot;The Mission and Death of Jesus in Islam and Christianity&quot; (2017). Slomp called it a &quot;conscious attempt at imitating a &quot;Diatessaron&quot;&quot;.:35 Egyptian Catholic philosopher wrote for the 1971 &quot;Encyclopaedia of Islam&quot;, &quot;The appearance of a forgery entitled the Gospel of Barnabas put into the hands of the Muslim polemicists [...] a new weapon whose effects on the ordinary public, and even on some insufficiently informed members of universities are felt even today.&quot; A critical book, William F. Campbell&#x27;s &quot;The Gospel of Barnabas: Its True Value&quot;, was published in 1989.

=== Islamic ===
==== Acceptance ====
Some have identified it as the Injil, one of four Islamic holy books sent by God. About the gospel&#x27;s generally-positive reception in the Muslim world, Scottish orientalist W. Montgomery Watt said that it is not uncommon for Muslims to be persuaded to believe in it without question; some are unaware of the scholarly consensus that it is a forgery. According to German scholar Christine Schirrmacher, Muslim positivity about the gospel is based on its claim of being written by an eyewitness and disagreement (favoured by Islam) with mainstream Christian doctrines.

Among Muslims, the gospel was first cited by Indian scholar Rahmatullah Kairanawi in his (1853). It became more popular after the 1908 publication of Rashid Rida&#x27;s Arabic translation. According to Pakistani scholar Abul A&#x27;la Maududi, the Gospel of Barnabas is &quot;more genuine than the four canonical gospels&quot;. Rida agreed that it was &quot;superior&quot; to the canonical gospels in its &quot;divine knowledge, glorification of the Creator, and knowledge of ethics, manners and values&quot;. During a 1940 course at Al-Azhar University, Egyptian intellectual Muhammad Abu Zahra challenged Christians to study and refute the gospel: &quot;The most significant service to the religions and to humanity would be that the church take the trouble to study the gospel according to Barnabas and refute it and to bring us the proofs on which this refutation is based.&quot;

At a 1976 Christian–Muslim dialogue in Libya, each Muslim delegate first received copies of the Gospel of Barnabas and the Quran; the gospel was withdrawn after a protest by the Vatican. Rahim published &quot;Jesus: A Prophet of Islam&quot;, defending the gospel, in 1979. M. A. Yusseff wrote in &quot;The Dead Sea Scrolls, The Gospel of Barnabas, and the New Testament&quot; (1985) that no other gospels can equal its authenticity. A 2007 Iranian film, &quot;The Messiah&quot;, was apparently based on the gospel and was the first film to depict Jesus from Christian and Islamic perspectives. It had a mixed critical response, praised for &quot;generating interfaith dialogue&quot; but criticised for its controversial account of the crucifixion. Director Nader Talebzadeh said, &quot;I pray for Christians. They&#x27;ve been misled. They will realize one day the true story.&quot;

==== Rejection ====
The Gospel of Barnabas is criticized by Muslim scholars, who reject it partially or completely. According to American scholar Amina Inloes, the many differences between the gospel and the Quran dilute its importance. In the January 1977 issue of the &quot;Islamic World League&quot; journal, Syrian writer Yahya al-Hashimi called it a polemic by a Jew to generate hostility between Christians and Muslims. Al-Hashimi said that there was no need to use apocryphal gospels to prove that Muhammad was a prophet, because he believed Muhammad had been foretold by Jesus as the Paraclete in the Gospel of John. Egyptian literary critic Abbas Mahmoud al-Aqqad cited several reasons to reject the gospel, including the use of Andalusi Arabic phrases and teachings which conflict with the Quran.

== See also ==
* Toledot Yeshu
* Acts of Barnabas
* Epistle of Barnabas

== Footnotes ==
== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q808428" start="4" end="22" title="Gospel of Barnabas" label="Gospel of Barnabas"/>
<link wikidata="Q170207" start="28" end="41" title="Biblical apocrypha" label="non-canonical"/>
<link wikidata="Q827597" start="43" end="60" title="Pseudepigrapha" label="pseudepigraphical"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="61" end="67" title="gospel" label="gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="88" end="104" title="Late Middle Ages" label="Late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q185856" start="152" end="160" title="Barnabas" label="Barnabas"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="195" end="203" title="Apostles in the New Testament" label="apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="207" end="212" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="264" end="270" title="gospel" label="gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q51664" start="342" end="358" title="Jesus in Islam" label="Islamic elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q6082810" start="371" end="404" title="Islamic views on Jesus&amp;#x27; death" label="denial of Jesus&amp;#x27; crucifixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q51628" start="486" end="503" title="nativity of Jesus" label="nativity of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q154326" start="524" end="536" title="annunciation" label="annunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q81989" start="554" end="561" title="Gabriel" label="Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="565" end="569" title="Mary, mother of Jesus" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q859115" start="585" end="602" title="Virgin birth of Jesus" label="Jesus&amp;#x27; birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q749771" start="623" end="635" title="ministry of Jesus" label="his ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q51642" start="653" end="669" title="Great Commission" label="message of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q81018" start="712" end="726" title="Judas Iscariot" label="Judas Iscariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="749" end="760" title="Crucifixion of Jesus" label="crucifixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q262557" start="929" end="948" title="Epistle of Barnabas" label="Epistle of Barnabas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629160" start="957" end="973" title="Acts of Barnabas" label="Acts of Barnabas"/>
<link wikidata="Q208176" start="1119" end="1126" title="Morisco" label="Morisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="1146" end="1152" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898822" start="1259" end="1280" title="Bernard de la Monnoye" label="Bernard de la Monnoye"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="1577" end="1582" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="1598" end="1603" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="1620" end="1633" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q392302" start="1714" end="1721" title="Gospel of Matthew" label="Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q107388" start="1723" end="1727" title="Gospel of Mark" label="Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q39939" start="1729" end="1733" title="Gospel of Luke" label="Luke"/>
<link wikidata="Q36766" start="1739" end="1743" title="Gospel of John" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q185856" start="2063" end="2071" title="Barnabas" label="Barnabas"/>
<link wikidata="Q9200" start="2197" end="2213" title="Paul the Apostle" label="Paul the Apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615240" start="2435" end="2449" title="gospel harmony" label="gospel harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q749771" start="2467" end="2475" title="ministry of Jesus" label="ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q623306" start="2480" end="2496" title="passion of Jesus" label="passion of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q392302" start="2542" end="2549" title="Gospel of Matthew" label="Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q39939" start="2554" end="2558" title="Gospel of Luke" label="Luke"/>
<link wikidata="Q154326" start="2572" end="2584" title="annunciation" label="annunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q81989" start="2602" end="2609" title="Gabriel" label="Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="2613" end="2617" title="Mary, mother of Jesus" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q643474" start="2650" end="2675" title="massacre of the Innocents" label="massacre of the Innocents"/>
<link wikidata="Q13510036" start="2681" end="2702" title="circumcision of Jesus" label="circumcision of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q245230" start="2712" end="2733" title="finding in the Temple" label="finding in the Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q205976" start="2789" end="2804" title="Mount of Olives" label="Mount of Olives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="2998" end="3007" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="3055" end="3063" title="Apostles in the New Testament" label="apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9181" start="3287" end="3294" title="Abraham" label="Abraham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3306" end="3330" title="Abraham in Islam#Youth" label="his destruction of idols"/>
<link wikidata="Q5007906" start="3339" end="3348" title="Binding of Isaac" label="sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q183403" start="3360" end="3367" title="Ishmael" label="Ishmael"/>
<link wikidata="Q201201" start="3395" end="3419" title="transfiguration of Jesus" label="transfiguration of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26403" start="3618" end="3627" title="Pharisees" label="Pharisees"/>
<link wikidata="Q492663" start="3638" end="3661" title="Jesus and the woman taken in adultery" label="woman taken in adultery"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="3720" end="3731" title="Crucifixion of Jesus" label="crucifixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q192950" start="3777" end="3790" title="Herod Antipas" label="Herod Antipas"/>
<link wikidata="Q17131" start="3796" end="3810" title="Pontius Pilate" label="Pontius Pilate"/>
<link wikidata="Q295084" start="3873" end="3882" title="Nicodemus" label="Nicodemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51633" start="3916" end="3927" title="Last Supper" label="Last Supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860530" start="3944" end="3951" title="Bargain of Judas" label="betrays"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448339" start="3960" end="3983" title="thirty pieces of silver" label="thirty pieces of silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q45581" start="4012" end="4019" title="Michael (archangel)" label="Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q56951" start="4021" end="4028" title="Raphael (archangel)" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q209378" start="4034" end="4039" title="Uriel" label="Uriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q271474" start="4404" end="4423" title="Joseph of Arimathea" label="Joseph of Arimathea"/>
<link wikidata="Q245209" start="4632" end="4659" title="dispersion of the Apostles" label="dispersion of the disciples"/>
<link wikidata="Q185856" start="4833" end="4841" title="Barnabas" label="Barnabas"/>
<link wikidata="Q262557" start="4913" end="4932" title="Epistle of Barnabas" label="Epistle of Barnabas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629160" start="4941" end="4957" title="Acts of Barnabas" label="Acts of Barnabas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182112" start="5049" end="5064" title="Gelasian Decree" label="Gelasian Decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q750403" start="5582" end="5611" title="Biblioteca Nacional de España" label="Biblioteca Nacional de España"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898822" start="5872" end="5893" title="Bernard de la Monnoye" label="Bernard de la Monnoye"/>
<link wikidata="Q247320" start="5953" end="5967" title="Adriaan Reland" label="Adriaan Reland"/>
<link wikidata="Q335820" start="6157" end="6168" title="John Toland" label="John Toland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544232" start="6198" end="6209" title="George Sale" label="George Sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="6460" end="6469" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q584205" start="6512" end="6528" title="Antitrinitarianism" label="anti-Trinitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q151826" start="6573" end="6595" title="Frederick I of Prussia" label="Frederick I of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307353" start="8129" end="8135" title="octavo" label="octavo"/>
<link wikidata="Q152428" start="8305" end="8327" title="Prince Eugene of Savoy" label="Prince Eugene of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q304037" start="8564" end="8589" title="Austrian National Library" label="Austrian National Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="8691" end="8714" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q471046" start="8789" end="8800" title="Rashid Rida" label="Rashid Rida"/>
<link wikidata="Q73094" start="10109" end="10141" title="The Queen&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford" label="The Queen&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q487556" start="10364" end="10384" title="University of Sydney" label="University of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q367840" start="10392" end="10406" title="Fisher Library" label="Fisher Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081249" start="10449" end="10466" title="Charles Nicholson" label="Charles Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364467" start="10606" end="10616" title="Page header" label="subheaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q648118" start="11337" end="11361" title="Lead Books of Sacromonte" label="Lead Books of Sacromonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="11606" end="11619" title="Church Fathers" label="Church Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q182123" start="11620" end="11628" title="Irenaeus" label="Irenaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q133350" start="11713" end="11726" title="Pope Sixtus V" label="Pope Sixtus V"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="11732" end="11744" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706746" start="11864" end="11873" title="Aragonese people" label="Aragonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232180" start="12135" end="12156" title="University of Granada" label="University of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q33538" start="12431" end="12437" title="Syriac language" label="Syriac"/>
<link wikidata="Q206895" start="12508" end="12515" title="Hakkâri (city)" label="Hakkâri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136957" start="12572" end="12603" title="Ministry of Culture and Tourism (Turkey)" label="Ministry of Culture and Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4533056" start="12712" end="12740" title="Ethnography Museum of Ankara" label="Ethnography Museum of Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="13212" end="13225" title="Late Middle Ages" label="late-medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="13481" end="13496" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante Alighieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q40185" start="13529" end="13542" title="Divine Comedy" label="Divine Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13624" end="13629" title="Seven Heavens#Islam" label="seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615240" start="13811" end="13820" title="Gospel harmony" label="harmonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313616" start="13940" end="13955" title="Mikel de Epalza" label="Mikel de Epalza"/>
<link wikidata="Q131262" start="14135" end="14156" title="University of Bologna" label="University of Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q8810" start="14458" end="14465" title="Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q648118" start="14766" end="14790" title="Lead Books of Sacromonte" label="Lead Books of Sacromonte"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="14890" end="14894" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q43999" start="14928" end="14943" title="James the Great" label="James the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="15165" end="15179" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="15207" end="15213" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345573" start="15451" end="15459" title="Expulsion of the Moriscos" label="expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149197" start="15717" end="15728" title="Jan Joosten (biblical scholar)" label="Jan Joosten"/>
<link wikidata="Q710490" start="16257" end="16273" title="Islamochristiana" label="Islamochristiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q51680" start="17374" end="17379" title="Annas" label="Annas"/>
<link wikidata="Q211246" start="17384" end="17392" title="Caiaphas" label="Caiaphas"/>
<link wikidata="Q182242" start="17664" end="17684" title="feast of Tabernacles" label="feast of Tabernacles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5680" start="18305" end="18312" title="Nineveh" label="Nineveh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="18373" end="18384" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q831297" start="18450" end="18459" title="Pool of Bethesda" label="Probatica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194545" start="18768" end="18775" title="Biblical jubilee" label="jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q134646" start="18845" end="18863" title="Pope Boniface VIII" label="Pope Boniface VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q838794" start="18893" end="18910" title="Jubilee in the Catholic Church" label="Christian jubilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q82070" start="18990" end="18994" title="Tyre, Lebanon" label="Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q40059" start="19018" end="19030" title="Jordan River" label="Jordan River"/>
<link wikidata="Q26403" start="19099" end="19107" title="Pharisee" label="Pharisee"/>
<link wikidata="Q26403" start="19253" end="19262" title="Pharisees" label="Pharisees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160695" start="19550" end="19556" title="pithoi" label="pithoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352429" start="20055" end="20065" title="Son of God (Christianity)" label="Son of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q40309" start="20250" end="20270" title="Acts of the Apostles" label="Acts of the Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q15708811" start="20341" end="20368" title="Journal of Higher Criticism" label="Journal of Higher Criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q128620" start="20405" end="20429" title="Epistle to the Galatians" label="Epistle to the Galatians"/>
<link wikidata="Q219696" start="20837" end="20844" title="An-Nisa" label="An-Nisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q207674" start="21432" end="21440" title="docetism" label="docetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992247" start="21444" end="21453" title="Heterodoxy" label="heterodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q244783" start="22706" end="22714" title="exegesis" label="exegesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q235662" start="22770" end="22777" title="As-Saff" label="As-Saff"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="23462" end="23470" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q207937" start="23519" end="23531" title="Nicene Creed" label="Nicene Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159" start="23571" end="23581" title="Monotheism" label="God is one"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188981" start="23598" end="23614" title="Consubstantiality" label="consubstantially"/>
<link wikidata="Q186350" start="23633" end="23639" title="God the Father" label="Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141210" start="23641" end="23644" title="God the Son" label="Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="23682" end="23696" title="Trinity" label="Trinitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q168827" start="23867" end="23883" title="Prophets and messengers in Islam" label="Islamic prophets"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149197" start="24712" end="24723" title="Jan Joosten (biblical scholar)" label="Jan Joosten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5911087" start="24742" end="24752" title="Hotchpot" label="hotchpotch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304214" start="24924" end="24943" title="interfaith dialogue" label="interfaith dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q10337407" start="25037" end="25051" title="Norman Geisler" label="Norman Geisler"/>
<link wikidata="Q932676" start="25925" end="25936" title="Diatessaron" label="Diatessaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="25962" end="25970" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145236" start="26008" end="26030" title="Encyclopaedia of Islam" label="Encyclopaedia of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762323" start="26486" end="26491" title="Gospel in Islam" label="Injil"/>
<link wikidata="Q235131" start="26505" end="26523" title="Islamic holy books" label="Islamic holy books"/>
<link wikidata="Q471167" start="26632" end="26650" title="W. Montgomery Watt" label="W. Montgomery Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083773" start="26837" end="26859" title="Christine Schirrmacher" label="Christine Schirrmacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2829349" start="27087" end="27108" title="Rahmatullah Kairanawi" label="Rahmatullah Kairanawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q471046" start="27177" end="27188" title="Rashid Rida" label="Rashid Rida"/>
<link wikidata="Q369907" start="27247" end="27269" title="Abul A&amp;#x27;la Maududi" label="Abul A&amp;#x27;la Maududi"/>
<link wikidata="Q173959" start="27561" end="27580" title="Al-Azhar University" label="Al-Azhar University"/>
<link wikidata="Q718677" start="27604" end="27622" title="Muhammad Abu Zahra" label="Muhammad Abu Zahra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855269" start="28372" end="28383" title="The Messiah (2007 film)" label="The Messiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6957575" start="28669" end="28685" title="Nader Talebzadeh" label="Nader Talebzadeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16730053" start="28942" end="28954" title="Amina Inloes" label="Amina Inloes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29388" end="29397" title="Paraclete#Islam" label="Paraclete"/>
<link wikidata="Q36766" start="29405" end="29419" title="Gospel of John" label="Gospel of John"/>
<link wikidata="Q305962" start="29446" end="29468" title="Abbas Mahmoud al-Aqqad" label="Abbas Mahmoud al-Aqqad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137945" start="29534" end="29549" title="Andalusi Arabic" label="Andalusi Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q279556" start="29621" end="29634" title="Toledot Yeshu" label="Toledot Yeshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629160" start="29637" end="29653" title="Acts of Barnabas" label="Acts of Barnabas"/>
<link wikidata="Q262557" start="29656" end="29675" title="Epistle of Barnabas" label="Epistle of Barnabas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12475" wikidata="Q76579" url="?curid=12475" title="Georgius Agricola">
<text>Georgius Agricola (; born Georg Bauer; 24 March 1494 – 21 November 1555) was a German Humanist scholar, mineralogist and metallurgist. Born in the small town of Glauchau, in the Electorate of Saxony of the Holy Roman Empire, he was broadly educated, but took a particular interest in the mining and refining of metals. He was the first to drop the Arabic definite article &quot;al-&quot;, exclusively writing &quot;chymia&quot; and &quot;chymista&quot; in describing activity that we today would characterize as chemical or alchemical, giving chemistry its modern name. For his groundbreaking work &quot;De Natura Fossilium&quot; published in 1546, he is generally referred to as the father of mineralogy and the founder of geology as a scientific discipline.

He is well known for his pioneering work &quot;De re metallica libri XII&quot;, that was published in 1556, one year after his death. This 12-volume work is a comprehensive and systematic study, classification and methodical guide on all available factual and practical aspects, that are of concern for mining, the mining sciences and metallurgy, investigated and researched in its natural environment by means of direct observation. Unrivalled in its complexity and accuracy, it served as the standard reference work for two centuries. Agricola stated in the preface, that he will exclude &quot;all those things which I have not myself seen, or have not read or heard of&quot;. He continued, &quot;That which I have neither seen, nor carefully considered after reading or hearing of, I have not written about.&quot;

As a scholar of the Renaissance he was committed to a universal approach towards learning and research. He published over 40 complete scholarly works during his professional life on a wide range of subjects and disciplines, such as pedagogy, medicine, metrology, mercantilism, pharmacy, philosophy, geology, history, and many more. His innovative and comprehensive scholarly work, based on new and precise methods of production and control, has made his work a central part of scholarship and understanding of science during that period.

==Etymology==
He is often, although not universally referred to as &quot;the Father of mineralogy&quot; and the founder of geology as a scientific discipline. Poet Georg Fabricius has bestowed a brief honorary title on him in recognition of his legacy, that his fellow Saxons cite regularly: &quot;die ausgezeichnete Zierde des Vaterlandes&quot;, (literally: &quot;the distinguished ornament of the Fatherland&quot;). He was baptized with his birth name &quot;Georg Pawer&quot;. &quot;Pawer&quot; is a vernacular form of the modern German term &quot;Bauer&quot;, which translates to &quot;farmer&quot; in English. His teacher, the Leipzig professor Petrus Mosellanus convinced him to consider the common practice of name latinisation, particularly popular among Renaissance scholars, so &quot;Georg Pawer&quot; became &quot;Georgius Agricola&quot;. Coincidentally, the name Georg/Georgius derives from Greek and also means &quot;farmer&quot;.

==Early life==

===Youth===
Agricola was born in 1494 as Georg Pawer, the second of seven children of a clothier and dyer in Glauchau. At the age of twelve he enrolled in the Latin school in Chemnitz or Zwickau. From 1514 to 1518 he studied at the Leipzig University where, under the name &quot;Georgius Pawer de Glauchaw&quot;, he first subscribed in the summer semester to theology, philosophy and philology under rector Nikolaus Apel and to ancient languages, Greek and Latin in particular. He received his first Latin lectures under Petrus Mosellanus, a celebrated humanist of the time and adherent of Erasmus of Rotterdam.

===Humanist education===
Gifted with a precocious intellect and his freshly acquired title of Baccalaureus artium, Agricola early threw himself into the pursuit of the &quot;new learning&quot;, with such effect that at the age of 24 he was appointed &quot;Rector extraordinarius&quot; of Ancient Greek at the 1519 established &quot;Zwickau Greek school&quot;, which was soon to be united with the Great School of Zwickau (Zwickauer Ratsschule). In 1520 he published his first book, a Latin grammar manual with practical and methodical hints for teachers. In 1522 he ended his appointment to again study at Leipzig for another year, where, as rector, he was supported by his former tutor and professor of classics, Peter Mosellanus, with whom he had always been in correspondence. He also subscribed to the studies of medicine, physics, and chemistry.

In 1523 he traveled to Italy and enrolled in the University of Bologna and probably Padua and completed his studies in medicine. It remains unclear where he acquired his diploma. In 1524 he joined the Aldine Press, a prestigious printing office in Venice that was established by Aldus Manutius, who had died in 1515. Manutius had established and maintained contacts and the friendship in a network among the many scholars, including the most celebrated, from all over Europe, whom he had encouraged to come to Venice and take care of the redaction of the numerous publications of the classics of antiquity. At the time of Agricola&#x27;s visit, the business was run by Andrea Torresani and his daughter Maria. Agricola participated in the edition of a work in several volumes on Galen until 1526.

==Professional life==
===Town physician and pharmacist===

He returned to Zwickau in 1527 and to Chemnitz in autumn of the same year, where he married Anna Meyner, a widow from Schneeberg. Upon his search for employment as town physician and pharmacist in the Ore Mountains, preferably a place, where he could satisfy his ardent longings for the studies on mining, he settled in the suitable little town Joachimsthal in the &quot;Bohemian Erzgebirge&quot;, where in 1516 significant silver ore deposits were found. The 15,000 inhabitants made Joachimsthal a busy, booming centre of mining and smelting works with hundreds of shafts for Agricola to investigate.

His primary post proved to be not very demanding and he lent all his spare time to his studies. Beginning in 1528 he immersed himself in comparisons and tests on what had been written about mineralogy and mining and his own observations of the local materials and the methods of their treatment. He constructed a logical system of the local conditions, rocks and sediments, the minerals and ores, explained the various terms of general and specific local territorial features. He combined this discourse on all natural aspects with a treatise on the actual mining, the methods and processes, local extraction variants, the differences and oddities he had learnt from the miners. For the first time, he tackled questions on the formation of ores and minerals, attempted to bring the underlying mechanisms to light and introduce his conclusions in a systematic framework. He laid out the whole process in a scholarly dialogue and published it under the title &quot;Bermannus, sive de re metallica dialogus&quot;, (Bermannus, or a dialogue on metallurgy) in 1530. The work was highly praised by Erasmus for the attempt to put the knowledge, won by practical inquiry into order and further investigate in reduced form. Agricola, in his capacity of physician, also suggested, that minerals and their effects on and relationship to human medicine should be a future subject of investigation.

In 1531 Christian Egenolff in Frankfurt published his German book named &quot;Rechter Gebrauch d&#x27;Alchimei, mitt vil bissher verborgenen, nutzbaren unnd lustigen Künsten, nit allein den fürwitzigen Alchimismisten, sonder allen kunstbaren Werckleutten, in und ausserhalb Feurs. Auch sunst aller menglichen inn vil wege zugebrauchen&quot; (&quot;The Proper Use of Alchemy&quot;) which argued that true &quot;alchemy&quot; should not attempt transmutation of metals to gold or synthesizing the philosopher&#x27;s stone but rather study and develop the industrial methods of skilled craftsmen.

=== Mayor of Chemnitz ===

In the same year Agricola received an offer of the city of &quot;Kepmnicz&quot; (Chemnitz) for the position of &quot;Stadtleybarzt&quot; (town physician), which he accepted and he relocated to Chemnitz in 1533. Although little is known about his work as physician, Agricola entered his most productive years and soon became lord mayor of Chemnitz and served as diplomat and historiographer for Duke George, who was looking to uncover possible territorial claims and commissioned Agricola with a large historical work, the &quot;Dominatores Saxonici a prima origine ad hanc aetatem&quot; (Lords of Saxony from the beginning to the present time), which took 20 years to accomplish and was only published in 1555 at Freiberg.

In his work &quot;De Mensuris et ponderibus&quot;, published in 1533, he described the systems of Greek and Roman measures and weights. In the 16th century Holy Roman Empire there were no uniform dimensions, measures, and weights, which impeded trade and commerce. This work laid the foundation for Agricola&#x27;s reputation as a humanist scholar; as he committed himself to the introduction of standardized weights and measures, he entered the public stage and occupied a political position.

In 1544, he published the &quot;De ortu et causis subterraneorum&quot; (On Subterranean Origins and Causes), in which he criticized older theories and laid out the foundations of modern physical geology. It discusses the effect of wind and water as powerful geological forces, the origin and distribution of ground water and mineralizing fluids, the origin of subterranean heat, the origin of ore channels, and the principal divisions of the mineral kingdom. However, he maintained that a certain &#x27;materia pinguis&#x27; or &#x27;fatty matter,&#x27; set into fermentation by heat, gave birth to fossil organic shapes, as opposed to fossil shells having belonged to living animals.

In 1546, he published the four volumes of &quot;De natura eorum quae effluunt e terra&quot; (The nature of the things that flow out of the earth&#x27;s interior). It deals with the properties of water, its effects, taste, smell, temperature etc. and air under the earth, which, as Agricola reasoned, is responsible for earthquakes and volcanoes.

The ten books of &quot;De veteribus et novis metallis&quot;, more commonly known as &quot;De Natura Fossilium&quot; were published in 1546 as a comprehensive textbook and account of the discovery and occurrence of minerals, ores, metals, gemstones, earths and igneous rocks, followed by &quot;De animantibus subterraneis&quot; in 1548 and a number of smaller works on the metals during the following two years. Agricola served as Burgomaster (lord mayor) of Chemnitz in 1546, 1547, 1551 and 1553.

== &quot;De re metallica&quot; ==

Agricola&#x27;s most famous work, the &quot;De re metallica libri xii&quot; was published the year after his death, in 1556; it was perhaps finished in 1550, since the dedication to the elector and his brother is dated to that year. The delay is thought to be due to the book&#x27;s many woodcuts. The work is a systematic, illustrated treatise on mining and extractive metallurgy. It shows processes to extract ores from the ground, and metals from ore.

Until that time, Pliny the Elder&#x27;s work &quot;Historia Naturalis&quot; was the main source of information on metals and mining techniques. Agricola acknowledged his debt to ancient authors, such as Pliny and Theophrastus, and made numerous references to Roman works. In geology, Agricola described and illustrated how ore veins occur in and on the ground. He described prospecting for ore veins and surveying in detail, as well as washing the ores to collect the heavier valuable minerals, such as gold and tin. The work shows water mills used in mining, such as the machine for lifting men and material into and out of a mine shaft. Water mills found application especially in crushing ores to release the fine particles of gold and other heavy minerals, as well as working giant bellows to force air into the confined spaces of underground workings.

Agricola described mining methods which are now obsolete, such as fire-setting, which involved building fires against hard rock faces. The hot rock was quenched with water, and the thermal shock weakened it enough for easy removal. It was a dangerous method when used underground, and was made redundant by explosives.

The work contains, in an appendix, the German equivalents for the technical terms used in the Latin text. Modern words that derive from the work include fluorspar (from which was later named fluorine) and bismuth. In another example, believing the black rock of the Schloßberg at Stolpen to be the same as Pliny the Elder&#x27;s basalt, Agricola applied this name to it, and thus originated a petrological term.

In 1912, the &quot;Mining Magazine&quot; (London) published an English translation of &quot;De re metallica&quot;. The translation was made by Herbert Hoover, the American mining engineer and his wife Lou Henry Hoover. Hoover was later President of the United States.

== Death ==
Agricola died on November 21, 1555. His &quot;lifelong friend,&quot; the Protestant poet and classicist Georg Fabricius, wrote in a letter to the Protestant theologian Phillip Melanchthon, &quot;He who since the days of childhood had enjoyed robust health was carried off by a four-days&#x27; fever.&quot; Agricola was a fervent Catholic, who, according to Fabricius, &quot;despised our Churches&quot; and &quot;would not tolerate with patience that anyone should discuss ecclesiastical matters with him&quot;. That did not stop Fabricius in the same letter from calling Agricola &quot;that distinguished ornament of our Fatherland,&quot; whose &quot;religious views...were compatible with reason, it is true, and were dazzling,&quot; though not &quot;compatible with truth&quot;; in 1551 Fabricius had already written the introductory poem to &quot;De re metallica&quot; in praise of Agricola.

According to traditional urban customs, as a former lord mayor he was entitled to a burial in the local mother church. His religious affiliation, however, outweighed his secular prerogatives and monumental services for the city. Chemnitz Protestant superintendent Tettelbach urged Prince August to command the refusal of a burial inside the city. The command was issued and Tettelbach immediately informed the Agricola party.

Upon the initiative of his childhood friend, Naumburg bishop Julius von Pflug, four days later Agricola&#x27;s body was carried off to Zeitz, more than away and interred by von Pflug in the Zeitz cathedral. His wife had a memorial plate commissioned and placed inside, that was already removed during the 17th century. Its text, however has been preserved in the Zeitz annals, and reads:

To the physician and mayor of Chemnitz, Georgius Agricola, a man most distinguished by piety and scholarship, who had rendered outstanding services to his city, whose legacy will bestow immortal glory on his name, whose spirit Christ himself absorbed into his eternal kingdom. His mourning wife and children. He died in the 62nd year of life on November 21, 1555 and was born in Glauchau on March 24, 1494

==See also==
* List of mineralogists
* Shen Kuo, 11th-century Chinese author on land formation and mineralogy
* Theophrastus
* Mineral collecting

==References==
==Further reading==
* Carolyn Merchant (1980). &quot;The Death of Nature: Women, Ecology and the Scientific Revolution&quot; (San Francisco: HarperCollins).
* Ralf Kern (2010). &quot;Wissenschaftliche Instrumente in ihrer Zeit&quot;. Vol. 1. pp. 334–336 (Cologne: Koenig).

== External links ==

* Agricola Akademischer Verein, (engl: Agricola Academic Association)
* 
* 
* Agricola&#x27;s work on gemstones and mineralogy: De Natura Fossilium, translated from Latin by Mark Chance Bandy
* Agricola&#x27;s De Re Metallica translated by former President H. Hoover and his wife L.H. Hoover, full text (650 pages) and illustrations
* &quot;De Ortu &amp; Causis Subterraneorum&quot; full digital facsimile
* &quot;De Re Metallica Libri XII&quot; full digital facsimile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q76579" start="0" end="17" title="Georgius Agricola" label="Georgius Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q76579" start="26" end="37" title="Georgius Agricola" label="Georg Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="79" end="85" title="German people" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q846933" start="86" end="94" title="Renaissance humanism" label="Humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="104" end="116" title="mineralogy" label="mineralogist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="121" end="133" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgist"/>
<link wikidata="Q20071" start="161" end="169" title="Glauchau" label="Glauchau"/>
<link wikidata="Q156199" start="178" end="198" title="Electorate of Saxony" label="Electorate of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="206" end="223" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="288" end="294" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283324" start="299" end="307" title="refining (metallurgy)" label="refining"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="311" end="316" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="543" end="552" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244649" start="604" end="623" title="De Natura Fossilium" label="De Natura Fossilium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="724" end="731" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193676" start="808" end="833" title="De Re Metallica" label="De re metallica libri XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="1064" end="1070" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="1096" end="1106" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="1599" end="1610" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922" start="1811" end="1819" title="pedagogy" label="pedagogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q394" start="1831" end="1840" title="metrology" label="metrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q162527" start="1842" end="1854" title="mercantilism" label="mercantilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q614304" start="1856" end="1864" title="pharmacy" label="pharmacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83353" start="2205" end="2215" title="mineralogy" label="mineralogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="2241" end="2248" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q71606" start="2282" end="2297" title="Georg Fabricius" label="Georg Fabricius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202" start="2387" end="2393" title="Saxony" label="Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036511" start="2620" end="2630" title="vernacular" label="vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="2749" end="2756" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q76095" start="2767" end="2784" title="Petrus Mosellanus" label="Petrus Mosellanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806983" start="2834" end="2851" title="Latinisation of names" label="name latinisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2795" start="3253" end="3261" title="Chemnitz" label="Chemnitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778" start="3265" end="3272" title="Zwickau" label="Zwickau"/>
<link wikidata="Q154804" start="3310" end="3328" title="Leipzig University" label="Leipzig University"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="3525" end="3530" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3535" end="3540" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q76095" start="3599" end="3616" title="Petrus Mosellanus" label="Petrus Mosellanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43499" start="3668" end="3688" title="Erasmus" label="Erasmus of Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="3785" end="3804" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Baccalaureus artium"/>
<link wikidata="Q13604283" start="3865" end="3877" title="new learning" label="new learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="3979" end="3992" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q884503" start="4088" end="4111" title="Westsächsische Hochschule Zwickau - University of Applied Sciences Zwickau" label="Great School of Zwickau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="4297" end="4304" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q76095" start="4405" end="4421" title="Peter Mosellanus" label="Peter Mosellanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="4508" end="4516" title="medicine" label="medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="4518" end="4525" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="4531" end="4540" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="4566" end="4571" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131262" start="4592" end="4613" title="University of Bologna" label="University of Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q193510" start="4627" end="4632" title="University of Padua" label="Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q567488" start="4744" end="4756" title="Aldine Press" label="Aldine Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="4791" end="4797" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q213220" start="4822" end="4836" title="Aldus Manutius" label="Aldus Manutius"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="5127" end="5148" title="Classics" label="classics of antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="5322" end="5327" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198" start="5601" end="5614" title="Ore Mountains" label="Ore Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q830418" start="5745" end="5757" title="Jáchymov" label="Joachimsthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q43499" start="7095" end="7102" title="Desiderius Erasmus" label="Erasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q74924" start="7398" end="7416" title="Christian Egenolff" label="Christian Egenolff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="7420" end="7429" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q182053" start="7885" end="7909" title="philosopher&amp;#x27;s stone" label="philosopher&amp;#x27;s stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327935" start="8150" end="8164" title="City physician" label="town physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q2795" start="8205" end="8213" title="Chemnitz" label="Chemnitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q719626" start="8406" end="8417" title="George, Duke of Saxony" label="Duke George"/>
<link wikidata="Q14819" start="8725" end="8733" title="Freiberg" label="Freiberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="9426" end="9433" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5244649" start="10354" end="10373" title="De Natura Fossilium" label="De Natura Fossilium"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="11145" end="11151" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11156" end="11177" title="metallurgy#Extractive metallurgy" label="extractive metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="11209" end="11212" title="ore" label="ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="11270" end="11285" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q442" start="11304" end="11322" title="Natural History (Pliny)" label="Historia Naturalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q160362" start="11466" end="11478" title="Theophrastus" label="Theophrastus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="11528" end="11535" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q952465" start="11576" end="11584" title="ore vein" label="ore vein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650350" start="11627" end="11638" title="prospecting" label="prospecting"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="11657" end="11666" title="surveying" label="surveying"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="11756" end="11760" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="11765" end="11768" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q185187" start="11785" end="11795" title="water mill" label="water mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="11805" end="11811" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q334493" start="11880" end="11890" title="mine shaft" label="mine shaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q208103" start="12039" end="12046" title="bellows" label="bellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q59049" start="12177" end="12189" title="fire-setting" label="fire-setting"/>
<link wikidata="Q960836" start="12292" end="12305" title="thermal shock" label="thermal shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="12418" end="12428" title="explosives" label="explosives"/>
<link wikidata="Q102151" start="12584" end="12593" title="fluorspar" label="fluorspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q650" start="12622" end="12630" title="fluorine" label="fluorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q942" start="12636" end="12643" title="bismuth" label="bismuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q8243" start="12697" end="12707" title="Schloßberg (Stolpen)" label="Schloßberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q8243" start="12711" end="12718" title="Stolpen" label="Stolpen"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="12760" end="12766" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="12987" end="13001" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q233669" start="13045" end="13061" title="Lou Henry Hoover" label="Lou Henry Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="13080" end="13110" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q71606" start="13229" end="13244" title="Georg Fabricius" label="Georg Fabricius"/>
<link wikidata="Q76325" start="13293" end="13312" title="Phillip Melanchthon" label="Phillip Melanchthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q435016" start="14302" end="14315" title="Augustus, Elector of Saxony" label="Prince August"/>
<link wikidata="Q15986" start="14493" end="14501" title="Naumburg" label="Naumburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q84963" start="14509" end="14525" title="Julius von Pflug" label="Julius von Pflug"/>
<link wikidata="Q16087" start="14583" end="14588" title="Zeitz" label="Zeitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3892898" start="15259" end="15280" title="List of mineralogists" label="List of mineralogists"/>
<link wikidata="Q270085" start="15283" end="15291" title="Shen Kuo" label="Shen Kuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q160362" start="15356" end="15368" title="Theophrastus" label="Theophrastus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6864349" start="15371" end="15389" title="Mineral collecting" label="Mineral collecting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940097" start="15428" end="15444" title="Carolyn Merchant" label="Carolyn Merchant"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12478" wikidata="Q191039" url="?curid=12478" title="Germanicus">
<text>Germanicus Julius Caesar (24 May 15 BC – 10 October AD 19) was an ancient Roman general and politician most famously known for his campaigns against Arminius in Germania. The son of Nero Claudius Drusus and Antonia the Younger, Germanicus was born into an influential branch of the patrician &quot;gens Claudia&quot;. The agnomen &quot;Germanicus&quot; was added to his full name in 9 BC when it was posthumously awarded to his father in honor of his victories in Germania. In AD 4 he was adopted by his paternal uncle Tiberius, himself the stepson and heir of Germanicus&#x27; great-uncle Augustus; ten years later, Tiberius succeeded Augustus as Roman emperor. As a result of his adoption, Germanicus became an official member of the &quot;gens Julia&quot;, another prominent family, to which he was related on his mother&#x27;s side. His connection to the &quot;Julii Caesares&quot; was further consolidated through a marriage between him and Agrippina the Elder, a granddaughter of Augustus. He was also the father of Caligula, the maternal grandfather of Nero, and the older brother of Claudius.

During the reign of Augustus, Germanicus enjoyed an accelerated political career, entering the office of quaestor five years before the legal age in AD 7. He held that office until AD 11, and was elected consul for the first time in AD 12. The year after, he was made proconsul of Germania Inferior, Germania Superior, and all of Gaul. From there he commanded eight legions, about one-third of the entire Roman army at the time, which he led against the Germanic tribes in his campaigns from AD 14 to 16. He avenged the Roman Empire&#x27;s defeat in the Teutoburg Forest and retrieved two of the three legionary eagles that had been lost during the battle. In AD 17, he returned to Rome, where he received a triumph before leaving to reorganize the provinces of Asia Minor, whereby he incorporated the provinces of Cappadocia and Commagene in AD 18.

While in the eastern provinces, Germanicus came into conflict with the governor of Syria, Gnaeus Calpurnius Piso. During their feud, Germanicus became ill in Antioch and died on 10 October AD 19. His death has been attributed to poison by ancient sources, but that was never proven. As a famous general, he was widely popular and regarded as the ideal Roman long after his death. To the Roman people, Germanicus was the Roman equivalent of Alexander the Great due to the nature of his death at a young age, his virtuous character, his dashing physique, and his military renown.

==Name==

Germanicus&#x27;s &quot;praenomen&quot; (personal name) at birth is unknown, but he was probably named Nero Claudius Drusus after his father (conventionally called &quot;Drusus&quot;), or possibly Tiberius Claudius Nero after his paternal uncle. Some historians such as Iosif Constantin Drăgan believe he may have been named Decimus Claudius Nero or Decimus Claudius Drusus at his &quot;Dies lustricus&quot;, since his father&#x27;s &quot;praenomen&quot; at birth was &quot;Decimus&quot;. He took the &quot;agnomen&quot; (nickname) &quot;Germanicus&quot;, awarded posthumously to his father in honor of his victories in Germania, at which point he nominally became head of the family in 9 BC. By AD 4 his uncle Tiberius adopted Germanicus as his son and heir. As a result, Germanicus was adopted out of the &quot;gens Claudia&quot; and into that of the &quot;gens Julia&quot;. In accordance with Roman naming conventions, he adopted the name &quot;Julius Caesar&quot; while retaining his &quot;agnomen&quot;, becoming Germanicus Julius Caesar. Upon Germanicus&#x27; adoption into the &quot;Julii&quot;, his brother Claudius became the sole legal representative of his father, inheriting the &quot;agnomen&quot; &quot;Germanicus&quot; as the new head of the family.

==House and early life==

Germanicus was born in Rome on 24 May 15 BC to Nero Claudius Drusus and Antonia Minor and had two younger siblings: a sister, Livilla, and a brother, Claudius. His paternal grandmother was Livia, who had divorced his grandfather Tiberius Claudius Nero around 24 years before Germanicus&#x27; birth. Livia&#x27;s second marriage was to the Roman emperor Augustus. His maternal grandparents were the triumvir Mark Antony and Augustus&#x27; sister Octavia Minor. Germanicus was a key figure in the Julio-Claudian dynasty of the early Roman Empire. Tiberius, Germanicus&#x27; uncle, became the second Roman emperor and would be succeeded by Germanicus&#x27; son Gaius. Germanicus was also the brother of the fourth emperor, Claudius, and the grandfather of the fifth emperor, Nero.

When Augustus&#x27; chosen successor, Gaius Caesar, died in AD 4, he briefly considered Germanicus as his heir. His wife Livia persuaded him to choose his stepson Tiberius instead. As part of the succession arrangements, Augustus adopted Tiberius on 26 June AD 4, but first required him to adopt Germanicus, thus placing him next in the line of succession after Tiberius. Germanicus married Augustus&#x27; granddaughter, Agrippina the Elder, probably the next year, to further strengthen his ties to the imperial family. The couple had nine children: Nero Julius Caesar; Drusus Caesar; Tiberius Julius Caesar (not to be confused with emperor Tiberius); a child of unknown name (normally referred to as &quot;Ignotus&quot;); Gaius the Elder; Gaius the Younger (the future emperor &quot;Caligula&quot;); Agrippina the Younger (the future empress); Julia Drusilla; and Julia Livilla. Only six of his children came of age; Tiberius and the Ignotus died as infants, and Gaius the Elder in his early childhood.

==Career==
===Batonian War===
Germanicus became a quaestor in AD 7, four years before the legal age of 25. He was sent to Illyricum the same year to help Tiberius suppress a rebellion by the Pannonians and Dalmatians. He brought with him an army of levied citizens and former slaves to reinforce Tiberius at Siscia, his base of operations in Illyricum. Towards the end of the year, additional reinforcements arrived; three legions from Moesia commanded by Aulus Caecina Severus, and two legions with Thracian cavalry and auxiliary troops from Anatolia commanded by Silvanus.

By the time Germanicus had arrived in Pannonia, the rebels had resorted to raiding from the mountain fortresses to which they had withdrawn. Because the Roman legions were not so effective at countering this tactic, Tiberius deployed his auxiliary forces and divided his army into small detachments, allowing them to cover more ground and conduct a war of attrition against the rebels in their strong defensive positions. The Romans also began to drive the rebels out of the countryside, offering amnesty to those tribes that would lay down their arms, and implemented a scorched earth policy in an effort to starve the enemy out. During this period, Germanicus&#x27; detachments were in action against the Mazaei, whom he defeated.

The rebel position in Pannonia collapsed in AD 8 when one of their commanders, Bato the Breucian, surrendered their leader Pinnes to the Romans and laid down his arms in return for amnesty. This was nullified when Bato the Breucian was defeated in battle and subsequently executed by his former ally Bato the Daesitiate, but this left the Pannonians divided against each other, and the Romans were able to subdue the Breuci without battle. The pacification of the Breuci, with their large population and resources, was a significant victory for the Romans, who would be reinforced by eight cohorts of Breuci auxiliaries towards the end of the war. Bato the Daesitiate withdrew from Pannonia to Dalmatia, where he occupied the mountains of Bosnia and began conducting counter-attacks, most likely against the indigenous people who sided with the Romans. Later in the year, Tiberius left Lepidus in command of Siscia and Silvanus at Sirmium.

Roman forces took the initiative in AD 9, and pushed into Dalmatia. Tiberius divided his forces into three divisions: one under Silvanus, which advanced south-east from Sirmium; another commanded by Lepidus, which advanced north-west along the Una Valley from Siscia toward Burnum; and the third led by Tiberius and Germanicus in the Dalmatian hinterland. The divisions under Lepidus and Silvanus practically exterminated the Perustae and Daesitiate in their mountain strongholds. Roman forces captured many cities, and those commanded by Germanicus took Raetinum, near Seretium (although it was destroyed in a fire set by the rebels during the siege), Splonum (in modern-day northern Montenegro) and Seretium itself (in modern-day western Bosnia). The Roman forces under Tiberius and Germanicus pursued Bato to the fortress of Andretium near Salona, to which they laid siege. When it became clear Bato would not surrender, Tiberius assaulted the fortress and captured him. While Tiberius negotiated the terms of surrender, Germanicus was sent on a punitive expedition across the surrounding territory, during which he forced the surrender of the fortified town of Arduba and surrounding towns. He then sent a deputy to subdue the remaining districts and returned to Tiberius.

===Interim===

After a distinguished start to his military career, Germanicus returned to Rome in late AD 9 to personally announce his victory. He was honored with a triumphal insignia (without an actual triumph) and the rank (not the actual title) of praetor. He was also given permission to be a candidate for consul before the regular time and the right to speak first in the Senate after the consuls. According to Cassius Dio, Germanicus was a popular quaestor because he acted as an advocate as much in capital jurisdiction cases before Augustus as he did before lesser judges in standard &quot;quaestiones&quot; (trials). He successfully defended, for example, a quaestor accused of murder in AD 10 in which the prosecutor, fearing the jurors would find in favor of the defense out of deference for Germanicus, demanded a trial before Augustus.

In AD 9, three Roman legions commanded by Varus were destroyed by a coalition of German tribes led by Arminius in the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest. As proconsul, Germanicus was dispatched with Tiberius to defend the empire against the Germans in AD 11. The two generals crossed the Rhine, made various excursions into enemy territory and, in the beginning of autumn, recrossed the river. The campaigns of Tiberius and Germanicus in Germania in the years AD 11–12, combined with an alliance with the Marcomannic federation of Marbod, prevented the German coalition from crossing the Rhine and invading Gaul and Italy. In winter, Germanicus returned to Rome, where he was, after five mandates as quaestor and despite never having been aedile or praetor, appointed consul for the year AD 12. He shared the consulship with Gaius Fonteius Capito. He continued to advocate for defendants in court during his consulship, a popular move reminiscent of his previous work defending the accused in front of Augustus. He also courted popularity by ministering the &quot;Ludi Martiales&quot; (games of Mars), as mentioned by Pliny the Elder in his &quot;Historia Naturalis&quot;, in which he released two hundred lions in the Circus Maximus.

On 23 October AD 12, Tiberius held a triumph for his victory over the Pannonians and Dalmatians, which he had postponed on account of the defeat of Varus at Teutoburg Forest. He was accompanied, among his other generals, by Germanicus, for whom he had obtained the triumphal regalia. Unlike his adoptive brother Drusus, who received no recognition beyond being the son of a triumphator, Germanicus played a distinguished part in the celebration and was given the opportunity to display his consular insignia and triumphal ornaments.

===Commander of Roman campaigns in Germania===
In AD 13, Augustus appointed him commander of the forces at the Rhine, which totaled eight legions and was about one-third of Rome&#x27;s total military force. The next year in August, Augustus died and on 17 September the Senate met to confirm Tiberius as princeps. That day the Senate also dispatched a delegation to Germanicus&#x27; camp to send its condolences for the death of his grandfather and to grant him proconsular &quot;imperium&quot;. The delegation would not arrive until October.

In Germany and Illyricum, the legions were in mutiny. In Germany, the legions in mutiny were those of the Lower Rhine under Aulus Caecina (the V Alaudae, XXI Rapax, I Germanica, and XX Valeria Victrix). The army of the Lower Rhine was stationed in summer quarters on the border of the Ubii. They had not been paid the bonuses promised them by Augustus and, when it became clear a response from Tiberius was not forthcoming, they revolted. Germanicus dealt with the troops in Germania, and Tiberius&#x27; son Drusus dealt with Illyricum.

The army of the Lower Rhine sought an increase in pay, the reduction of their service to 16 years (down from 20) to mitigate the hardship of their military tasks, and vengeance against the centurions for their cruelty. After Germanicus arrived, the soldiers listed their complaints to him and attempted to proclaim him emperor. His open and affable manners made him popular with the soldiers, but he remained loyal to the emperor. When news of the mutiny reached the army of the Upper Rhine under Gaius Silius (the Legions II Augusta, XIII Gemina, XVI Gallica, and XIV Gemina) a meeting was held to meet their demands. Germanicus negotiated a settlement:
*After 20 years of service, a full discharge was given, but after 16 years an immunity from military tasks, except to take part in actions (&quot;missio sub vexillo&quot;).
*The donative left by Augustus to the troops was to be doubled and discharged.

====First campaign against the Germanic tribes====

To satisfy the requisition promised to the legions, Germanicus paid them out of his own pocket. All eight legions were given money, even if they did not demand it. Both the armies of the Lower and Upper Rhine had returned to order. It seemed prudent to satisfy the armies, but Germanicus took it a step further. In a bid to secure the loyalty of his troops, he led them on a raid against the Marsi, a Germanic people on the upper Ruhr river. Germanicus massacred the villages of the Marsi he encountered and pillaged the surrounding territory. On the way back to their winter quarters at Castra Vetera, they pushed successfully through the opposing tribes (Bructeri, Tubantes, and Usipetes) between the Marsi and the Rhine.

Back at Rome, Tiberius instituted the &quot;Sodales Augustales&quot;, a priesthood of the cult of Augustus, of which Germanicus became a member. When news arrived of his raid, Tiberius commemorated his services in the Senate. The Senate, in absence of Germanicus, voted that he should be given a triumph. Ovid&#x27;s &quot;Fasti&quot; dates the Senate vote of Germanicus&#x27; triumph to 1 January AD 15.

====Second campaign against the Germanic tribes====

For the next two years, he led his legions across the Rhine against the Germans, where they would confront the forces of Arminius and his allies. Tacitus says the purpose of those campaigns was to avenge the defeat of Varus at the Battle of Teutoburg Forest, and not to expand Roman territory.

In early spring AD 15, Germanicus crossed the Rhine and struck the Chatti. He sacked their capital Mattium (modern Maden near Gudensberg), pillaged their countryside, then returned to the Rhine. Sometime this year, he received word from Segestes, who was held prisoner by Arminius&#x27;s forces and needed help. Germanicus&#x27;s troops rescued Segestes and took his pregnant daughter, Arminius&#x27;s wife Thusnelda, into captivity. Again he marched back victorious and at the direction of Tiberius, accepted the title of Imperator.

Arminius called his tribe, the Cherusci, and the surrounding tribes to arms. Germanicus coordinated a land and riverine offensive, with troops marching eastward across the Rhine, and sailing from the North Sea up the Ems River in order to attack the Bructeri and Cherusci. Germanicus&#x27; forces went through Bructeri territory, where a general, Lucius Stertinius, recovered the lost eagle of the XIX Legion from among the equipment of the Bructeri after routing them in battle.

Germanicus&#x27;s legions met up to the north, and ravaged the countryside between the Ems and the Lippe, and penetrated to the Teutoburg Forest, a mountain forest in western Germany situated between these two rivers. There, Germanicus and some of his men visited the site of the disastrous Battle of the Teutoburg Forest, and began burying the remains of the Roman soldiers that had been left in the open. After half a day of the work, he called off the burial of bones so that they could continue their war against the Germans. He made his way into the heartland of the Cherusci. At a location Tacitus calls the &quot;pontes longi&quot; (&quot;long causeways&quot;), in boggy lowlands somewhere near the Ems, Arminius&#x27;s troops attacked the Romans. Arminius initially caught Germanicus&#x27;s cavalry in a trap, inflicting minor casualties, but the Roman infantry reinforced the rout and checked them. The fighting lasted for two days, with neither side achieving a decisive victory. Germanicus&#x27;s forces withdrew and returned to the Rhine.

====Third campaign against the Germanic tribes====

In preparations for his next campaign, Germanicus sent Publius Vitellius and Gaius Antius to collect taxes in Gaul, and instructed Silius, Anteius, and Caecina to build a fleet. A fort on the Lippe called &quot;Castra Aliso&quot; was besieged, but the attackers dispersed on sight of Roman reinforcements. The Germans destroyed the nearby mound and altar dedicated to his father Drusus, but he had them both restored and celebrated funerary games with his legions in honor of his father. New barriers and earthworks were put in place, securing the area between Fort Aliso and the Rhine.

Germanicus commanded eight legions with Gallic and Germanic auxiliary units overland across the Rhine, up the Ems and Weser rivers as part of his last major campaign against Arminius in AD 16. His forces met those of Arminius on the plains of Idistaviso, by the Weser River near modern Rinteln, in an engagement called the Battle of the Weser River. Tacitus says that the battle was a Roman victory: 

Arminius and his uncle Inguiomer were both wounded in the battle but evaded capture. The Roman soldiers involved on the battlefield honored Tiberius as Imperator, and raised a pile of arms as a trophy with the names of the defeated tribes inscribed beneath them.

The sight of the Roman trophy constructed on the battlefield enraged the Germans who were preparing to retreat beyond the Elbe, and they launched an attack on the Roman positions at the Angrivarian Wall, thus beginning a second battle. The Romans had anticipated the attack and again routed the Germans. Germanicus stated that he did not want any prisoners, as the extermination of the Germanic tribes was the only conclusion he saw for the war. The victorious Romans then raised a mound with the inscription: &quot;The army of Tiberius Caesar, after thoroughly conquering the tribes between the Rhine and the Elbe, has dedicated this monument to Mars, Jupiter, and Augustus.&quot;

Germanicus sent some troops back to the Rhine, with some of them taking the land route, but most of them took the fast route and traveled by boat. They went down the Ems toward the North Sea, but as they reached the sea, a storm struck, sinking many of the boats and killing many men and horses.

Then Germanicus ordered Gaius Silius to march against the Chatti with a mixed force of 3,000 cavalry and 33,000 infantry and lay waste to their territory, while he himself, with a larger army, invaded the Marsi for the third time and devastated their land. He forced Mallovendus, the defeated leader of the Marsi, to reveal the location of another of the three legion&#x27;s eagles lost in AD 9. Immediately Germanicus despatched troops to recover it. The Romans advanced into the country, defeating any foe they encountered.

Germanicus&#x27;s successes in Germany had made him popular with the soldiers. He had dealt a significant blow to Rome&#x27;s enemies, quelled an uprising of troops, and returned lost standards to Rome. His actions had increased his fame, and he had become very popular with the Roman people. Tiberius took notice, and had Germanicus recalled to Rome and informed him that he would be given a triumph and reassigned to a different command.

====Result====
The effort it would have taken to conquer Germania Magna was deemed too great when compared with the low potential for profit from acquiring the new territory. Rome regarded Germany as a wild territory of forests and swamps, with little wealth compared to territories Rome already had. However, the campaign significantly healed the Roman psychological trauma from the Varus disaster, and greatly recovered Roman prestige. In addition to the recovery of two of the three lost eagles, Germanicus had fought Arminius, the leader who destroyed the three Roman legions in AD 9. In leading his troops across the Rhine without recourse to Tiberius, he contradicted the advice of Augustus to keep that river as the boundary of the empire, and opened himself to potential doubts from Tiberius about his motives in taking such independent action. This error in political judgment gave Tiberius reason to controversially recall his nephew. Tacitus attributed the recall to Tiberius&#x27; jealousy of the glory Germanicus had acquired, and, with some bitterness, claims that Germanicus could have completed the conquest of Germania had he been given full operational independence.

===Recall===

At the beginning of AD 17, Germanicus returned to the capital and on 26 May he celebrated a triumph. He had captured a few important prisoners, but Arminius was still at large. And yet, Strabo, who may have been in Rome at the time, in mentioning the name of Thusnelda, the captured pregnant wife of Arminius, draws attention to the fact that her husband, the victor at Teutoburg Forest, had not been captured and the war itself had not been won. Nonetheless, this did not take away from the spectacle of his triumph: a near contemporary calendar marks 26 May as the day in &quot;which Germanicus Caesar was borne into the city in triumph&quot;, while coins issued under his son Gaius (Caligula) depicted him on a triumphal chariot, with the reverse reading &quot;Standards Recovered. Germans Defeated.&quot;

His triumph included a long procession of captives including the wife of Arminius, Thusnelda, and her three-year-old son, among others of the defeated German tribes. The procession displayed replicas of mountains, rivers, and battles; and the war was considered closed.

Tiberius gave money out to the people of Rome in Germanicus&#x27; name, and Germanicus was scheduled to hold the consulship next year with the emperor. As a result, in AD 18, Germanicus was granted the eastern part of the empire, just as Agrippa and Tiberius had received before, when they were successors to the emperor.

===Command in Asia===

Following his triumph, Germanicus was sent to Asia to reorganize the provinces and kingdoms there, which were in such disarray that the attention of a &quot;domus Augusta&quot; was deemed necessary to settle matters. Germanicus was given &quot;imperium maius&quot; (extraordinary command) over the other governors and commanders of the area he was to operate; however, Tiberius had replaced the governor of Syria with Gnaeus Calpurnius Piso, who was meant to be his helper (&quot;adiutor&quot;), but turned out to be hostile. According to Tacitus, this was an attempt to separate Germanicus from his familiar troops and weaken his influence, but the historian Richard Alston says Tiberius had little reason to undermine his heir.

Germanicus had a busy year in 17. He restored a temple of Spes, and allegedly won a chariot race in the name of Tiberius at the Olympic Games that year. However, Eusebius, our main reference for this, does not name Germanicus, and Tacitus makes no reference to this occasion either, which would have required Germanicus to make two trips to Greece within a year. Also, not waiting to take up his consulship in Rome, he left after his triumph but before the end of AD 17. He sailed down the Illyrian coast of the Adriatic Sea to Greece. He arrived at Nicopolis near the site of the Battle of Actium, where he took up his second consulship on 18 January AD 18. He visited the sites associated with his adoptive grandfather Augustus and his natural grandfather Mark Antony, before crossing the sea to Lesbos and then to Asia Minor. There he visited the site of Troy and the oracle of Apollo Claros near Colophon. Piso left at the same time as Germanicus, but traveled directly to Athens and then to Rhodes where he and Germanicus met for the first time. From there Piso left for Syria where he immediately began replacing the officers with men loyal to himself in a bid to win the loyalty of his soldiers.

Next Germanicus traveled through Syria to Armenia where he installed king Artaxias as a replacement for Vonones, whom Augustus had deposed and placed under house arrest at the request of the king of Parthia, Artabanus. The king of Cappadocia died too, whereupon Germanicus sent Quintus Veranius to organize Cappadocia as a province – a profitable endeavor as Tiberius was able to reduce the sales tax down to .5% from 1%. The revenue from the new province was enough to make up the difference lost from lowering the sales tax. The kingdom of Commagene was split on whether or not to remain free or to become a province with both sides sending deputations, so Germanicus sent Quintus Servaeus to organize the province.

Having settled these matters he traveled to Cyrrhus, a city in Syria between Antioch and the Euphrates, where he spent the rest of AD 18 in the winter quarters of the Legion X Fretensis. Evidently here Piso attended Germanicus, and quarreled because he failed to send troops to Armenia when ordered. Artabanus sent an envoy to Germanicus requesting that Vonones be moved further from Armenia as to not incite trouble there. Germanicus complied, moving Vonones to Cilicia, both to please Artabanus and to insult Piso, with whom Vonones was friendly.

====Egypt====

He then made his way to Egypt, arriving to a tumultuous reception in January AD 19. He had gone there to relieve a famine in the country vital to Rome&#x27;s food supply. The move upset Tiberius, because it had violated an order by Augustus that no senator shall enter the province without consulting the emperor and the Senate (Egypt was an imperial province, and belonged to the emperor). Germanicus entered the province in his capacity as proconsul without first seeking permission to do so. He returned to Syria by summer, where he found that Piso had either ignored or revoked his orders to the cities and legions. Germanicus in turn ordered Piso&#x27;s recall to Rome, although this action was probably beyond his authority.

===Illness and death===
In the midst of this feud, Germanicus became ill and despite the fact Piso had removed himself to the port of Seleucia, he was convinced that Piso was somehow poisoning him. Tacitus reports that there were signs of black magic in Piso&#x27;s house with hidden body-parts and Germanicus&#x27;s name inscribed on lead tablets. Germanicus sent Piso a letter formally renouncing their friendship (&quot;amicitia&quot;). Germanicus died soon after on 10 October of that year. His death aroused much speculation, with several sources blaming Piso, acting under orders from Emperor Tiberius. This was never proven, and Piso killed himself while facing trial. Tacitus says Tiberius was involved in a conspiracy against Germanicus, and Tiberius&#x27;s jealousy and fear of his nephew&#x27;s popularity and increasing power was the true motive.

The death of Germanicus in dubious circumstances greatly affected Tiberius&#x27;s popularity in Rome, leading to the creation of a climate of fear in Rome itself. Also suspected of connivance in his death was Tiberius&#x27;s chief advisor, Sejanus, who would, in the 20s, create an atmosphere of fear in Roman noble and administrative circles by the use of treason trials and the role of &quot;delatores,&quot; or informers.

==Post-mortem==

When Rome had received word of Germanicus&#x27; death, the people began observing a &quot;iustitium&quot; before the Senate had officially declared it. Tacitus says this shows the true grief that the people of Rome felt, and this also shows that by this time the people already knew the proper way to commemorate dead princes without an edict from a magistrate. At his funeral, there were no procession statues of Germanicus. There were abundant eulogies and reminders of his fine character and a particular eulogy was given by Tiberius himself in the Senate.

The historians Tacitus and Suetonius record the funeral and posthumous honors of Germanicus. His name was placed into the Carmen Saliare, and onto the curule seats that were placed with oaken garlands over them as honorary seats for the Augustan priesthood. His ivory statue was at the head of the procession during the Circus Games; his posts as priest of Augustus and Augur were to be filled by members of the imperial family; knights of Rome gave his name to a block of seats at a theatre in Rome, and rode behind his effigy on 15 July AD 20.

After consulting with his family, Tiberius made his wishes known whereupon the Senate collected the honors into a commemorative decree, the &quot;Senatus Consultum de memoria honoranda Germanini Caesaris&quot;, and ordered the consuls of AD 20 to issue a public law honoring the death of Germanicus, the &quot;Lex Valeria Aurelia&quot;. Although Tacitus stressed the honors paid to him, the funeral and processions were carefully modeled after those of Gaius and Lucius, Agrippa&#x27;s sons. This served to emphasize the continuation of the &quot;domus Augusta&quot; across the transition from Augustus to Tiberius. Commemorative arches were built in his honor and not just in Rome, but at the frontier on the Rhine and in Asia where he had governed in life. The arch of the Rhine was placed alongside that of his father, where the soldiers had built a funerary monument honoring him. Portraits of him and his natural father were placed in the Temple of Apollo on the Palatine in Rome. Several cities in Asia Minor were named Germanicopolis in honor of the general (among them Gangra and Germanicia).

On the day of Germanicus&#x27; death his sister Livilla gave birth to twins by Drusus. The oldest was named Germanicus and died young. In 37, Germanicus&#x27; only remaining son, Caligula, became emperor and renamed September &quot;Germanicus&quot; in honor of his father. Many Romans, in the account of Tacitus, considered Germanicus to be their equivalent to Alexander the Great, and believed that he would have easily surpassed the achievements of Alexander had he become emperor. In book eight of his &quot;Natural History&quot;, Pliny connects Germanicus, Augustus, and Alexander as fellow equestrians: when Alexander&#x27;s horse Bucephalus died he named a city, Bucephalia, in his honor. Less monumental, Augustus&#x27; horse received a funeral mound, which Germanicus wrote a poem about.

===Trial of Piso===
Piso was rumored to have been responsible for Germanicus&#x27; death. As accusations accumulated, it was not long before the well known accuser, Lucius Fulcinius Trio, brought charges against him. The continued support of the Pisones and his own friendship with Piso made Tiberius hesitant to hear the case himself. After briefly hearing both sides, Tiberius referred the case to the Senate, making no effort to hide his deep anger toward Piso. Tiberius made allowances for Piso to summon witnesses of all social orders, including slaves, and he was given more time to plead than the prosecutors, but it made no difference: before the trial was over Piso died; ostensibly by suicide, but Tacitus supposes Tiberius may have had him murdered before he could implicate the emperor in Germanicus&#x27; death.

The accusations brought against Piso are numerous, including:

*Insubordination
*Corruption
*Abandoning and reentering a province
*Summary justice
*Destroying military discipline
*Misusing the &quot;fiscus principis&quot; (emperor&#x27;s money)
*Fomenting civil war
*Violating the divinity of &quot;Divus Augustus&quot; (sacrilege).
He was found guilty and punished posthumously for treason. The Senate had his property proscribed, forbade mourning on his account, removed images of his likeness, such as statues and portraits, and his name was erased from the base of one statue in particular as part of his &quot;damnatio memoriae&quot;. Yet, in a show of clemency not unlike that of the emperor, the Senate had Piso&#x27;s property returned and divided equally between his two sons, on condition that his daughter Calpurnia be given 1,000,000 sesterces as dowry and a further 4,000,000 as personal property. His wife Plancina was absolved.

==Literary activity==

In AD 4, Germanicus wrote a Latin version of Aratus&#x27;s &quot;Phainomena&quot;, which survives, wherein he rewrites the contents of the original. For example, he replaces the opening hymn to Zeus with a passage in honor of the Roman emperor. He avoided writing in the poetic style of Cicero, who had translated his own version of the &quot;Phainomena&quot;, and he wrote in a new style to meet the expectations of a Roman audience whose tastes were shaped by &quot;modern&quot; authors like Ovid and Virgil. For his work, Germanicus is ranked among Roman writers on astronomy, and his work was popular enough for scholia to be written on it well into the Medieval era.

==Historiography==
Germanicus and Tiberius are often contrasted by ancient historians and poets who wrote using themes found in drama, with Germanicus playing the tragic hero and Tiberius the tyrant. The endurance of the Principate is challenged in these narratives, by the emperor&#x27;s jealous trepidation toward competent commanders such as Germanicus. Attention is paid particularly to their leadership styles, i.e., in their relationship with the masses. Germanicus is painted as a competent leader able to handle the masses whereas Tiberius is indecisive and envious.

Despite the poetics attached to Germanicus by ancient authors, it is accepted by historians such as Anthony A. Barrett that Germanicus was an able general. He fought against the Pannonians under Tiberius, quelled the mutiny in the Rhine, and led three successful campaigns into Germania. As for his popularity, he was popular enough that the mutinous legions of the Rhine attempted to proclaim him emperor in AD 14; however, he remained loyal and led them against the German tribes instead. Tacitus and Suetonius claim that Tiberius was jealous of Germanicus&#x27; popularity, but Barrett suggests their claim might be contradicted by the fact that, following his campaigns in Germany, Germanicus was given command of the eastern provinces – a sure sign he was intended to rule. In accordance with the precedent set by Augustus, Agrippa had been given command of those same provinces in the east when Agrippa was the intended successor to the empire.

===Publius Cornelius Tacitus===
The &quot;Annals&quot; by Tacitus is one of the most detailed accounts of Germanicus&#x27; campaigns against the Germans. He wrote his account in the early years of the second century. Tacitus described Germanicus as a fine general who was kind and temperate, saying that his early death had taken a great ruler from Rome.

Book 1 of &quot;Annals&quot; extensively focuses on the mutinies of the legions in Pannonia and Germany (AD 14). The riotous army figures into the unpredictable wrath of the Roman people giving Tiberius the chance to reflect on what it means to lead. It serves to contrast the &quot;old-fashioned&quot; Republican values assigned to Germanicus, and the imperial values possessed by Tiberius. The mood of the masses is a recurring theme, with their reactions to the fortunes of Germanicus being a prominent feature of the relationship between him and Tiberius well into the &quot;Annals&quot; (as far as &quot;Annals&quot; 3.19).

===Gaius Suetonius Tranquillus===
Suetonius was an equestrian who held administrative posts during the reigns of Trajan and Hadrian. &quot;The Twelve Caesars&quot; details a biographical history of the Principate from the birth of Julius Caesar to the death of Domitian in AD 96. Like Tacitus, he drew upon the imperial archives, as well as histories by Aufidius Bassus, Cluvius Rufus, Fabius Rusticus and Augustus&#x27; own letters.

The attitude of Suetonius toward Germanicus&#x27; personality and moral temperament is that of adoration. He dedicates a good portion of his &quot;Life of Caligula&quot; to Germanicus, claiming Germanicus&#x27; physical and moral excellence surpassed that of his contemporaries. Suetonius also says that Germanicus was a gifted writer, and that despite all these talents, he remained humble and kind.

==Legacy==
Due to his prominence as heir to the imperial succession, he is depicted in many works of art. He often appears in literature as the archetypal ideal Roman. His life and character have been portrayed in many works of art, the most notable of which include:

* &quot;Germanico in Germania&quot; (1732), an Italian opera by Nicola Porpora. He was played by Domenico Annibali.
* &quot;Death of Germanicus&quot; (1773–1774), a marble sculpture by British sculptor Thomas Banks.
* &quot;Thusnelda im Triumphzug des Germanicus&quot; (1873), a painting by German painter Karl von Piloty.
* &quot;I, Claudius&quot; (1934), a historical fiction novel by classicist Robert Graves.
* &quot;The Caesars&quot; (1968), a British television series by Philip Mackie. He was played by Eric Flynn.
* &quot;I, Claudius&quot; (1976), a British television series by Jack Pulman. He was played by David Robb.

==Footnotes==
==References==
==Sources==
===Primary sources===
* 
===Secondary sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* .
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* Cassius Dio, &quot;Roman History&quot; (Loeb Classical Library English translation)
* Suetonius, &quot;Life of Tiberius&quot; (Loeb Classical Library English translation)
* Velleius Paterculus, &quot;Roman History&quot; Book II (Loeb Classical Library English translation)
* Suetonius, &quot;Life of Caligula&quot; (Loeb Classical Library translation)
* Suetonius, &quot;Life of Caligula&quot;(Alexander Thomson translation) 
* &quot;Thusnelda&quot;

 
 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q191039" start="0" end="24" title="Germanicus" label="Germanicus Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="66" end="79" title="ancient Roman" label="ancient Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q68880" start="149" end="157" title="Arminius" label="Arminius"/>
<link wikidata="Q62646" start="161" end="169" title="Germania" label="Germania"/>
<link wikidata="Q156778" start="182" end="202" title="Nero Claudius Drusus" label="Nero Claudius Drusus"/>
<link wikidata="Q229836" start="207" end="226" title="Antonia the Younger" label="Antonia the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q154668" start="282" end="291" title="Patrician (ancient Rome)" label="patrician"/>
<link wikidata="Q385338" start="298" end="310" title="gens Claudia" label="gens Claudia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363404" start="322" end="329" title="Victory title" label="agnomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="519" end="527" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="590" end="598" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="648" end="661" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q510193" start="742" end="752" title="gens Julia" label="gens Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268376" start="865" end="879" title="Julii Caesares" label="Julii Caesares"/>
<link wikidata="Q229413" start="946" end="965" title="Agrippina the Elder" label="Agrippina the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="1022" end="1030" title="Caligula" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="1060" end="1064" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="1091" end="1099" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q189430" start="1207" end="1215" title="quaestor" label="quaestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="1306" end="1312" title="Roman consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912782" start="1370" end="1379" title="proconsul" label="proconsul"/>
<link wikidata="Q152136" start="1383" end="1400" title="Germania Inferior" label="Germania Inferior"/>
<link wikidata="Q153553" start="1402" end="1419" title="Germania Superior" label="Germania Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q879466" start="1432" end="1436" title="Roman Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="1468" end="1475" title="Roman legion" label="legions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114493" start="1507" end="1517" title="Roman army" label="Roman army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348645" start="1579" end="1588" title="Roman campaigns in Germania (12 BC – AD 16)" label="campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="1622" end="1634" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q87779" start="1649" end="1672" title="Battle of the Teutoburg Forest" label="in the Teutoburg Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532405" start="1704" end="1720" title="aquila (Roman)" label="legionary eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q657438" start="1810" end="1817" title="Roman triumph" label="triumph"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="1864" end="1874" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q33490" start="1917" end="1927" title="Cappadocia (Roman province)" label="Cappadocia"/>
<link wikidata="Q332137" start="1932" end="1941" title="Commagene" label="Commagene"/>
<link wikidata="Q207118" start="2036" end="2041" title="Roman Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q453845" start="2043" end="2065" title="Gnaeus Calpurnius Piso (consul 7 BC)" label="Gnaeus Calpurnius Piso"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="2111" end="2118" title="Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="2393" end="2412" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240901" start="2566" end="2575" title="praenomen" label="praenomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q156778" start="2672" end="2682" title="Nero Claudius Drusus" label="his father"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="2768" end="2786" title="Tiberius" label="his paternal uncle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3770368" start="2812" end="2835" title="Iosif Constantin Drăgan" label="Iosif Constantin Drăgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q97585749" start="2929" end="2943" title="Dies lustricus" label="Dies lustricus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249184" start="3016" end="3023" title="Decimus (praenomen)" label="Decimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596516" start="3049" end="3056" title="agnomen" label="agnomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q62646" start="3162" end="3170" title="Germania" label="Germania"/>
<link wikidata="Q272851" start="3438" end="3462" title="Roman naming conventions" label="Roman naming conventions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="3657" end="3665" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q229836" start="3906" end="3919" title="Antonia Minor" label="Antonia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q234665" start="3960" end="3967" title="Livilla" label="Livilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q469701" start="4023" end="4028" title="Livia" label="Livia"/>
<link wikidata="Q342512" start="4063" end="4085" title="Tiberius Claudius Nero (praetor 42 BC)" label="Tiberius Claudius Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="4173" end="4186" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q212079" start="4232" end="4240" title="Second Triumvirate" label="triumvir"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="4241" end="4252" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q229483" start="4279" end="4292" title="Octavia the Younger" label="Octavia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q192841" start="4329" end="4351" title="Julio-Claudian dynasty" label="Julio-Claudian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="4492" end="4497" title="Caligula" label="Gaius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="4606" end="4610" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q298162" start="4651" end="4663" title="Gaius Caesar" label="Gaius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q229413" start="5034" end="5053" title="Agrippina the Elder" label="Agrippina the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q370363" start="5164" end="5182" title="Nero Julius Caesar" label="Nero Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q165448" start="5184" end="5197" title="Drusus Caesar" label="Drusus Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q154732" start="5415" end="5436" title="Agrippina the Younger" label="Agrippina the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q241036" start="5459" end="5473" title="Julia Drusilla" label="Julia Drusilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q237629" start="5479" end="5492" title="Julia Livilla" label="Julia Livilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q189430" start="5669" end="5677" title="quaestor" label="quaestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q753824" start="5741" end="5750" title="Illyricum (Roman province)" label="Illyricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q170062" start="5810" end="5818" title="Pannonia" label="Pannonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="5825" end="5833" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192119" start="5927" end="5933" title="Siscia" label="Siscia"/>
<link wikidata="Q199499" start="6055" end="6061" title="Moesia" label="Moesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q586829" start="6075" end="6096" title="Aulus Caecina Severus (suffect consul 1 BC)" label="Aulus Caecina Severus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232026" start="6184" end="6192" title="Marcus Plautius Silvanus (consul 2 BC)" label="Silvanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q831550" start="6544" end="6560" title="war of attrition" label="war of attrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q208485" start="6766" end="6780" title="scorched earth" label="scorched earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q20310254" start="6902" end="6908" title="Mazaei" label="Mazaei"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197356" start="7008" end="7025" title="Bato the Breucian" label="Bato the Breucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7196349" start="7052" end="7058" title="Pinnes (Pannonian chieftain)" label="Pinnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417655" start="7229" end="7248" title="Bato the Daesitiate" label="Bato the Daesitiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="7668" end="7674" title="Bosnia" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q461688" start="7815" end="7822" title="Marcus Aemilius Lepidus (consul 6)" label="Lepidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q548862" start="8144" end="8150" title="Burnum" label="Burnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="8555" end="8565" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258998" start="8713" end="8719" title="Salona" label="Salona"/>
<link wikidata="Q172907" start="9400" end="9407" title="praetor" label="praetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="9460" end="9466" title="Roman consul" label="consul"/>
<link wikidata="Q214765" start="10042" end="10047" title="Publius Quinctilius Varus" label="Varus"/>
<link wikidata="Q68880" start="10102" end="10110" title="Arminius" label="Arminius"/>
<link wikidata="Q87779" start="10118" end="10148" title="Battle of the Teutoburg Forest" label="Battle of the Teutoburg Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912782" start="10153" end="10162" title="proconsul" label="proconsul"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="10284" end="10289" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q209851" start="10501" end="10523" title="Marcomanni" label="Marcomannic federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q165144" start="10527" end="10533" title="Marbod" label="Marbod"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="10603" end="10607" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q205757" start="10735" end="10741" title="aedile" label="aedile"/>
<link wikidata="Q15107136" start="10821" end="10842" title="Gaius Fonteius Capito (consul AD 12)" label="Gaius Fonteius Capito"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="11114" end="11129" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q442" start="11143" end="11161" title="Natural History (Pliny)" label="Historia Naturalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207808" start="11215" end="11229" title="Circus Maximus" label="Circus Maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q313737" start="11544" end="11550" title="Drusus Julius Caesar" label="Drusus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348645" start="11846" end="11882" title="Roman campaigns in Germania (12 BC – AD 16)" label="commander of the forces at the Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="12036" end="12042" title="Roman Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q396808" start="12070" end="12078" title="princeps" label="princeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q499146" start="12246" end="12254" title="imperium" label="imperium"/>
<link wikidata="Q122131" start="12313" end="12320" title="History of Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q586829" start="12434" end="12447" title="Aulus Caecina Severus" label="Aulus Caecina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136322" start="12453" end="12462" title="Legio V Alaudae" label="V Alaudae"/>
<link wikidata="Q266367" start="12464" end="12473" title="Legio XXI Rapax" label="XXI Rapax"/>
<link wikidata="Q917212" start="12475" end="12486" title="Legio I Germanica" label="I Germanica"/>
<link wikidata="Q607548" start="12492" end="12510" title="Legio XX Valeria Victrix" label="XX Valeria Victrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q664800" start="12595" end="12599" title="Ubii" label="Ubii"/>
<link wikidata="Q14852482" start="13345" end="13357" title="Gaius Silius (consul)" label="Gaius Silius"/>
<link wikidata="Q168654" start="13371" end="13381" title="Legio II Augusta" label="II Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q168553" start="13383" end="13394" title="Legio XIII Gemina" label="XIII Gemina"/>
<link wikidata="Q660347" start="13396" end="13407" title="Legio XVI Gallica" label="XVI Gallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q707649" start="13413" end="13423" title="Legio XIV Gemina" label="XIV Gemina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240688" start="13681" end="13689" title="Donativum" label="donative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168677" start="14200" end="14205" title="Marsi (Germanic)" label="Marsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664" start="14238" end="14242" title="Ruhr (river)" label="Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q162890" start="14396" end="14409" title="Castra Vetera" label="Castra Vetera"/>
<link wikidata="Q850223" start="14465" end="14473" title="Bructeri" label="Bructeri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501100" start="14475" end="14483" title="Tubantes" label="Tubantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517050" start="14489" end="14497" title="Usipetes" label="Usipetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q426032" start="14577" end="14595" title="Sodales Augustales" label="Sodales Augustales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="14838" end="14842" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236235" start="14856" end="14861" title="Fasti (poem)" label="Fasti"/>
<link wikidata="Q68880" start="15113" end="15121" title="Arminius" label="Arminius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="15138" end="15145" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q164076" start="15354" end="15360" title="Chatti" label="Chatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476380" start="15386" end="15393" title="Mattium" label="Mattium"/>
<link wikidata="Q558498" start="15413" end="15423" title="Gudensberg" label="Gudensberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359090" start="15524" end="15532" title="Segestes" label="Segestes"/>
<link wikidata="Q242382" start="15694" end="15703" title="Thusnelda" label="Thusnelda"/>
<link wikidata="Q725434" start="15810" end="15819" title="Imperator" label="Imperator"/>
<link wikidata="Q268307" start="15853" end="15861" title="Cherusci" label="Cherusci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="16022" end="16031" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648" start="16039" end="16048" title="Ems River" label="Ems River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532405" start="16207" end="16212" title="aquila (Roman)" label="eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q399246" start="16220" end="16230" title="Legio XIX" label="XIX Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q153945" start="16402" end="16407" title="Lippe River" label="Lippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707087" start="17037" end="17045" title="Battle at Pontes Longi" label="attacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227318" start="17462" end="17479" title="Publius Vitellius the Younger" label="Publius Vitellius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179592" start="17618" end="17630" title="Aliso (Roman camp)" label="Castra Aliso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650" start="18113" end="18118" title="Weser River" label="Weser"/>
<link wikidata="Q10752474" start="18238" end="18248" title="Idistaviso" label="Idistaviso"/>
<link wikidata="Q498571" start="18281" end="18288" title="Rinteln" label="Rinteln"/>
<link wikidata="Q630644" start="18318" end="18343" title="Battle of the Weser River" label="Battle of the Weser River"/>
<link wikidata="Q325764" start="18420" end="18429" title="Inguiomer" label="Inguiomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q725434" start="18549" end="18558" title="Imperator" label="Imperator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="18783" end="18787" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q543514" start="18847" end="18863" title="Angrivarian Wall" label="Angrivarian Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q15844347" start="18882" end="18895" title="Battle of the Angrivarian Wall" label="second battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="19026" end="19039" title="genocide" label="extermination"/>
<link wikidata="Q112" start="19308" end="19312" title="Mars (mythology)" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="19314" end="19321" title="Jupiter (mythology)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="19327" end="19335" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14852482" start="19665" end="19677" title="Gaius Silius (consul)" label="Gaius Silius"/>
<link wikidata="Q29566447" start="19908" end="19919" title="Mallovendus" label="Mallovendus"/>
<link wikidata="Q62646" start="20666" end="20680" title="Germania Magna" label="Germania Magna"/>
<link wikidata="Q242382" start="22068" end="22077" title="Thusnelda" label="Thusnelda"/>
<link wikidata="Q48174" start="23128" end="23135" title="Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa" label="Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q210718" start="23282" end="23286" title="Asia (Roman province)" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207118" start="23643" end="23648" title="Syria (Roman province)" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q453845" start="23654" end="23676" title="Gnaeus Calpurnius Piso (consul 7 BC)" label="Gnaeus Calpurnius Piso"/>
<link wikidata="Q20054045" start="23896" end="23910" title="Richard Alston (classicist)" label="Richard Alston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482478" start="24025" end="24029" title="Spes" label="Spes"/>
<link wikidata="Q188468" start="24095" end="24108" title="Ancient Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q13924" start="24479" end="24491" title="Adriatic Sea" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497438" start="24495" end="24501" title="Roman Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q943637" start="24517" end="24526" title="Nicopolis" label="Nicopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q160387" start="24548" end="24564" title="Battle of Actium" label="Battle of Actium"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="24725" end="24736" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q128087" start="24765" end="24771" title="Lesbos" label="Lesbos"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="24825" end="24829" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="24848" end="24861" title="Apollo" label="Apollo Claros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142488" start="24867" end="24875" title="Colophon (city)" label="Colophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="24963" end="24969" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q208404" start="25213" end="25220" title="Kingdom of Armenia (antiquity)" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280736" start="25245" end="25253" title="Artaxias III" label="Artaxias"/>
<link wikidata="Q253888" start="25275" end="25282" title="Vonones I" label="Vonones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645483" start="25370" end="25377" title="Parthia" label="Parthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q345134" start="25379" end="25388" title="Artabanus II of Parthia" label="Artabanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q29654286" start="25402" end="25412" title="Kingdom of Cappadocia" label="Cappadocia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11944310" start="25449" end="25465" title="Quintus Veranius (governor of Cappadocia)" label="Quintus Veranius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123414" start="25846" end="25862" title="Quintus Servaeus" label="Quintus Servaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q536924" start="25934" end="25941" title="Cyrrhus" label="Cyrrhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="25983" end="25992" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q977375" start="26057" end="26075" title="Legio X Fretensis" label="Legion X Fretensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q620864" start="26353" end="26360" title="Cilicia" label="Cilicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="26479" end="26484" title="Egypt (Roman province)" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="26797" end="26814" title="imperial province" label="imperial province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605894" start="27321" end="27329" title="Seleucia Pieria" label="Seleucia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="27385" end="27392" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q120015" start="28287" end="28294" title="Sejanus" label="Sejanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183900" start="28441" end="28448" title="delator" label="delator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478188" start="28580" end="28589" title="justitium" label="iustitium"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="29078" end="29087" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043717" start="29173" end="29187" title="Carmen Saliare" label="Carmen Saliare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064051" start="29202" end="29213" title="curule seat" label="curule seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q215909" start="29421" end="29426" title="Augur" label="Augur"/>
<link wikidata="Q298162" start="30051" end="30056" title="Gaius Caesar" label="Gaius"/>
<link wikidata="Q313735" start="30061" end="30067" title="Lucius Caesar" label="Lucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q48174" start="30069" end="30083" title="Marcus Vispanius Agrippa" label="Agrippa&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236860" start="30542" end="30558" title="Temple of Apollo Palatinus" label="Temple of Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486690" start="30566" end="30574" title="Palatine" label="Palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q247539" start="30624" end="30638" title="Germanicopolis (disambiguation)" label="Germanicopolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q209925" start="30675" end="30681" title="Çankırı" label="Gangra"/>
<link wikidata="Q134703" start="30686" end="30696" title="Kahramanmaraş" label="Germanicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q201598" start="31336" end="31346" title="Bucephalus" label="Bucephalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q786725" start="31369" end="31379" title="Bucephalia" label="Bucephalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q673210" start="31662" end="31683" title="Lucius Fulcinius Trio" label="Lucius Fulcinius Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q281126" start="32454" end="32469" title="Summary judgment" label="Summary justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235185" start="32622" end="32636" title="Divus Augustus" label="Divus Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180362" start="32644" end="32653" title="sacrilege" label="sacrilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="32706" end="32713" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q223590" start="32938" end="32955" title="damnatio memoriae" label="damnatio memoriae"/>
<link wikidata="Q208041" start="33169" end="33178" title="sesterces" label="sesterces"/>
<link wikidata="Q180671" start="33335" end="33341" title="Aratus" label="Aratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="33484" end="33488" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="33577" end="33583" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="33793" end="33799" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="33859" end="33868" title="astrology" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358144" start="33906" end="33913" title="scholia" label="scholia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25372" start="34091" end="34096" title="drama" label="drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969230" start="34126" end="34137" title="tragic hero" label="tragic hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q180095" start="34155" end="34161" title="tyrant" label="tyrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q206414" start="34184" end="34194" title="Principate" label="Principate"/>
<link wikidata="Q112369832" start="34639" end="34657" title="Anthony A. Barrett" label="Anthony A. Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="36150" end="36160" title="Roman Republic" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="36511" end="36520" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="36590" end="36596" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="36601" end="36608" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229963" start="36616" end="36634" title="The Twelve Caesars" label="The Twelve Caesars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423" start="36738" end="36746" title="Domitian" label="Domitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q759760" start="36831" end="36846" title="Aufidius Bassus" label="Aufidius Bassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q74243" start="36848" end="36861" title="Cluvius Rufus" label="Cluvius Rufus"/>
<link wikidata="Q995441" start="36863" end="36878" title="Fabius Rusticus" label="Fabius Rusticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q24965416" start="37591" end="37612" title="Germanico in Germania" label="Germanico in Germania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3712881" start="37680" end="37697" title="Domenico Annibali" label="Domenico Annibali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120721" start="37785" end="37797" title="Thomas Banks (sculptor)" label="Thomas Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q505758" start="37889" end="37904" title="Karl von Piloty" label="Karl von Piloty"/>
<link wikidata="Q135215" start="37914" end="37925" title="I, Claudius" label="I, Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q201732" start="37981" end="37994" title="Robert Graves" label="Robert Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720918" start="38004" end="38015" title="The Caesars (TV series)" label="The Caesars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184008" start="38061" end="38074" title="Philip Mackie" label="Philip Mackie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386495" start="38093" end="38103" title="Eric Flynn" label="Eric Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q135096" start="38113" end="38124" title="I, Claudius (TV series)" label="I, Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157292" start="38170" end="38181" title="Jack Pulman" label="Jack Pulman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2491464" start="38200" end="38210" title="David Robb" label="David Robb"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12479" wikidata="Q539927" url="?curid=12479" title="Giulio Alberoni">
<text>Giulio Alberoni (21 May 1664 OS – 26 June NS 1752) was an Italian cardinal and statesman in the service of Philip V of Spain.

==Early years==
He was born near Piacenza on May 21, 1664, probably at the village of Fiorenzuola d&#x27;Arda in the Duchy of Parma.

His father was a gardener, and he himself became first connected with the church in the humble position of a bellringer and verger in the Duomo of Piacenza; he was twenty-one when the judge Ignazio Gardini, of Ravenna, was banished, and he followed Gardini to Ravenna, where he met the vice-legate Giorgio Barni, who was made bishop of Piacenza in 1688 and appointed Alberoni chamberlain of his household. Alberoni took priest&#x27;s orders, and afterwards accompanied the son of his patron to Rome.

During the War of the Spanish Succession Alberoni laid the foundation of his political success by the services he rendered to Louis-Joseph, duc de Vendôme, commander of the French forces in Italy, to whom the duke of Parma had sent him. That a low-ranking priest was used as an envoy was due to the duke&#x27;s rude manners: the previous envoy, the bishop of Parma, had quit because the duke had wiped his buttocks in front of him: Saint-Simon in his Mémoires relates that Alberoni gained Vendôme&#x27;s favour when he was received in the same way, but reacted adroitly by kissing the duke&#x27;s buttocks and crying &quot;O culo di angelo!&quot;. The duke was amused, and this joke started Alberoni&#x27;s brilliant career. When the French forces were recalled in 1706, he accompanied the duke to Paris, where he was favourably received by Louis XIV.

==Middle years==

Alberoni accompanied Vendôme to Spain as his secretary and became very active in promoting the cause of the French candidate Philip V. Following Vendôme&#x27;s death, in 1713 he was made a Count and appointed Consular agent for Parma at Philip&#x27;s court where he was a Royal favourite.

Under the terms of the 1713 Treaty of Utrecht, Philip became King of Spain but the Spanish Empire was effectively partitioned. The Southern Netherlands and their Italian possessions were ceded to the Austrian Habsburgs and Savoy, Menorca and Gibraltar went to Britain while British merchants gained trading rights in the previously closed market of the Spanish Americas.

At this time, the key powerbroker at the Spanish court was Marie-Anne de la Trémoille, princesse des Ursins who dominated Phillip and his wife Maria Luisa of Savoy. Alberoni worked with her and when Maria Luisa died in 1714 they arranged for Philip to marry Elisabetta Farnese, daughter of the Duke of Parma.

Elisabetta was a strong personality herself and formed an alliance with Alberoni, their first action being to banish the Princesse des Ursins. By the end of 1715, Alberoni had been made a Duke and Grandee of Spain, a member of the King&#x27;s council, Bishop of Málaga and Chief Minister of the Hispanic Monarchy. In July 1717, Pope Clement XI appointed him Cardinal, allegedly because of his assistance in resolving several ecclesiastical disputes between Rome and Madrid in favour of Rome.

One outcome of the war was to reduce the powers of Castile and Aragon and create a Spanish state similar to the centralised French system. This allowed Alberoni to copy the economic reforms of Colbert and he passed a series of decrees aimed at restoring the Spanish economy. These abolished internal custom-houses, promoted trade with the Americas, instituted a regular mail service to the colonies and reorganised state finances along lines established by the French economist Jean Orry. Some attempts were made to satisfy Spanish conservatives e.g. a new School of Navigation was reserved for the sons of the nobility.

These reforms made Spain confident enough to attempt the recovery of territories in Italy ceded to Savoy and Charles VI of Austria. In 1717, a Spanish force occupied Sardinia unopposed; neither Austria or Savoy had significant naval forces and Austria was engaged in the Austro-Turkish War of 1716–18. This assumed the British would not intervene but when 38,000 Spanish troops landed on Sicily in 1718, Britain declared it a violation of Utrecht. On 2 August 1718, Britain, France, the Netherlands and the Austrians formed the Quadruple Alliance and on 11 August the Royal Navy destroyed a Spanish fleet off Sicily at the Battle of Cape Passaro.

Alberoni now attempted to offset British in the Mediterranean by sponsoring a Jacobite landing to divert their naval resources; he also sought to end the 1716 Anglo-French Alliance by using the Cellamare conspiracy to replace the current French Regent the Duke of Orleans with Phillip of Spain. However, he failed to appreciate that Britain was now powerful enough to maintain naval superiority in the Mediterranean and the Atlantic while France declared war on Spain in December 1718 on the discovery of the Conspiracy.

France invaded eastern Spain and in October 1719 a British naval expedition captured the Spanish port of Vigo; they landed 6,000 troops, held Vigo for ten days, destroyed vast quantities of stores and equipment and then re-embarked unopposed. The nearby city of Santiago de Compostela even paid £40,000 in return for being left alone. As intended, this was a crushing demonstration of British naval power and showed the Spanish Britain could land anywhere along their coastline and leave when they wanted to. The failure of his policy meant Alberoni was dismissed on 5 December 1719 and ordered to leave Spain, with the Treaty of The Hague in 1720 confirming the outcome of Utrecht.

==Later years==
He went to Italy, escaped from arrest at Genoa, and had to take refuge among the Apennines, Pope Clement XI, who was his bitter enemy, having given strict orders for his arrest. On the death of Clement in 1721, Alberoni boldly appeared at the conclave, and took part in the election of Innocent XIII, after which he was for a short time imprisoned by the new pontiff on the demand of Spain on charges including sodomy (Elizabeth Charlotte of the Palatine noted in her diaries that he was a pederast). He was ultimately cleared by a commission of his fellow Cardinals. At the next election (1724) he was himself proposed for the papal chair, and secured ten votes at the conclave that elected Benedict XIII.

Benedict&#x27;s successor, Clement XII (elected 1730), named him legate of Ravenna, where he erected the Porta Alberoni (1739), a magnificent gateway that formerly provided access to the city&#x27;s dockyards, and has since been moved to the entrance of the Teatro Rasi. That same year, the strong and unwarrantable measures he adopted to subject the grand republic of San Marino to the papal states incurred the pope&#x27;s displeasure and left a historical scar in that place&#x27;s memory. He was soon replaced by another legate in 1740, and he retired to Piacenza, where in 1730 Clement XII appointed him administrator of the hospital of San Lazzaro, an institute founded in the medieval era for the benefit of lepers. Since leprosy had nearly disappeared in Italy, Alberoni obtained the consent of the pope to suppress the hospital, which had fallen into great disorder, and replaced it with a seminary for the priestly education of seventy poor boys, under the name of the Collegio Alberoni, which it still bears. The Cardinal&#x27;s collections of art gathered in Rome and Piacenza, housed in his richly appointed private apartments, have been augmented by the Collegio. There are remarkable suites of Flemish tapestries, and paintings, among which the most famous is the &quot;Ecce Homo&quot; by Antonello da Messina (1473), but which also include panels by Jan Provoost and other Flemish artists, oil paintings by Domenico Maria Viani and Francesco Solimena.

Alberoni was a gourmand. Interspersed in his official correspondence with Parma are requests for local delicacies &quot;triffole&quot; (truffles), salame, robiola cheeses, and &quot;agnolini&quot; (kind of pasta). The pork dish &quot;Coppa del Cardinale&quot;, a specialty of Piacenza, is named for him. A &quot;timballo Alberoni&quot; combines maccaroni, shrimp sauce, mushrooms, butter and cheese.

==Death and legacy==
He died leaving a sum of 600,000 ducats to endow the seminary he had founded. He left the rest of the immense wealth he had acquired in Spain to his nephew. Alberoni produced many manuscripts. The genuineness of the Political Testament, published in his name at Lausanne in 1753, has been questioned.

==References and sources==
;References

;Sources
* Kuethe, Allan J. &quot;Cardinal Alberoni and Reform in the American Empire.&quot; in Francisco A. Eissa-Barroso y Ainara Vázquez Varela, eds. &quot;Early Bourbon Spanish America. Politics and Society in a forgotten Era (1700–1759)&quot; (Brill, 2013): 23–38.
* &quot;Catholic Encyclopedia&quot;: Giulio Alberoni
* Catholic Hierarchy: Giulio Cardinal Alberoni
* Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church: Conclave of 31 March – 8 May 1724
* Collegio Alberoni, Piacenza
* The San Marino event of 1739–40</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q539927" start="0" end="15" title="Giulio Alberoni" label="Giulio Alberoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="66" end="74" title="Cardinal (Catholicism)" label="cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q170467" start="107" end="124" title="Philip V of Spain" label="Philip V of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q13329" start="160" end="168" title="Piacenza" label="Piacenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q102767" start="213" end="236" title="Fiorenzuola d&amp;#x27;Arda" label="Fiorenzuola d&amp;#x27;Arda"/>
<link wikidata="Q165040" start="244" end="258" title="Duchy of Parma" label="Duchy of Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q587524" start="370" end="380" title="Bell-ringer" label="bellringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921264" start="385" end="391" title="verger" label="verger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576211" start="399" end="416" title="Duomo di Piacenza" label="Duomo of Piacenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q13364" start="471" end="478" title="Ravenna" label="Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="559" end="572" title="Giorgio Barni" label="Giorgio Barni"/>
<link wikidata="Q874204" start="587" end="605" title="bishop of Piacenza" label="bishop of Piacenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="773" end="802" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q315513" start="888" end="916" title="Louis Joseph de Bourbon, duc de Vendôme" label="Louis-Joseph, duc de Vendôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q555354" start="971" end="984" title="Francesco Farnese, Duke of Parma" label="duke of Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818861" start="1111" end="1126" title="bishop of Parma" label="bishop of Parma"/>
<link wikidata="Q463728" start="1194" end="1205" title="Louis de Rouvroy, duc de Saint-Simon" label="Saint-Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="1603" end="1612" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417901" start="1678" end="1687" title="Secretary of State (Ancient Regime in Spain)" label="secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q170467" start="1758" end="1766" title="Philip V of Spain" label="Philip V"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519259" start="1822" end="1827" title="Count" label="Count"/>
<link wikidata="Q154674" start="1951" end="1968" title="Treaty of Utrecht" label="Treaty of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581823" start="2050" end="2074" title="Southern Netherlands" label="The Southern Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="2123" end="2141" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Austrian Habsburgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q14118" start="2146" end="2151" title="Savoy" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q52636" start="2153" end="2160" title="Menorca" label="Menorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="2165" end="2174" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q447889" start="2354" end="2402" title="Marie-Anne de la Trémoille, princesse des Ursins" label="Marie-Anne de la Trémoille, princesse des Ursins"/>
<link wikidata="Q229861" start="2438" end="2458" title="Maria Luisa of Savoy" label="Maria Luisa of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q229867" start="2553" end="2571" title="Elizabeth Farnese" label="Elisabetta Farnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3907844" start="2802" end="2809" title="Grandee" label="Grandee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365860" start="2857" end="2873" title="Bishop of Málaga" label="Bishop of Málaga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2900" end="2917" title="Monarchy of Spain#Bourbon Monarchy" label="Hispanic Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q129967" start="2933" end="2948" title="Pope Clement XI" label="Pope Clement XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993747" start="3149" end="3156" title="Council of Castile" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327827" start="3161" end="3167" title="Council of Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188971" start="3291" end="3298" title="Jean-Baptiste Colbert" label="Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127285" start="3433" end="3445" title="Council of the Indies" label="the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q576733" start="3576" end="3585" title="Jean Orry" label="Jean Orry"/>
<link wikidata="Q14118" start="3819" end="3824" title="Savoy" label="Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q150665" start="3829" end="3850" title="Charles VI of Austria" label="Charles VI of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="3886" end="3894" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q26799687" start="3991" end="4020" title="Austro-Turkish War of 1716–18" label="Austro-Turkish War of 1716–18"/>
<link wikidata="Q221941" start="4248" end="4266" title="Quadruple Alliance (1718)" label="Quadruple Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q241110" start="4343" end="4365" title="Battle of Cape Passaro" label="Battle of Cape Passaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q47004504" start="4446" end="4462" title="Jacobite rising of 1719" label="Jacobite landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q19870740" start="4522" end="4548" title="Anglo-French Alliance (1716–1731)" label="1716 Anglo-French Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297581" start="4562" end="4582" title="Cellamare conspiracy" label="Cellamare conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q155596" start="4620" end="4639" title="Philippe II, Duke of Orléans" label="the Duke of Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037074" start="4995" end="4999" title="Capture of Vigo" label="Vigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14314" start="5152" end="5174" title="Santiago de Compostela" label="Santiago de Compostela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893619" start="5506" end="5529" title="Treaty of The Hague (1720)" label="the Treaty of The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285" start="5671" end="5680" title="Apennine Mountains" label="Apennines"/>
<link wikidata="Q129967" start="5682" end="5697" title="Pope Clement XI" label="Pope Clement XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q133100" start="5876" end="5889" title="Pope Innocent XIII" label="Innocent XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q206426" start="6001" end="6007" title="sodomy" label="sodomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q57221" start="6009" end="6044" title="Elizabeth Charlotte, Madame Palatine" label="Elizabeth Charlotte of the Palatine"/>
<link wikidata="Q211354" start="6080" end="6088" title="pederast" label="pederast"/>
<link wikidata="Q155971" start="6282" end="6295" title="Pope Benedict XIII" label="Benedict XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q133108" start="6325" end="6336" title="Pope Clement XII" label="Clement XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q13364" start="6373" end="6380" title="Ravenna" label="Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q238" start="6667" end="6677" title="San Marino" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q13329" start="6857" end="6865" title="Piacenza" label="Piacenza"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6940" end="6951" title="San Lazzaro e San Vincenzo De Paoli, Piacenza" label="San Lazzaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="7013" end="7019" title="leprosy" label="lepers"/>
<link wikidata="Q200736" start="7277" end="7294" title="Collegio Alberoni" label="Collegio Alberoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594" start="7602" end="7622" title="Antonello da Messina" label="Antonello da Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q672255" start="7664" end="7676" title="Jan Provoost" label="Jan Provoost"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290110" start="7721" end="7741" title="Domenico Maria Viani" label="Domenico Maria Viani"/>
<link wikidata="Q736065" start="7746" end="7764" title="Francesco Solimena" label="Francesco Solimena"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588439" start="7782" end="7790" title="gourmand" label="gourmand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690965" start="7903" end="7911" title="truffles" label="truffles"/>
<link wikidata="Q188655" start="7914" end="7920" title="salame" label="salame"/>
<link wikidata="Q21210955" start="7949" end="7957" title="agnolini" label="agnolini"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8001" end="8020" title="Coppa del Cardinale" label="Coppa del Cardinale"/>
<link wikidata="Q528827" start="8079" end="8087" title="timballo" label="timballo"/>
<link wikidata="Q202018" start="8222" end="8227" title="ducat" label="ducat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620430" start="8232" end="8237" title="endow" label="endow"/>
<link wikidata="Q233324" start="8242" end="8250" title="seminary" label="seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q87167" start="8369" end="8379" title="manuscript" label="manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="8451" end="8459" title="Lausanne" label="Lausanne"/>
</links>
</doc>
