<doc id="12061" wikidata="Q1154607" url="?curid=12061" title="Politics of Georgia (country)">
<text>Politics in Georgia involve a parliamentary representative democratic republic with a multi-party system. The President of Georgia is the ceremonial head of state and the Prime Minister of Georgia is the head of government. The Prime Minister and the Government wield executive power. Legislative power is vested in both the Government and the unicameral Parliament of Georgia.

The Georgian state is highly centralized, except for the autonomous regions of Abkhazia and Adjara and the former autonomous region of South Ossetia. Abkhazia and South Ossetia, which had autonomy within the Georgian SSR during Soviet rule, unilaterally seceded from Georgia in the 1990s. While, , the Georgian government recognizes Abkhazia as autonomous within Georgia, it does not recognize South Ossetia as having any special status.

Since achieving independence from the Soviet Union, Georgian politics has been characterized by a schism over its relationship with Russia on one hand and Europe on the other hand. Since the early 2010s, Georgian politics has been characterized by a contentious rivalry between two main political parties, Georgian Dream and the United National Movement (UNM). In the early 2020s, scholars raised concerns about democratic backsliding in Georgia.

== History, development and evolution ==
=== Political systems under Georgian monarchies ===
Tribal configurations were the dominant feature of early Georgian states, which resembled confederations of different clans more than centralized kingdoms. While in Western Georgia, various tribes came together to form proto-states like Diaokhi and Colchis, other parts of the country were ruled by individual clans led by a &quot;mamasakhlisi&quot; (მამასახლისი, &quot;head of household&quot;) that controlled large swaths of land and set rules for the various families settled under his clan. The only known &quot;mamasakhlisi&quot; is Samara of Mtskheta in the 4th century BCE who was overthrown by Alexander the Great&#x27;s occupation of Iberia but whose son Pharnavaz eventually created the Kingdom of Iberia.

In the 3rd century BCE, Iberia emerged as the most powerful Georgian state, a centralized kingdom ruled by one king and divided into several provinces, each governed by an &quot;eristavi&quot; (ერისთავი, &quot;head of the people&quot;) appointed by the king. However, centralization was challenged by powerful nobles who saw their influence decrease and forced through armed rebellions the recognition of their own land rights. These nobles would originally be known as &quot;aznauri&quot; (აზნაური), while centuries of power struggles between these nobles eventually gave rise to a higher class of nobles, the &quot;mtavari&quot; (მთავარი) or &quot;tavadi&quot; (თავადი), equivalent to the western European title of prince. Power-sharing between kings, eristavis, princes, and aznauris evolved but remained largely the same over the centuries and continued during the medieval Kingdom of Georgia, despite attempts by several monarchs to lower the influence of the noble class.

In the late 11th century, King David IV engaged in a state reform that lowered the power of large nobles on the one hand, while creating a state council (the &quot;Darbazi&quot;) to advise the king and made of both church and feudal representatives. Under Queen Tamar, a rebellion by the merchant class led to a large expansion of the Darbazi&#x27;s powers. In 1490, it was the Darbazi that voted to formally abolish the Kingdom of Georgia after decades of civil wars, replacing it with three kingdoms and one principality (Kakheti, Kartli, Imereti, and Samtskhe). Besides the Darbazi, several court officials assisted the monarch in administering the kingdom&#x27;s affairs, led by the &quot;mtsignobartukhutsesi&quot; (მწიგნობართუხუცესი), usually a Church figure acting as head of the king&#x27;s government.

Many of these institutions would be inherited by the various Georgian states that divided among themselves the kingdom at the end of the 15th century, although their powers were largely reduced as most decision-making powers were held by foreign invading powers (Ottoman Turkey or Safavid Persia), as well as powerful noble houses that at times were more powerful than the central government (Dadiani, Gurieli, Bagration-Mukhraneli, etc.).

==== Regional differences ====

Though nominally, a central government controlled most Georgian territories throughout history, certain regions were largely autonomous, if not entirely independent, due to their geographic isolation. Notably, high-mountain regions like Svaneti, Khevsureti, and Tusheti developed independent political and judicial systems as their affairs were largely ignored by monarchs or foreign invaders. In Svaneti, long considered to be a refuge for national treasures in times of foreign invasions, small villages coalesced together into small clan-based organizations with no single ruler and cultivating independent legal systems carried out by elected representatives, as early as the late medieval period. Legal rulings were traditionally confirmed by oaths taken on icons, a system that continues to be observed to this day to arbitrate local conflicts. This system has been described by historian Brigitta Schrade as a &quot;military-democratic system&quot; stabilized by the Georgian Orthodox Church, itself represented locally in the town of Mestia, making the latter a &quot;de facto&quot; historical capital of Svaneti. Russian imperial administrators facing continuous insubordination from the region would label it &quot;Free Svaneti&quot;. In 2022, President Salome Zourabichvili proposed to integrate traditional Svan arbitration systems into national judicial reform.

In other mountainous provinces like Khevsureti, locals historically elected governors called &quot;Gagas&quot; (გაგა), also known as the &quot;masters and legislators of the people&quot;. Gagas were regularly involved in arbitrating conflicts between various families based on ancient customs and was represented in small cases by local judges, while intra-family feuds were regulated by clan elders. In some parts of the country, gagas were called &quot;Makhvshi&quot; (მახვში). Though the historical origins of these ancient institutions are not well-known, it is believed these traditions were established in the late Bronze Age period and continued well into the 19th century.

=== First Republic (1918–1921) ===
In the 19th century, Georgian kingdoms and one principality were integrated into the Russian Empire. Following the collapse of the Russian Empire in 1918, South Caucasus nations declared their independence and formed the Transcaucasian Democratic Federative Republic. A short-lived state, it brought together the Georgian, Armenian, and Azerbaijani nations under one government and one legislature, the Seim, empowered with directly negotiating with the Ottoman Empire in the last months of World War I to end hostilities on the Caucasus front. The state collapsed as the three nations differed on their foreign policy choices and by May 1918, the Democratic Republic of Georgia was proclaimed.

The first government of the DRG was made of a left-wing coalition dominated by the Social-Democratic (Menshevik) Party and headed by Prime Minister Noe Ramishvili. In July, he would be replaced by Noe Zhordania, who carried out the first reforms to transition the previous imperial government into republican institutions. Local, municipal-level governments were established through direct elections, while imperial provinces and revolutionary councils established since the early 20th century were abolished. The role of DRG&#x27;s legislative organ was first filled by a transitional National Council. The proportional elections in 1919 selected a Constituent Assembly made of 130 members with a goal of drafting the country&#x27;s first-ever constitution. An overwhelming majority held by the Social-Democratic Party, while overall four parties were represented in the Constituent Assembly (including Georgian Socialist-Federalist Revolutionary Party, National Democratic Party and Socialist-Revolutionary Party of Georgia). The 1919 elections are the first nationwide, direct and universal elections in the history of Georgia and all citizens aged 20 and older were granted the right to vote, making Georgia one of the first countries in the world to grant women the right to vote and hold elected office. Various revolutionary, military, and imperial tribunals were replaced by district courts with judges elected by the Constituent Assembly.
The Social-Democratic Party was the most powerful political organization in Georgia. Its influence was also based on a large network of international partners within the global socialist movement, as shown in the 1920 visit to Georgia by the Second International, which declared Georgia a &quot;living incarnation of the socialist ideology&quot;. The opposition Georgian Socialist-Federalist Revolutionary Party and Socialist-Revolutionary Party of Georgia were also left-wing and mostly more radical. The National-Democratic Party the only right-wing party to be represented in the Constituent Assembly. Historian Otar Janelidze has described the political pluralism in the DRG as &quot;peaceful rivalry&quot;, expressed by competitive but compromising rhetoric.

The Constitution of the Democratic Republic of Georgia was adopted on 21 February 1921 and embodied principles of social democracy. A radically parliamentarian document, it saw no need for the office of a President and instead envisioned a governing legislature adopting policies for a weak executive to implement, itself led by a President of the Government, also known as the Prime Minister.

The Democratic Republic of Georgia saw many political turmoils as it was involved in numerous territorial conflicts such as Sochi conflict, the war against the South West Caucasian Republic, Georgian–Ossetian conflict and Armeno-Georgian War. Due to these tensions, the Constituent Assembly decided to grant disputed regions, such as Abkhazia, Saingilo and Adjara status of autonomy, which was enshrined in the Constitution of Georgia.

Throughout its short-lived existence, the Menshevik government was embroiled in armed struggles against Georgian Bolsheviks, which were also backed by the Russian Bolshevik movement. Georgian Bolsheviks organized numerous peasants&#x27; and workers&#x27; rebellions in Racha-Lechkhumi, Samegrelo and Dusheti. In 1920, they staged a coup against the Menshevik government, which led to arrests of Bolshevik leaders. Consequently, the Red Army invaded Georgia from Azerbaijan to aid the rebellion, although they were driven off by the Georgian army. The agreement was signed between the Soviet Russia and Georgia, which led to Russian recognition of Georgia&#x27;s independence with Georgia being obliged to legalize activities of the Communist Party of Georgia. However, a few months later, the Bolsheviks staged another rebellion against the Menshevik government and the Red Army invaded Georgia again to aid the rebellion, leading to toppling of the Menshevik government in Georgia. That government would continue to formally exercise powers until 1954 from France.

=== Soviet Georgia ===

In the early days of the invasion, a Revolutionary Committee (RevKom) was proclaimed by Georgian Bolshevik leaders which formally declared the Soviet Socialist Republic of Georgia and held both legislative and executive powers. A &quot;de jure&quot; independence of the Georgian SSR was temporarily recognized by the Worker-Peasant Union Agreement between Soviet Russia and Soviet Georgia of May 1921. However, the Georgian RevKom held its power from the Russia-appointed Caucasian Bureau of the Communist Party and the Revolutionary-Military Council of the 11th Red Army, while solidifying its hold over the country using armed factions like the Militia of Workers and Peasants and the Young Communist League.

The Bolsheviks did not recognize the liberal democratic concept of separation of powers, arguing that all power in the soviet socialist republics should be held by the working class and exercised in a unified manner. The RevKom formally took over all legislative and executive powers through a 21 April 1921 decree about organization of the state power. Under the Bolshevik system, People&#x27;s Commissariats by the members of RevKom of were formed as the executive branch of government and soon, the People&#x27;s Commissariat of Internal Affairs became the most powerful state institution, abolishing all local governments elected in 1919 and replacing them with revolutionary districts overseen by local Communist Party leaders. Its power was backed by the State Political Department (OGPU), the Special Committee (SakCheka), and later the Committee of State Security (KGB). &quot;Mushglekhini&quot; (or Worker-Peasant Councils) were created as a form of inspectorate to oversee the activities of the Commissariats before legislative elections were held in 1922 to elect Workers&#x27;, Peasants&#x27;, and Military Soviets. Those elections, and all subsequent ones under the Soviet regime banned participation for clergymen, people employed in the private sector, and former public workers, while preventing the participation of all political parties other than the Communist Party. These elections elected a 380-member RevKom Congress, which in turn elected a 95-member All-Georgia Central Executive Committee, which held executive power.
Soviet Georgia adopted its own constitution in 1922, although it was virtually the same as that of other Soviet republics. A new constitution adopted in March 1927 organized state powers between the Supreme Soviet (legislature) and the Soviet of People&#x27;s Commissars (executive), while Georgia was entitled seats in the Central Executive Committee of the Congress of All-Russia Soviets. All officeholders were members of the Communist Party of Georgia and were appointed by the Caucasus Bureau of the Bolshevik Party, itself appointed by the Soviet Union. All other political parties were banned, although some underground dissident groups started to organize as parties in the late 1970s, including the Georgian Helsinki Union, the Republican Party, and the National Democratic Party.

=== Development since 1991 ===
==== Independence and coup ====
Political pluralism was reintroduced in Georgia after political reforms in the Soviet Union that followed the 9 April 1989 tragedy. Elections open to all parties were scheduled for 1990. Six parties and five blocs took part in the Supreme Soviet elections of October 1990, which saw the defeat of the Communist Party and the victory of the Round Table—Free Georgia coalition, a group of anti-Soviet parties led by dissident Zviad Gamsakhurdia. The latter was elected Chairman of the Supreme Soviet, which was renamed the Supreme Council and which took steps that eventually led to a declaration of independence on 9 April 1991.

Though state authorities continued to operate under the 1976 Soviet Constitution, several changes were adopted following independence to create a French-style presidential republic. On 14 April, Zviad Gamsakhurdia was recognized as President of Georgia and presidential elections held on 26 May confirmed his status. The Supreme Council retained solely a legislative role, while the executive was controlled by a President and a Prime Minister appointed by him. The international civil society organization Helsinki Watch described the new presidential powers as &quot;sweeping&quot;, granting the President the right to veto, to declare war and martial law, to appoint the Prime Minister, the Supreme Court chairperson, the State Prosecutor, and the Commander in Chief, immunity from criminal prosecution. The Supreme Council adopted reforms meant to consolidate President&#x27;s power, including the power to appoint powerful prefects in regions answerable only to the President.
In August 1991, parts of the National Guard declared a rebellion under the leadership of former Prime Minister Tengiz Sigua and National Guard commander Tengiz Kitovani, and would soon be assisted by the Mkhedrioni, a paramilitary organization with the ties to the Georgian underworld. The conflict devolved into a civil war by the end of 1991 and Zviad Gamsakhurdia was forced to flee Georgia on 6 January 1992. He would never recognize his overthrow and many of his partisans, including members of the Supreme Council, continued to recognize him as legitimate President in exile, first in Grozny and then in the western Georgian region of Samegrelo, until his death in 1993.

Coup leaders proclaimed a Military Council in January 1992 that abolished the Supreme Council and all state institutions. The Military Council was led by Tengiz Kitovani, Tengiz Sigua, and Mkhedrioni leader Jaba Ioseliani and combined both executive and legislative powers, although its full composition was never published. In March 1992, the Military Council disbanded itself to be replaced by an interim State Council chaired by Eduard Shevardnadze. The State Council held nationwide elections in October 1992 to elect a &quot;Head of State&quot; (Eduard Shevardnadze) and a Parliament composed of 20 parties and four blocs. In the three years of the State Council&#x27;s existence, it went through a resolution of the conflict in South Ossetia, a war in Abkhazia, state reforms that abolished the Prime Minister&#x27;s post, and the writing of a new Constitution.

==== First Constitution ====

Shortly after the coup, the Military Council passed a resolution which formally restored the 1921 Constitution of the Democratic Republic of Georgia. The State Council was organized under the State Power Act of November 1992, also known as the &quot;Small Constitution&quot;. In March 1993, Parliament created a State Constitutional Commission chaired by Eduard Shevardnadze to author the new Constitution of Georgia. Parliament ratified the Constitution on 24 August 1995, after amending the original proposal to create a presidential system of governance instead of the previously envisioned semi-presidential republic.

The adoption of the Constitution was followed by presidential and parliamentary elections in late 1995 that reelected Eduard Shevardnadze and his new presidential party, the Citizens Union of Georgia. The imposition of electoral thresholds led to a rapid decrease in multi-partisanship: the number of parties in Parliament decreased to 14 in 1995 and four in 1999. The Citizens Union actively recruited leading members of the opposition parties, including Zurab Zhvania of the Greens Party, who soon became a prominent leader of the Citizens Union. Its only strong opposition was the regional Democratic Revival Union of Adjara&#x27;s strongman governor Aslan Abashidze. However, an internal divide within the Citizens&#x27; Union soon led to creation of the various factions which President Shevardnadze failed to unite. These factions turned out to be more effective in opposing President Shevardnadze than opposition parties. Most notably, the Reformers Faction pushed for anti-corruption reforms against a majority of the Shevardnadze government.

==== Rose Revolution and Saakashvili presidency ====

 In 2001, former Minister of Justice Mikheil Saakashvili launched his own party, the New National Movement (later renamed as United National Movement). In 2002, Zurab Zhvania moved to create his own party Democrats. Pro-presidential faction, led by the influential governor Levan Mamaladze, managed to dismiss most of his supporters from leadership positions in parliamentary committees. Later Zhvania allied with Nino Burjanadze, which was a prominent member of the parliament at that time from Citizens Union. Georgian Labour Party, an opposition party which rose to prominence in recent years, positioned itself as an outsider in contrast to New National Movement and New Right politicians who were represented in top echelons of the legislature and executive.

Following the disastrous 2002 local elections, Shevardnadze made a concerted attempt to rebuild a political coalition that could support him. The CUG was rebuilt before the 2003 parliamentary election, which was understood to be a key trial before the 2005 presidential election. However, President Shevardnadze&#x27;s popularity rating had plummeted to around 5%, undermining any attempt to revive the CUG under his leadership. The new CUG further found itself divided over internal disputes, and lacking effective leadership to replace those that had defected. Despite the fact that opposition parties enjoyed large popularity, the 2003 parliamentary election saw the reelection of Shevardnadze&#x27;s party, albeit the accusations of large-scale electoral fraud, leading to the Rose Revolution of November 2003. The Rose Revolution was a peaceful development – the first color revolution of the post-Soviet world – and resulted in Shevardnadze&#x27;s resignation and the rise to power of a trio: Mikheil Saakashvili as president, Zurab Zhvania as Prime Minister, and Nino Burjanadze as Speaker of Parliament. The new Parliament ratified constitutional amendments in 2004 that increased the powers of the President and divided powers among the three trio leaders.

The new Georgian government launched large reforms to curb the crumbling infrastructure and deep-seated corruption that had been inherited after a decade of civil conflicts. The radical reforms were enacted in the police, with the entire police force being dismissed in 2004 to root out corruption. The government introduced the liberal economic reforms aimed at attracting foreign investment and abolished several ministries and governmental departments. Large-scale privatization was implemented, labor legislation was liberalized, healthcare was privatized, import tariffs were lowered, a capital control was abolished, taxes were lowered, many governmental regulatory agencies were disbanded and a ban on foreign ownership of Georgian land was repealed. The reforms in education led to massive firings in the academic sector to remove Soviet era leadership. The local self-government was centralized, which led to the abolition of thousands of elected village councils. The legislation concerning thieves-in-law was tightened to reduce the influence of the underworld on the public life. This led to mass incarceration. In 2005, the Parliament passed the General Education Act, restricting the teaching of religion in schools and the use of religious symbols in the school space for devotional purposes.

The post-revolution government enjoyed large popular support in the starting years, confirmed in the 2004 presidential election that gave Saakashvili 97% of the vote and in that same year&#x27;s parliamentary election that gave the National Movement a clear majority in the legislature. The new government has achieved considerable progress in eradicating corruption. In 2008 Transparency International ranked Georgia 67th in its Corruption Perceptions Index, with a score of 3.9 points out of 10 possible. This represented the best result among the CIS countries and a dramatic improvement on Georgia&#x27;s score since 2004, when the country was ranked 133rd with 2.0 points. The rates of crimes was also reduced and Georgia became one of the safest countries. The GDP increased significantly in the first four years, although the economic reforms failed to reduce poverty and substantially increase the standards of living. Scandals such as Sandro Girgvliani murder case eventually decreased the popularity of the government.

The government removed provisions in the Criminal Code which criminalized libel, supposedly to protect freedom of speech of the media. However, the media pluralism remained low. The opposition TV channels faced significant difficulties in obtaining news broadcasting license from the Georgian National Communications Commission. During the 2007 Georgian demonstrations, thousands of Georgians dissatisfied with the Saakashvili&#x27;s rule protested peacefully in the streets of Tbilisi and Batumi. The government responded by raiding the protests and shutting down the opposition channels such as TV Imedi and Kavkasia. These events led to the eventual departure of Nino Burjanadze from the ruling coalition in 2008. Along with the death of Zurab Zhvania in 2005, this allowed Saakashvili to concentrate all state powers, assisted by a few powerful officials (including Interior Minister Vano Merabishvili, Justice Minister Zurab Adeishvili, and Defense Minister Davit Kezerashvili).

In 2010, Parliament ratified new constitutional amendments that transitioned Georgia into a semi-presidential republic, increasing the powers of the Prime Minister and making the President&#x27;s role more ceremonial. Many observers believe those changes were adopted to guarantee Saakashvili&#x27;s stay in power after being term limited as president, although the National Movement would be defeated in the 2012 parliamentary election by Georgian Dream party.

==== Transition to Parliamentary Republic ====

Georgian Dream came to power in the 2012 parliamentary election as a coalition of several parties opposed to Mikheil Saakashvili&#x27;s presidency. Its founder, Bidzina Ivanishvili, the wealthiest man in Georgia, became Prime Minister during a cohabitation with Saakashvili, who remained President of Georgia with limited powers.

Saakashvili&#x27;s terms as president ended in the late 2013. He was replaced by Giorgi Margvelashvili, who became Georgia&#x27;s fourth president from 2013 to 2018. Though Georgia was a semi-presidential republic up to 2018, most powers already were in the hands of the Prime Minister&#x27;s Office (Ivanishvili being followed by Irakli Gharibashvili in 2013, Giorgi Kvirikashvili in 2015, and Mamuka Bakhtadze in 2018). The 2017-2018 constitutional amendments were a major step in Georgia&#x27;s transition to a parliamentary system of governance, removing the President&#x27;s executive powers and making the presidency a largely ceremonial role.

====Georgian Dream rule====
The new government liberalized criminal policies, implementing a large-scale amnesty and abolishing consecutive sentencing. In 2013, the parliament passed a new Labour Code in line with International Labour Organization (ILO) standards and the government launched the Universal Healthcare Program (UHP) which made state-sponsored health insurance available on a massive scale. Several high-ranking government officials from United National Movement were arrested on charges of abuse of power. In November 2013, Bidzina announced his resignation from the post of Prime Minister. Ivanishvili stated that his intention was to return to civil sector and form a non-government organisation. Four days after his resignation as Prime Minister, he resigned as Chairman of Georgian Dream. Many observers, civil society organizations, and opposition groups have alleged that Bidzina Ivanishvili has remained the most powerful decision-maker in Georgia despite not holding any public office since 2013, mostly as the largest financial power behind Georgian Dream.

Though Georgian Dream started as a bloc of several parties, most of them left the ruling coalition by 2016 (most notably, the Free Democrats in 2014, the Republican Party in 2015, and the National Forum in 2016). In the 2016 parliamentary election, Georgian Dream ran on its own and won a constitutional majority, consolidating all levers of power. The party rapidly entered into conflict with President Margvelashvili, and endorsed the candidacy of Salome Zourabichvili in 2018, which won the presidency in a run-off vote against the United National Movement nominee Grigol Vashadze.

A major constitutional reform took place in 2017–2018 that made Georgia a parliamentary republic. The same amendments transitioned Georgia&#x27;s parliamentary elections to a fully proportional system by 2024, abolished direct presidential elections, stipulated that Georgia should be a welfare state, removed a ban on progressive taxes, banned foreign ownership of agricultural land, defined marriage as a union of a woman and a man for the purpose of founding a family and made EU and NATO integration as the constitutionally-enshrined foreign policy objectives of Georgia.

In foreign policy with Russia, the government sought to de-escalate conflict with Russia and normalize relations by promoting &quot;Peace Through Trade&quot; and diplomatic engagement. In November 2012, Prime Minister Ivanishvili appointed special envoy for relations with Russia, Zurab Abashidze (diplomatic relations between the countries remained formally broken). In December 2012, Georgian and Russian diplomats met in Prague to discuss problematic relations between the countries first time since the end of the 2008 war. This became known as &quot;Abashidze–Karasin Format&quot;. In June 2013, Russia lifted the embargo on Georgian wine. Georgia resumed wine exports to Russia for the first time since 2006. The policy reduced the risks of military conflict, although tensions remained high as Georgia continued Euro-Atlantic integration and territorial disputes remained unresolved. In 2019, there was a wave of protests and demonstrations against the government caused by the visit of Russian communist MP Sergei Gavrilov to Georgia. The Russian delegation visited Georgia in the framework of the Interparliamentary Assembly on Orthodoxy session planned to be held in the Parliament of Georgia. Russia and Georgia, both Orthodox Christian nations, are part of the Assembly. During the session, Sergei Gavrilov, the President of the Interparliamentary Assembly, sat in the chair reserved by protocol for the Head of Parliament and gave a speech in Russian about Orthodox brotherhood of Georgia and Russia. Gavrilov had previously voted in favor of the independence of Abkhazia. The protest, which worsened after an attempt to storm the parliament building and violent dispersal by special forces, led to Georgian Dream pledging electoral reform and to hold the next year&#x27;s parliamentary election under a fully proportional system. In November 2019, Parliament&#x27;s failure to pass the promised constitutional amendments (caused by opposition to the amendments by some internal factions within Georgian Dream) led to a parliamentary boycott by the opposition and a political crisis.

On 8 March 2020, Western ambassadors mediated an agreement between Georgian Dream and its opposition, although a refusal by President Zourabichvili to pardon Giorgi Rurua (an opposition leader arrested during the November 2019 protests) led to a collapse of the agreement, while the COVID-19 pandemic prevented a continuation of protests.
The 2020 parliamentary elections saw the reelection of Georgian Dream for a third term, although the opposition alleged that the elections were rigged and organized protests, boycotting the new Parliament and forcing a new political crisis. That crisis came to an end on 19 April 2021, when opposition parties and Georgian Dream signed a new agreement mediated by European Council President Charles Michel guaranteeing electoral and judicial reforms in exchange for the release of Nika Melia, UNM leader who had been arrested for organizing violence during the 2019 protests. That agreement was short-lived, as the largest opposition party, the United National Movement, refused to sign the agreement, and because of this the ruling Georgian Dream party withdrew its signature within a few months, saying that the agreement failed to reach its goals.

By the end of 2021, the political crisis in Georgia had worsened following the arrest of former President Saakashvili for abuse of power, while attempts by President Zourabichvili to mediate eventually failed. Zourabichvili herself was targeted by a series of constitutional lawsuits filed by the government to challenge the use of her limited powers in diplomatic appointments.

In June 2022, the European Council issued the &quot;12 Recommendations&quot;, a series of reform proposals to be implemented by the Georgian authorities before it could be granted European Union membership candidacy status. While originally granted a deadline till the end of 2022 to implement the reforms, failure to reach compromises led to the European Commission agreeing to postpone the deadline to late 2023.

On 14 December 2023, the European Union granted Georgia candidate status, acknowledging the Georgia&#x27;s ongoing efforts toward EU integration. The decision, announced by the European Council, came alongside the initiation of accession negotiations with Eastern Partnership members Ukraine and Moldova. Despite very limited progress on these recommendations, the EU&#x27;s decision reflected an ongoing commitment to fostering diplomatic relations with Georgia and advancing Georgian prospects of EU integration.

====2024–2025 Georgian constitutional crisis====
== Central government ==
Georgia is a parliamentary unitary republic, in which the President (who serves as head of state), the Government, Parliament, and the judiciary share powers reserved to the national government, while the central government shares powers with two autonomous republics and 69 municipalities.

The central government is divided into four branches, as specified by the Constitution of Georgia
* The President of Georgia serves as head of state with limited executive and diplomatic powers and is currently elected by direct suffrage (a provision set to change in 2024).
* The Executive branch is headed by the Prime Minister of Georgia, appointed by Parliament, and is composed of 11 ministries and one state ministry, each appointed by the Prime Minister.
* The Parliament serves as the unicameral legislative body of Georgia (although the Constitution provides for a bicameral legislature once the country&#x27;s territorial integrity is restored) and is elected in proportional elections by direct suffrage.
* The Judiciary branch is composed of a Constitutional Court, a Supreme Court, and lower appellate and municipal courts that are appointed and regulated by the High Council of Justice.

Georgia&#x27;s liberal electoral laws have created a vibrant multi-partisan system, with 15 political parties currently serving in the Parliament of Georgia and another seven in local offices, although the existing system discourages the existence of non-partisan elected officials.

=== Presidency ===
The President of Georgia serves as head of state with very limited executive powers, which are regulated by Chapter Four of the Constitution of Georgia, but also by Articles 25, 37, 38, 44, 46, 48, 56, 57, 58, 60, 64, 66, 68, 71, 72, 73, and 77 of the Constitution.

The Constitution defines the President as &quot;the guarantor of the country&#x27;s unity and national independence&quot;. As such, the officeholder also serves as Supreme Commander-in-chief of the Georgian Defense Forces and has the duty to &quot;represent Georgia in foreign relations.&quot; The latter power has been the subject of regular debates, as the Government has routinely relied on the Government Consent Clause of Article 52, which provides for government approvals for any of the President&#x27;s diplomatic activities.

The President has limited appointment and nomination powers. He or she can appoint one member to the High Council of Justice and had the power to nominate the chairperson and board members of the Central Election Commission, per recommendation of a Candidate Selection Commission, although that power was abolished in July 2023. She also makes the final confirmation for government nominations for Chief of the Defense Forces and several other national regulatory bodies.

On a discretionary basis, the President has the power to issue pardons to convicts and to grant citizenship. In times of national emergencies, the Prime Minister entertains the right to advice the President to declare a State of Emergency (last declared in May 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic) which later requires the approval of the Parliament. During the state of emergency the President can dissolve any municipal government body but that also requires the advice of the Prime Minister and the consent of Parliament. The President has the power to veto legislation, although a veto can be overridden by a simple parliamentary majority, rendering the veto power in Georgia much less significant than in other Euro-Atlantic democracies.

The current presidency is disputed between Salome Zourabichvili and Mikheil Kavelashvili. Zourabichvili was elected during the 2018 presidential election and the last president to be elected via direct suffrage. Salome Zourabichvili is also the first President to head the state under its fully-parliamentary system of government. Since 2024, the Constitution of Georgia provides for presidential election via an Electoral college made of legislative, autonomous republic, and municipal leaders. Mikheil Kavelashvili was elected by the 2024 Electoral college and inaugurated as President on 29 December 2024.

=== Executive Government ===
The Government of Georgia serves as the executive branch of Georgia&#x27;s state institutions. It is headed by a Prime Minister, who is appointed by the Parliamentary Majority and confirmed in a vote of Parliament, and includes 10 ministries and one state ministry, as well as several executive agencies, commonly known as &quot;Services&quot; that are responsible directly to the Government (such as the Georgian Intelligence Service, the State Security Service, the State Data Protection Service, and the Special State Protection Service). Though Georgia is a parliamentary republic, its executive branch holds considerably large powers, including that of sponsoring legislation, issuing executive decrees, and holding exclusive powers to draft budgets.

The term of the Government is exercised between two parliamentary elections and is formed by a simple majority of Parliament. The current Prime Minister is Irakli Gharibashvili of the ruling Georgian Dream party, who has held the post since 2021.

While the Office of Prime Minister is constitutionally-prescribed, ministries can be created by simple parliamentary law. The Prime Minister&#x27;s powers are considerably larger than that of President, including in foreign policy where the former is the sole authority with the power to conclude international treaties.

Individual cabinet appointments do not require parliamentary approval and a Cabinet is approved in a single vote upon the designation of a new Prime Minister. Votes of confidence are required once a majority of Cabinet members are changed. The Prime Minister is allowed to designate Vice Prime Ministers. Currently, two cabinet members hold that title: Culture Minister Tea Tsulukiani and Economy Minister Levan Davitashvili.

The Government is empowered with organizing the territorial administration of Georgia outside of its autonomous republics. Currently, there are nine regions administered directly by the central government (Samegrelo-Zemo Svaneti, Racha-Lechkhumi-Kvemo Svaneti, Guria, Samtskhe-Javakheti, Imereti, Kvemo Kartli, Shida Kartli, Mtskheta-Mtianeti, and Kakheti), which is represented in those regions by a &quot;State Representative-Governors&quot; who are appointed by the Prime Minister. The capital Tbilisi enjoys a special status and is not included in any of those regions, although it does not enjoy any further autonomy than other administrative units.

=== Legislative branch ===

The legislative branch of Georgia is currently unicameral and is made of the Parliament of Georgia, defined by the Constitution as &quot;the supreme representative body of the country that exercises legislative power, defines the main directions of the country&#x27;s domestic and foreign policies, controls the activities of the Government...&quot;

The Constitution provides for a theoretical bicameral legislation &quot;following the full restoration of Georgia&#x27;s jurisdiction throughout the entire territory of Georgia&quot;, ergo upon resolution of the status of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. The legislature would then be made of:
* The Council of the Republic, composed of members elected proportionally.
* The Senate, composed of members elected from the Autonomous Republics of Abkhazia, Adjara, and other territorial units of Georgia, and five members appointed by the President.

As of now, Parliament is made of 150 members elected in a mixed electoral system, with 30 members elected from single-mandate majoritarian districts and 120 elected through a fully party-based proportional system with a natural electoral threshold. In 2024, the electoral system is set to become fully proportional, abolishing all majoritarian districts and setting an electoral threshold at 5%.

Parliament is headed by a Chairperson (currently Shalva Papuashvili) and a First Deputy Chair, while the Parliamentary Opposition is allowed to select a deputy chair, nominated by the largest faction in the Opposition. The work of Parliament is divided into Committees, as well as several Special Commissions, Councils, and a Trust Group in charge of overseeing national security policy. Each MP is allowed to join only one Faction (composed of at least seven members) or Political Group (made of two to six members) and there are currently two Factions and six Political Groups.

Each MP is entitled to ask questions to public agencies, which are mandated to provide answers. A Faction is entitled to summon a Cabinet member for hearing.

Though Georgia is a parliamentary republic, Parliament&#x27;s role in policy-making has been largely reduced over the years, with most powers concentrated in the Prime Minister&#x27;s Office. Proposed reforms to ensure parliamentary oversight have included requiring parliamentary confirmations of cabinet and diplomatic appointments, removing the Government&#x27;s power to sponsor legislation, and reducing the Government&#x27;s discretionary powers.

=== Judiciary ===

Georgia has a centralized judiciary system, led by the Constitutional Court of Georgia, a body made of nine judges appointed for a term of 10 years with appointments scattered between the President, Parliament, and the Supreme Court. Its responsibility is to check the constitutionality of existing legislature, treaties, and executive decisions. The Court of Cassation of Georgia is the Supreme Court, made of 28 judges appointed for life terms by the High Council of Justice and confirmed by Parliament. Appellate and municipal courts form the common courts of Georgia and are regulated by the High Council of Justice.

The High Council of Justice is an independent body constitutionally-prescribed to &quot;ensure the independence and efficiency of the common courts, to appoint and dismiss judges and to perform other tasks&quot;. It is made of 15 members, including 14 appointed for a 4-year term and the Chair of the Supreme Court. Among the 14 appointees, the President is entitled to appoint one member, while the remaining are appointed by Parliament and &quot;the self-governing body of judges of the common courts&quot; (also called the Conference of Judges of Georgia, which consists of all acting judges at all levels).

Article 65 of the Constitution provides for an independent Prosecutor&#x27;s Office led by a General Prosecutor elected by Parliament upon nomination for a six-year term by the Prosecutorial Council. The latter is made of 15 members and exists to &quot;ensure the independence, transparency and efficiency of the Prosecutor&#x27;s Office.&quot;

Western-funded non-governmental organizations have accused the High Council of Justice of serving the interests of a &quot;Judicial Clan&quot; and of using its powers to promote or dismiss judges based on their court rulings. On 5 April 2023, the United States Department of State sanctioned four current and former members of the High Council of Justice for alleged corrupt practices.

=== Checks and balances ===
Formally, the constitutional framework guarantees checks and balances and institutional independence, with the President holding veto power and the right to nominate candidates for the High Council of Justice and the National Bank of Georgia, Parliament confirming those nominations and maintaining a veto override power, the Government enforcing legislative decisions and overseeing the President&#x27;s activities, and a self-regulating Judiciary. However, some observers have opined that there is a lack of proper checks and balances in the Georgian politics.

Most bills passed in the 10th Convocation of Parliament have been initiated by the Government, indicating a low level of legislative independence. The President&#x27;s veto powers has been used twice since 2019, both times overridden by Parliament. The traditionally strong oversight powers held by individual MPs have been weakened in recent years, with up to 60% of parliamentary questions asked to public agencies left unanswered in 2023.

Since the beginning of 2021, tensions between President Zourabichvili and the Government of Irakli Gharibashvili have led to institutional warfare between the President and the Government. In at least two occasions, the Government banned the President from traveling abroad, preventing her from visiting Ukraine, Poland, Germany, and France. In March 2023, the Government announced it would file two lawsuits with the Constitutional Court against the President over her decision to go on an unauthorized visit to Brussels and Paris and over her refusal to sign outright decrees appointing ambassador candidates nominated by the Government, before dismissing the lawsuits several months later. In June 2023, Parliament overrode a presidential veto over a bill that changes the composition of the National Bank and gave the Government more powers over the appointment of the bank&#x27;s president. In December 2021, Parliament approved a Government-sponsored bill that abolished the State Inspector&#x27;s Service after the latter issued several rulings critical of the Government.

== Autonomous republics ==

Autonomous republics are entitled to their own executive and legislative structures, in the forms of a Government and a Supreme Council. The President of Georgia appoints the Chairman of the Government of autonomous republics upon &quot;consultations with political entities represented in the Supreme Council&quot;, although the Consultation Clause of the autonomous republics&#x27; constitutions has been largely disregarded in modern practice, with the President automatically appointing the nominee of the Majority of the Supreme Councils. The current chairman of the Government of the Adjarian Autonomous Republic is Tornike Rizhvadze.

Though Supreme Councils are elected via direct suffrage at the same time as nationwide parliamentary elections, the bodies of the Autonomous Republic of Abkhazia enjoy a special status as its authority has been in exile since 1993. Per the State Power Act of 1995, the Supreme Council of Abkhazia is therefore made of those Supreme Council members who remained loyal to Georgia in 1991 and no election is scheduled as long as the conflict remains unresolved. The Supreme Council nonetheless elects a new Chairman of Government once every five years. The current chairman of the Abkhazian Government in exile is Ruslan Abashidze.

Autonomous republics enjoy more responsibilities than regions and have their own independent agencies, including Supreme Election Commissions and Ministries. Their Supreme Councils have the right to sponsor legislation in the Parliament of Georgia and are entitled to seats in the Electoral College set to be inaugurated in 2024. They have their own Constitutions and are empowered with administering their territories to the extent set out by Georgian legislation. The Constitution of Georgia recognizes Abkhazian as the official language of Autonomous Republic of Abkhazia.

In 2007, the Parliament of Georgia recognized the authority of the Provisional Administration of South Ossetia, an entity created under the leadership of South Ossetia&#x27;s Dimitri Sanakoev to administer territories of South Ossetia under Georgian control in agreement with Georgian authorities. While the Provisional Administration continues to exist, Georgia has lost control of all of South Ossetia following the 2008 Russo-Georgian War. South Ossetia enjoyed status of autonomous oblast in the Soviet Georgian Constitution. In 1990, when South Ossetian Autonomous Oblast declared its independence from Georgia, the Supreme Council of Georgia voted to abolish its status to prevent separatism. Nowadays some have advocated for the constitutional recognition of a South Ossetian autonomy as a potential compromise settlement in the conflict.

== Local governments ==
=== Municipalities ===

Georgia is divided into 69 municipalities, although only 63 fall in the territory controlled by the Georgian Government, with the remaining six divided located in Abkhazia and South Ossetia. Municipalities are entitled their own self-government per Article 7 of the Constitution, which states that citizens &quot;shall regulate affairs of local importance through local self-government&quot;. Municipalities and their boundaries are established by the Government and confirmed by Parliament.

The municipalities are governed by a mayor and a municipal assembly locally known as &quot;Sakrebulo&quot; (საკრებულო). Both are elected by direct suffrage for a four-year term, with the Sakrebulo elected in a mixed majoritarian-proportional system. The number of Sakrebulo members varies in each municipality. Mayors are responsible for the implementation of ordinances adopted by the Sakrebulo, and though local budgets are established by the Mayor&#x27;s Office, funding is provided exclusively by the central government. Local self-governments are entrusted with taking decisions in compliance with national legislation and on all matters that do not fall in the exclusive powers of the central government or autonomous republics. Starting in 2024, local self-government units will be entitled to representation in the Electoral College.

The Constitution of Georgia also provides for the Anaklia Economic Zone, which shall operate under a &quot;special legal regime&quot; once established. It is the only constitutionally-prescribed special economic zone with a special legal regime, although similar ones can be created by the Parliament of Georgia.

=== LEPLs ===
Legal Entitles under Public Law (LEPLs) are autonomous organizations at the local, autonomous or central level created by legislation or executive decree to carry out political, educational, cultural or other activities under public control. They are similar to special districts in Western democracies, although Georgian LEPLs have no oversight boards, appointed leaderships, and are not financially autonomous.

Virtually every ministry, state body, and municipality has established LEPLs. Some of the best-known LEPLs are public universities, government bureaus, and cultural institutions.

Critics of LEPLs have argued that the lack of financial transparency have transformed them into a mechanism to distribute administrative resources during electoral campaigns.

== Elections ==
=== Historical development ===
All elections since 1990 have been held under universal direct suffrage for all citizens 18 years old and over and have been free to participate in for all political parties registered by the Central Election Commission. The first multi-partisan elections in modern Georgia were held in 1990 to elect the 250-member Supreme Soviet of the Georgian SSR and led to a victory by the electoral alliance known as the Round Table – Free Georgia bloc, which spearheaded Georgia&#x27;s declaration of independence from the USSR. Those elections were held in a mixed majoritarian-proportional system, with 125 members elected in single-mandate majoritarian districts and 125 elected proportionally from those parties that passed the 4% threshold.

Though the Supreme Council was abolished following the 1991–92 coup d&#x27;état, new legislative elections were held in 1992 to elect a 225-member Parliament, including 75 elected in majoritarian districts and 150 in proportional elections. The proportional part of these elections were held under a natural threshold, meaning that any party winning at least 0.67% of the vote was entitled a seat in Parliament, leading to the most multi-partisan Parliament in Georgia&#x27;s history, with 20 political parties and four electoral blocs winning seats. The only other parliamentary election held with a natural threshold (although for only 120 seats) was the 2020 election, which saw seven parties and two blocs win seats.

All parliamentary elections from 1995 to 2016 have been held in a mixed majoritarian-proportional system, although changes have been introduced from election to election. Following the 1992 open elections, the 1995 Constitution of Georgia provided for an electoral threshold of 5%, which severely reduced the number of elected subjects to nine parties and two blocs. The threshold would be increased again in 1999 to 7% and remain at that level till the 2008 parliamentary election, when concerns about the democratic standard of such a high threshold made the authorities return to the 5% threshold. All elections have been held under the 5% threshold since then (except for the 2020 election). In all parliamentary elections between 1995 and 2008, there were 75 single-mandate majoritarian districts, though the occupation of the Kodori Valley and South Ossetia by Russian forces in 2008 led to the cancellation of two districts.

As a result of the 2019 demonstrations, a constitutional amendment was proposed to abolish all single-mandate districts and hold fully proportional elections with no threshold. The amendment failed, causing a political crisis that would last until June 2020, when the ruling Georgian Dream party and opposition parties agreed to a compromise solution that reduced the number of majoritarian districts from 73 to 30 and increased proportional elected MPs from 77 to 120, with a natural threshold. This compromise was used only in the 2020 election and though majoritarian districts have been abolished, a 5% threshold is set to be restored in 2024.

Georgia has held seven presidential elections since 1991, including two snap elections (in 2004 and 2008). Participation in presidential elections has also been opened to all political parties registered by the CEC. The 2018 election saw the highest number of presidential candidates (26) and was the first-ever election to go to a runoff. The highest electoral turnout in a presidential contest was seen in 2004 (88%) in the aftermath of the Rose Revolution, while the lowest was seen in 2013 (47%). The 2018 election was the last presidential election held via direct suffrage, as an Electoral College is set to elect the next president.

In 1992, Georgia held an election of the Head of State (who was also Chairman of Parliament), a position briefly established after the 1991–92 coup to substitute the overthrown President Zviad Gamsakhurdia. Eduard Shevardnadze was elected and served in this position until the 1995 presidential election.

Georgia&#x27;s municipal election system has been irregular with constant changes as decentralization and the amount of public input in local governance have been the subject of debates in each national administration since independence. The first local elections in Georgia took place on 30 April 1991 and are considered to be the first democratic elections in post-independence Georgia, although its results would be cancelled a few months later by the Military Council, after which all local governments would be directly administered by the central government. In 1998, decentralization reforms allowed for local elections at the municipal and township levels and a total of 10,693 members were elected in 1,031 councils under a mixed electoral system (large towns and cities held proportional elections and smaller units held majoritarian elections). In 2002, the central government allowed for the first time direct mayoral elections across the country, except for Tbilisi and Poti whose mayors were appointed by the President of Georgia. But a 2005 local government reform abolished all local town councils and maintained only Municipal Assemblies (Sakrebulos). Direct elections for mayors in all municipalities were introduced in 2010. Electoral reforms that discouraged decentralization and encouraged multi-partisanship since 2010 have abolished elections for district prefects while reducing the number of majoritarian districts to increase the share of proportional elections in all municipalities.

Georgia has held two referendums (the Independence Referendum of 1991 and a 2003 vote on reducing the number of MPs from 235 to 150) and two plebiscites (both in 2008; one on supporting NATO membership and one on scheduling early parliamentary elections for the spring of that year) in recent history. According to the Georgian legislation, the referendums, unlike plebiscites, have a binding force. The highest voter turnout in any Georgian election in history was recorded during the 1991 referendum (91%).

=== Current procedures ===

The electoral procedures for Parliament are set out by Article 37 of the Constitution of Georgia, which outline 150 elected members of Parliament in a single multi-mandate electoral district for a 4-year term through proportional, universal, and direct suffrage. Parties that cross the 5% electoral threshold shall be entitled seats in Parliament. There is no petitioning or financial requirements for political parties to gain ballot access, though all parties are required to meet a gender-based quota by having at least one woman for every four names in their electoral lists (this provision will be in force until 2032). The 2024 parliamentary elections are the first to be held under a fully-proportional system.

The last presidential election held under direct suffrage took place in 2018. Starting in 2024, presidential elections will be held once every four years and the President will be elected by an Electoral College made of 300 members, including all members of Parliament, all members of the Supreme Councils of Abkhazia and Adjara, and partisan representatives of municipal governments selected based on proportional geographical representation and partisan support.

The next municipal elections are scheduled for 2025 and electoral procedures vary based on municipalities, though all will continue to have a combination of proportional and majoritarian seats in their Sakrebulos. Reforms implemented in 2021 increased the share of proportional seats, while lowering the electoral threshold from 4 to 2.5% in Tbilisi and 3% in the rest of Georgia. In Tbilisi, Batumi, Kutaisi, Rustavi, and Poti, there is a 4–1 ratio in favor of proportional seats, while other municipalities have a 2–1 ratio. Since the 2021 elections, majoritarian districts require a runoff if no candidate gains more than 40% of the vote in the first round.

All electoral procedures are regulated and administered by the Central Election Commission, whose chairperson and two board members are selected by a Candidate Selection Commission, nominated by the Chairman of Parliament, and confirmed by a majority of Parliament for a 5-year term. The current chairman of the CEC is Giorgi Kalandarishvili, who serves in an interim basis as Parliament has refused to confirm appointments made by President Salome Zourabichvili since 2022. Out of 17 CEC board members, 15 are appointed by political parties represented in Parliament. At the local level, the CEC administers District Election Commissions and Precinct Election Commissions, which are also made of 17 members (8 appointed by the CEC and 8 by political parties).

According to the V-Dem Democracy indices Georgia was 2023 the 6th most electoral democratic country in Asia.

== Political parties, blocs, and factions ==
=== Political parties ===
Georgia is a multi-partisan republic where political parties have played a major role in the country&#x27;s political development throughout its republican history. The first parties date back to the late 19th century when groups of intellectuals formed advocacy groups in then-Russian Georgia (Ilia Chavchavadze&#x27;s classical liberal and nationalist Pirveli Dasi and Giorgi Tsereteli&#x27;s center-left Meore Dasi for example). In 1892, intelligentsia leaders Egnate Ninoshvili and Mikhail Tskhakaya founded Georgia&#x27;s first official political party – Mesame Dasi, a social-democratic party that advocated for a socialist revolution. The Social Democratic Party of Georgia would be founded a year later as a split party but would soon become Georgia&#x27;s most influential political organization, eventually leading the independence movement and winning a ruling majority during the Democratic Republic of Georgia.
In Soviet Georgia, all political parties were banned and the Communist Party became the only legal political organization that controlled all branches of government. However, dissident movements started coalescing into underground parties in the 1970s, with the Helsinki Union created by Zviad Gamsakhurdia in 1976, the Republican Party in 1978, and the National Democratic Party in 1988. Dozens of parties would be created in 1990 by various anti-Soviet dissidents ahead of the 1990 legislative elections, in which 14 parties won seats to the Supreme Council.

After the 1990 legislative elections, the formerly ruling Communist Party lost its power, and in 1991, the Supreme Council of Georgia under the leadership of Zviad Gamsakhurdia banned it for allegedly supporting the 1991 Soviet coup d&#x27;état attempt. The decision was later reaffirmed by the Supreme Court of Georgia. In 1992, 27 parties would be elected to the State Council of Georgia in a legislative election that saw a low electoral threshold and that followed the 1991–1992 coup d&#x27;état. Many of these parties would progressively disappear after the Eduard Shevardnadze government imposed a 5% electoral threshold (12 parties won seats in the 1995 elections, nine in 1999 and seven in 2003). Following the Rose Revolution, most political parties that operated in the 1990s were disbanded, including the ruling Citizens Union of Georgia of Shevardnadze and the opposition Democratic Revival of Aslan Abashidze, while most political operatives coalesced around the United National Movement of Mikheil Saakashvili, which controlled the Georgian government from 2004 to 2012.

Under Saakashvili&#x27;s presidency, parliamentary opposition parties remained considerably weak, with only four parties winning seats in the 2004 parliamentary elections. By 2008, the only opposition party that remained in Parliament was the Christian-Democratic Movement. However, the extraparliamentary opposition was considerably active and several parties, centered around various political well-known figures, successively took leadership of the opposition. The Way of Georgia, created in 2006 by dismissed Foreign Minister Salome Zourabichvili, was the first major anti-government movement under Saakashvili&#x27;s presidency. It would soon join forces with a dozen other parties to create the United Opposition that backed the presidential candidacy of Levan Gachechiladze in 2008. By 2010, the Free Democrats of former UN Ambassador Irakli Alasania played a considerable role as well.

Most of these parties either disappeared or were absorbed by Georgian Dream when that party was created in 2012 by Bidzina Ivanishvili. The ruling coalition that came to power at the time was made of various former opposition parties, including the Free Democrats, National Forum, and the Republican Party, although they would each join the opposition to the new government by 2016. Many of Georgia&#x27;s oldest political parties have disappeared after years of poor electoral results, including the Ilia Chavchavadze Society and the Industry Will Save Georgia party. In the 2020 parliamentary election, 14 parties won seats in the legislature, although the two largest parties remain Georgian Dream and the United National Movement. Both have suffered from several splits since 2012: For Justice (2019), Solidarity Alliance (2020), For Georgia (2021), and People&#x27;s Power (2022) were formed by Georgian Dream members, while Girchi (2015), European Georgia (2017) and Strategy Aghmashenebeli (2020) were launched by UNM members. Some of these split parties have themselves experienced their own splits (Girchi – More Freedom was created by Girchi members in 2020, Droa was created by European Georgia members in 2021).

Domestic and international observers have noted the lack of clearly-defined ideologies among Georgian political parties. Instead, parties mostly evolve around individual leaders and rarely survive their founders. Low electoral thresholds, a lack of political culture, and the proportional electoral system have contributed to the lack of non-partisan politicians, which in turn has encouraged individual leaders to form their own parties when failing to find common ground with existing parties. Publicly stated position statements almost never differentiate between parties and correspond to existing political developments in the country. For example, most parties in the 1990s called for a peaceful settlement of the Georgian-Abkhazian conflict, while virtually every party since the Rose Revolution has publicly backed Georgia&#x27;s integration into the European Union and liberal economic reforms.
Unlike many other European democracies, political parties in Georgia are defined by the Constitution, Article 3 of which states that, &quot;Political parties shall participate in the formation and exercise of the political will of the people.&quot; The Political Associations Act of 1997 regulates the creation and activities of parties and require all new parties to be created by a founding assembly of at least 300 members. Parties are free to regulate their own membership procedures, although the law requires parties to maintain an executive board of at least three members. For most parties, these boards are appointed by party leadership, although intra-party democracy has slowly developed in recent years: in 2013, the United National Movement became the first party to hold a presidential primary, Girchi would become the first party to hold primaries to decide the makeup of its electoral list in the 2020 parliamentary election, while UNM would become the first party to hold elections for its executive board in 2023.

Despite the large amount of active political parties in Georgia, the Georgian Constitution provides for the prohibition of parties based on certain criteria. Parties that advocate for the overthrow of the government, the violation of Georgia&#x27;s territorial integrity, civil strife or violence based on ethnicity, geography, or social classes are banned. Under the current Constitution, only the Constitutional Court has a right to review the constitutionality and ban a political party. The request to ban a political party can be submitted to the court by the President, the Government, or by at least one fifth of the Members of Parliament. As of 2023, two parties have been banned under this rule, the Communist Party in 1991 and the Centrists Party in 2016. There have been several legislative initiatives to ban the United National Movement, mostly proposed by the Alliance of Patriots. Several civil society organizations and parliamentary deputies have suggested to ban the Conservative Movement party.

Political parties in Georgia have historically formed alliances to create electoral blocs. The first such bloc dates back to the 1990 legislative election when seven anti-Soviet parties formed the Round Table – Free Georgia alliance to defeat the Communist Party in the country&#x27;s first free elections and bring Zviad Gamsakhurdia to power. A total of five blocs took part in that year&#x27;s elections. Since then, blocs have mostly been used by opposition parties as a way to join forces to defeat an incumbent government: the National Democrats-UNM-Republican Party alliance of 2003 against Shevardnadze&#x27;s government, the United Opposition of 2008 against Mikheil Saakashvili, the Georgian Dream coalition of 2012, and Strength is in Unity currently bringing together three parties against Georgian Dream. Blocs have been criticized for encouraging political polarization and discouraging issues-based debates. Election reform in 2021 banned electoral blocs in all future elections, which in turn has encouraged small parties to integrate with each other ahead of the 2024 election.

=== Factions and Political Groups ===
Members of Parliament are entitled to join factions, or groups of at least seven MPs elected from the same party or electoral bloc. Factions are formal, publicly funded and regulated parliamentary bodies entitled to several rights, such as committee and delegation quotas, summoning ministers for special hearings, nominating candidates for Parliamentary Chair and deputy chair, and be represented in the Parliamentary Bureau that sets the legislative agenda. There are currently two factions in Parliament: Georgian Dream and Strength is in Unity.
In 2021, Parliament adopted a controversial amendment to parliamentary regulations allowing any two MPs elected from the same party to create a &quot;Political Group&quot; in Parliament with effectively the same powers as factions, with questions raised about its constitutionality. Four political groups were created under that umbrella: Lelo, Girchi, Group of Reforms, and the European Socialists. In June 2023, Parliament adopted further regulatory changes allowing MPs to create Political Groups even if elected under another party banner, allowing the creation of the People&#x27;s Power and Euro-Optimists groups. Large opposition parties have criticized these measures as creative incentives for the dissolution of large opposition parties, especially as Political Groups are entitled to public funding.

The large powers granted to Factions and Political Groups have in turn lowered the influence of independent MPs. Starting with the 2024 parliamentary election, the abolition of majoritarian districts will ban the electoral participation of non-partisan candidates, while those MPs that leave political parties and refuse to join a faction or group receive less office funding, less rights in Parliament, and are not entitled to travel reimbursements.

=== Public funding ===
The large majority of political party budgets comes from public funding, as prescribed by the 1997 Political Associations Act and amendments to the law adopted in 2020. Any political party that receives at least 1% in the previous parliamentary election is entitled to public funding based on its results: 15,000 GEL per vote for the first 50,000 votes and 5 GEL for each subsequent vote. A party loses its public funding if it loses at least half of its seats within one parliamentary convocation or if at least half of the MPs fail to attend a majority of parliamentary sessions.

The parliamentary boycott by opposition parties that followed the 2020 election led to a controversial proposal on abolishing public funding for boycotting parties, a proposal that was criticized by the European Union and eventually scrapped.

==Separatism==
In the first half of the 1990s, Georgia suffered from a series of separatist conflicts, which led to &quot;de facto&quot; independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. Both of these regions enjoyed autonomous status within the Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic and wanted to remain within renewed Soviet Union as Georgia pushed for independence. Eventually, the conflicts developed into full-scale wars which left thousands of people dead. During the War in Abkhazia (1992–1993), roughly 230,000 to 250,000 Georgians were expelled from Abkhazia by Abkhaz separatists and North Caucasian volunteers (including Chechens). Around 23,000 Georgians fled South Ossetia as well.

Since the 1990s, the territorial problems have been one of the most important problems in Georgian politics. Under President Eduard Shevardnadze, several efforts were made to defuse the tensions and reintegrate these breakaway republics through diplomatic means. In 1996, the Ergneti market was opened and soon became the place where Georgians and South Ossetians traded. In 1996, Lyudvig Chibirov won the presidential elections in South Ossetia. A memorandum on &quot;Measures for providing security and confidence building&quot; was signed in Moscow on 16 May 1996, which was regarded as the first step towards a rapprochement between Georgia and the separatists of South Ossetia. This was followed up by several meetings between the President of Georgia, Eduard Shevardnadze, and the &quot;de facto&quot; President of South Ossetia, Lyudvig Chibirov. They met in Vladikavkaz in 1996, in Java in 1997, and in Borjomi in 1998. These resulted in some positive developments as the talks about IDP return, economic development, a political solution to the issues, and the protection of the population in the conflict zone.

In April–May 1998, the conflict between Georgia and Abkhaz separatists escalated once again in the Gali District when several hundred Abkhaz forces entered the villages still populated by Georgians to support the separatist-held parliamentary elections. Despite criticism from the opposition, Eduard Shevardnadze, President of Georgia, refused to deploy troops against Abkhazia. The conflict developed into six-day war between Abkhaz separatists and local Georgian guerillas. Georgia&#x27;s opposition blamed President Eduard Shevardnadze for losing the war by not supporting the guerillas with the Georgian Military. Shevardnadze declared that one of the reasons he had not sent in the military was it was not combat-ready. A ceasefire was negotiated on 20 May. The hostilities resulted in hundreds of casualties from both sides and an additional 20,000 Georgian refugees.

In September 2001, around 400 Chechen fighters and 80 Georgian guerrillas appeared in the Kodori Valley. The Chechen-Georgian paramilitaries advanced as far as Sukhumi, but finally were repelled by the Abkhazian forces and Gudauta-based Russian peacekeepers.

 Intense fighting took place between Georgian forces and the South Ossetians between 8 and 19 August. This was the first military confrontation for twelve years. At a high-level meeting between Georgian Prime Minister Zurab Zhvania and South Ossetian leader Eduard Kokoity on 5 November in Sochi, Russia, an agreement on demilitarization of the conflict zone was reached. Some exchange of fire continued in the zone of conflict after the ceasefire, apparently primarily initiated by the Ossetian side.

The Rose Revolution in 2003 resulted in a severe deterioration of relations with Russia, fuelled also by Russia&#x27;s open assistance and support to the two secessionist areas. Despite these increasingly difficult relations, in May 2005 Georgia and Russia reached a bilateral agreement by which Russian military bases (dating back to the Soviet era) in Batumi and Akhalkalaki were withdrawn. Russia withdrew all personnel and equipment from these sites by December 2007 while failing to withdraw from the Gudauta base in Abkhazia, which it was required to vacate after the adoption of the Adapted Conventional Armed Forces in Europe Treaty during the 1999 Istanbul summit.

There was a Russo-Georgian diplomatic crisis in April 2008. A bomb explosion on 1 August 2008 targeted a car transporting Georgian peacekeepers. South Ossetians were responsible for instigating this incident, which marked the opening of hostilities and injured five Georgian servicemen, then several South Ossetian militiamen were killed by snipers. South Ossetian separatists began shelling Georgian villages on 1 August. These artillery bombardments caused Georgian servicemen to return fire periodically.

On 7 August 2008, the Georgian president Mikheil Saakashvili announced a unilateral ceasefire and called for peace talks. More attacks on Georgian villages (located in the South Ossetian conflict zone) were soon matched with gunfire from Georgian troops, who then proceeded to move in the direction of the capital of the self-proclaimed Republic of South Ossetia (Tskhinvali) on the night of 8 August, reaching its centre in the morning of 8 August. According to Russian military expert Pavel Felgenhauer, the Ossetian provocation was aimed at triggering Georgian retaliation, which was needed as a pretext for a Russian military invasion. According to Georgian intelligence and several Russian media reports, parts of the regular (non-peacekeeping) Russian Army had already moved to South Ossetian territory through the Roki Tunnel before the Georgian military action.

Russia accused Georgia of &quot;aggression against South Ossetia&quot; and began a big land, air and sea invasion of Georgia under the pretext of a &quot;peace enforcement&quot; operation on 8 August 2008. Abkhaz forces opened a second front on 9 August with the Battle of the Kodori Valley, an attack on the Kodori Gorge, held by Georgia. Tskhinvali was seized by the Russian military by 10 August. Russian forces occupied Georgian cities beyond the disputed territories.

During the conflict, there was a campaign of ethnic cleansing against Georgians in South Ossetia, including destruction of Georgian settlements after the war had ended. The war displaced 192,000 people and while many were able to return to their homes after the war, a year later around 30,000 ethnic Georgians remained displaced. In an interview published in &quot;Kommersant&quot;, South Ossetian leader Eduard Kokoity said he would not allow Georgians to return.

The President of France, Nicolas Sarkozy, negotiated a ceasefire agreement on 12 August 2008. Russia recognized Abkhazia and South Ossetia as separate republics on 26 August. The Georgian government severed diplomatic relations with Russia. Russian forces left the buffer areas bordering Abkhazia and South Ossetia on 8 October and the European Union Monitoring Mission in Georgia was dispatched to the buffer areas. Since the war, Georgia has maintained that Abkhazia and South Ossetia are occupied Georgian territories.

== Role of the Georgian Orthodox Church ==

The Constitution of Georgia guarantees the special status of the Georgian Orthodox Church. The Constitution recognizes the special role of the Georgian Orthodox Church in Georgian history and nation-building. The relations between the Georgian government and the Georgian Orthodox Church were outlined in the 2002 Constitutional Agreement between the two entities, also known as the Concordat, which grants the Church special privileges, including ownership of all churches and monasteries in Georgia, allows Church involvement in state education matters, and exempts it from taxation. The Government of Georgia provides an annual 25 million GEL in direct funding to the Georgian Orthodox Church for as a compensation for persecution during the Soviet Union, a figure that does not include various other grants, tax benefits, and property transfers.

Additionally, the Georgian Orthodox Church is considered the most influential and trusted institution in the public sphere. According to a 2013 survey, 95% respondents had a favorable opinion of its work. 84% of the population in Georgia practices Orthodox Christianity, primarily the Georgian Orthodox Church. In public polls, the Church is regularly named as the most trusted institution in Georgia. Catholicos-Patriarch Ilia II is shown as the most trusted public figure in Georgia by various polls. Accordingly, the Church plays a significant role in the political life of Georgia.

===Church as a mediator===

The Church often takes the role of a mediator between the rivaling political forces, helping to defuse the tensions. In early October 1991, the Church served as a mediator between the government of President Zviad Gamsakhurdia and rebel factions of the opposition during the political crisis in Georgia. During the dispute which followed the 2008 presidential elections, Patriarch Illia II served as intermediary between the government and the opposition. The Church also often served as mediator between Georgian Dream and United National Movement. In the words of one of the priests, &quot;The administrative leadership of the church was trying to reconcile conflicting parties and to declare, that it is a mother for everyone, this side or either that side and this is the right thing. This is right in one condition, for example, United National Movement and also Georgian Dream representatives were coming to me. The &quot;daughter-in-law and mother-in-law&quot; come to me and I am trying to consolidate them, all the sides are coming. This is the right position, because the church cannot be a church for one side, if you are not trying to obviously give preference to one side&quot;.

Additionally, the Church often served as de facto diplomatic go-between between Georgia and other countries. In 2013, when Georgia and Russia were trying to normalize relations, Patriarch Illia II met Russian President Vladimir Putin and Russian Patriarch Kirill in Moscow and served as de facto diplomatic go-between between Georgia and Russia. During the meetings, the parties discussed the strained relations between the countries and said that &quot;we should spare no efforts in order to bring these relations out of the deadlock&quot;.

===Cultural politics===

The Church plays a significant role in the politics as a major conservative actor in favor of Georgia&#x27;s traditional values. The relations between the Church and the state have evolved drastically since the Rose Revolution. While the Saakashvili administration sought to push for liberal reforms until 2012, which also created an environment that allowed for public criticism of certain Church activities, the Georgian Dream government has heavily relied on its ties to the Orthodox leadership. Prior to the 2018 presidential election, the Georgian government abandoned a plan to legalize cultivation and selling of the marijuana in Georgia due to opposition from the Georgian Orthodox Church. It was alleged that the plan was designed to allow Bidzina Ivanishvili to start business project relating to cultivation and selling of the marijuana. Even though the authorities backed down from endorsing a proposed drug reform, the Georgian Constitutional Court still legalized consumption of marijuana, which also caused backlash and a protest movement from the Georgian Orthodox Church.

It has been largely assumed that the Church played a major role in the Batumi local government banning the construction of a second mosque in the municipality and in the ban by Rustavi city officials on the Catholic Church to build a local chapel.

Georgian Orthodox Church has been campaigning against the LGBT movement in Georgia. Georgian population maintains negative views about homosexuality. Georgian Patriarch Ilia II described homosexuality as a disease and immoral. The view is shared by the Georgian population, which considers homosexuality to be unacceptable. According to the Georgian Orthodox Church, the promotion of LGBT movement is depravity and unacceptable to Georgian morals and traditions. It violates the rights of majority by forcing immorality onto the traditional and Christian Georgian population. In 2013, the Georgian Orthodox Church urged the Georgian authorities to stop LGBT rally planned for Tbilisi on 17 May to mark International Day Against Homophobia, stating that the rally was a violation of the majority&#x27;s rights and an insult to the Georgian traditions. Following his comments, thousands of Georgians, led by Georgian Orthodox priests, took to the streets of Tbilisi to protest the LGBT rally. In 2014, the Georgian Orthodox Church declared 17 May &quot;a day of family sanctity&quot; and promised to protect family values. Since then, the Day of the Holiness of the Family is celebrated every year with rallies in Tbilisi and other cities. Many priests took part in protests against Tbilisi Pride in 2021 and 2023 as well.

In his sermons Ilia II has condemned homosexuality, abortion, and demanded television be censored to remove sexual content, has denounced school textbooks for insufficient patriotism, lectured against extreme liberalism and warned against pseudo-culture from abroad. He has opposed attempts to give other confessions equal status under Georgian law and has condemned international educational exchanges and working abroad as unpatriotic.

In 2014, the Georgian Parliament adopted the &quot;Law of Georgia on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination&quot;. It was recommended by the European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) Country Progress Report 2013 for Georgia as a prerequisite for finalizing the Visa Liberalization Action Plan between Georgian and the European Union. Article 1 of the law prohibited &quot;discrimination&quot; against LGBT. The Georgian Orthodox Church urged the Parliament to suspend discussions of the bill, saying that &quot;making illegality a law is a huge sin&quot; and that &quot;law will not be accepted by the believers&quot;. According to the Church, the law imposes immorality on the vast majority of Georgian population against their will. The critics have alleged that the law violates the right of association and freedom of religion.

== Ongoing debates ==
=== Electoral system ===

Electoral reform has been one of the most recurring debates in Georgian political history, with dissatisfaction being one of the most important sources of criticisms for successive administrations. The most contentious debates surround the electoral system and the electoral threshold. The electoral system was much-debated topic during the 2010 and 2017-2018 constitutional reforms. Following the 2016 parliamentary elections, the opposition proposed a change from the existing semi-proportional system to a fully proportional one for 2020, while the ruling party wanted to postpone the electoral transition to 2024. At that time, the 150-seat Georgian parliament was elected through a mixed system of 77 seats by proportional representation (5% threshold) and 73 single-seat majoritarian constituencies. This remained a divisive issue in the following years. During the summer 2019 protests, the opposition demanded once more a change to a fully proportional system for the 2020 Georgian parliamentary election which secured a promise from Georgian Dream party leader Bidzina Ivanishvili to do so. In November 2019, however, individual members of parliament voted against a bill to change the electoral system, sparking renewed protests. majoritarian members of parliament (MPs elected from particular constituencies) from Georgian Dream blocked the electoral reform, instead they proposed a bicameral legislature with a majoritarian Senate and a proportional Parliament. Similar compromise solution was made by President Salome Zourabichvili in 2020. This eventually led to a political crisis in which EU and U.S. mediated. Ultimately, the election code was changed for the 2020 elections to a mixed system of 120 proportional (1% threshold, lowered from a one-off 3%) and 30 single-seat majoritarian constituencies. It also barred any party to claim a majority of seats in the Parliament if they receive less than 40% of votes.

The proponents of the proportional electoral system claim that the majoritarian system disproportionately benefits the ruling party and does not reflects reality accurately, allowing the ruling party to win most of the seats in the local constituencies and receive many more seats than it received votes. They also argue that the system increases the chances getting a one-party or two-party parliament. The proponents of the semi-proportional or fully majoritarian systems argue that such system provides the direct link between local areas and their directly elected representatives, promotes accountability of members of Parliament and weakens the party&#x27;s vertical power. While proponents of the proportional system claim that these benefits the advantages of a majoritarian system practically do not work because of the weak democratic institutions since the majortarian MPs lobby for their own interests, their opponents call for the introduction of recall elections to solve these problems.

Another contentious debate surrounds the system of the electoral threshold, with opposition political parties calling for a cancellation of the 5% electoral threshold to guarantee more pluralistic representation. In 2022, the ruling Georgian Dream party pledged to lower the threshold from 5 to 3% if the European Council granted Georgia membership candidacy status, which has not happened yet. Out of 15 political parties currently represented in Parliament and elected through a no-threshold election in 2020, only two (Georgian Dream and Strength is in Unity) received more than 5% of the vote.

=== Oligarchy ===
The influence of businessmen in Georgian politics has been one of the most contentious topics of public debates in recent years. After serving a year as Prime Minister, Bidzina Ivanishvili, who is the wealthiest man in Georgia, resigned upon the presidential election of Giorgi Margvelashvili in October 2013 and claimed to have left politics altogether. Many observers and opposition groups accused Ivanishvili of remaining the most influential decision-maker in the ruling Georgian Dream party since then, even though he held no public post.

In 2018, Ivanishvili formally returned in politics and took over as chairman of Georgian Dream shortly before the presidential election of that year, leading the party&#x27;s endorsement of presidential candidate Salome Zourabichvili. As President, Zourabichvili would later confirm coordinating many of her decisions with Ivanishvili, including discussing her pardoning of anti-government activists arrested in 2019. Though Ivanishvili once again announced his departure from politics in early 2021, Zourabichvili would say as recently as 2022 that Ivanishvili maintained a &quot;considerable influence&quot; in the government&#x27;s activities.

According to the 2020 Transparency International report, Bidzina Ivanishvili&#x27;s influence has grown over the years (and &quot;exponentially since 2016&quot;) despite his alleged separation from politics and that he held considerable control over the Government, law enforcement agencies, the judiciary, parliamentary institutions, and the media, while maintaining power through the use of fabricated criminal cases to sway election results, electoral fraud, persecution and blackamail of political opponents, maintaining powerful decision-makers out of public office, engaging in hostile takeover practices to control the private sector, cracking down on protests. Several high-level government officials in office since 2012 held positions in Ivanishvili&#x27;s various companies before joining the public service, including: Prime Ministers Giorgi Kvirikashvili and Irakli Gharibashvili (Cartu Bank), Interior Minister Vakhtang Gomelauri (personal bodyguard of Ivanishvili before 2012), former General Prosecutor Shalva Tadumadze (his personal lawyer before 2012), State Security Service head Grigol Liluashvili (Cartu Bank), former Infrastructure Ministers Maia Tskitishvili and Nodar Javakhishvili (Cartu Bank), former Health Ministers Ekaterine Tikaradze and Davit Sergeenko (former directors of a private clinic owned by Ivanishvili), former Economy Minister Dimitri Kumsishvili (Cartu Bank), and Special State Protection Service head Anzor Chubinidze (former head of his personal bodyguard service).

Former Parliamentary chairman Davit Usupashvili, who himself served under Ivanishvili&#x27;s Georgian Dream, admitted that both the administrations of Prime Ministers of Irakli Gharibashvili and Giorgi Kvirikashvili were &quot;not entirely free in their staff appointment policies, including in the appointment of the Cabinet of Ministers and the offices where the appointment procedure is determined by law.&quot;

Though Ivanishvili formally departed from politics in January 2021, civil society and media organizations have alleged that he continues to maintain a stronghold over power. He has made no public appearance, though he has issued a handful of addresses to the public, including one calling former Prime Minister Giorgi Gakharia a &quot;traitor&quot; after the latter resigned to join the opposition and one confirming an alleged meeting with U.S. Ambassador Kelly C. Degnan shortly after the Russian invasion of Ukraine. In September 2021, a massive leak of domestic intelligence files in the State Security Service revealed a series of briefs on opposition, journalist, civil society, and diplomat activities provided by the SSS to Ivanishvili personally.

There has been significant controversy about involvement of Georgian businessman and former defence minister Davit Kezerashvili in the Georgian politics. Kezerashvili served on several high-ranking positions during the Saakashvili&#x27;s presidency, culminating in his appointment as a defence minister in 2006. He served as a defence minister during the Russo-Georgian war and resigned shortly after following the widespread criticism. During these time, the claims surfaced about Kezerashvili&#x27;s wealth, some alleging that Kezerashvili was involved in political corruption while being a defence minister. According to the Swiss outlet Tribune de Genève, Kezerashvili&#x27;s trustees registered three offshore shell companies into which he moved millions of dollars two days after his resignation from the post of defence minister of Georgia. He also left the country afterwards. The investigation was started in 2012 and in 2021, the Supreme Court of Georgia found that Kezerashvili was guilty of embezzling over €5 million during his time as defence minister under the auspices of a combat training project, later transferring this money abroad. The court sentenced Kezerashvili to ten years in prison due to these corrupt practices. Kezerashvili, living in the United Kingdom, managed to avoid imprisonment.

In 2023, the BBC published a journalistic investigation titled &quot;On the hunt for the businessmen behind a billion-dollar scam&quot;, alleging that Kezerashvili is in charge of a global network of fraudulent and unregulated investment brands which scam vulnerable people out of their savings on the pretext of making investments (so-called fraudulent &quot;call centre&quot; scheme). In the documentary, it is revealed that Kezerashvili is known &quot;Mr. Offshore&quot; and has amassed millions through these fraudulent practices. The global scamming network primarily targets European pensioners through a swindling scam. Currently, Europol, Eurojust and several national governments (including Georgian and German authorities) are cooperating to uncover these crimes and bring criminals to responsibility.

It is alleged that Kezerashvili invests large amount of money in Georgian political parties, civil society organizations and media outlets. In 2019, Kezerashvili bought the a controlling stake in Formula TV, a Georgian pro-opposition TV channel. Kezerashvili is considered to be a major financial donor to several Georgian opposition parties, including the United National Movement, Strategy Aghmashenebeli, European Georgia, Girchi — More Freedom and Droa. He has provided funds for Girchi TV, operated by the opposition Girchi — More Freedom party.

In early 2023, Kezerashvili was accused of interfering the intra-party elections in United National Movement to elect executive board. Nika Melia, chairman of United National Movement, accused Kezerashvili of plotting against him to gain &quot;informal influence&quot; over the party. Melia described him as &quot;oligarch&quot; and accused him of trying to replace him with Levan Khabeishvili, who allegedly has close ties to Kezerashvili. As a result, Khabeishvili was elected as a new chairman of United National Movement. It has been alleged that Kezerashvili played significant role in the election of Khabeishvili.

On 17 June 2022, the European Commission recommended that Georgia not receive the EU membership candidacy status before fulfilling 12 reform priorities. The fifth point is the implementation of the &quot;commitment to &#x27;de-oligarchization&#x27; by eliminating the excessive influence of vested interests in economic, political, and public life.&quot; In response, Georgian Dream introduced a bill similar to Ukrainian anti-oligarch law that would have targeted business leaders with significant involvement in politics, media, and non-governmental sector, although critics alleged that the bill would not be effective.

=== Gender and political representation ===

The issue of gender representation in Georgian politics has long been a topic of debate. In 2011, Parliament passed a bill that created an incentive program for parties to include more women in their electoral lists by increasing by 10% public funding for parties running at least 20% of women in their candidate slates.

There have been several controversial proposals in recent years to regarding the gender representation, such as imposing a gender-based quota in Parliament. Such attempts failed several times in 2017 and 2018, before being passed as part of the June 2019 constitutional amendments. Current legislation requires all political parties to include at least one woman every four candidates in their electoral lists, a number set to increase to one out of three in 2028, before the quota is set to expire in 2032.

Libertarian and conservative organizations have advocated against gender-based quotas in parliamentary elections. In 2020, the political party Girchi and journalist Tamar Chergoleishvili filed two Constitutional Court lawsuits against the quotas, one arguing against the legitimacy of imposing standards on political parties and the other opposed to the &quot;de facto&quot; ban the quotas imposed on a theoretical &quot;all-female party&quot;. They claimed that the gender-based quotas violated numerous rights, such as right to equality, as well as passive and active voting rights of party supporters and partners to fill the party list in accordance with their free will.

The Constitutional Court found the relevant legislative norms constitutional. It claimed that the quotas were meant to ensure equality and that the state has positive obligations to promote opportunities for the women to be represented in politics by introducing measures against &quot;hindering artificial barriers&quot; and &quot;factual inequalities&quot;, which the Court blamed for low representation of women in politics. The court also upheld that these were &quot;provisional measures&quot; and, due to its purpose to promote women&#x27;s representation, argued that the law did not mandate the male quota, thus greenlighting the women-only party lists. The court decision proved to be controversial, with the Girchi party unsuccessfully filling another lawsuit to challenge the norms. Parties which challenge the gender-based quotas as undemocratic or unconstitutional include Lelo, European Georgia, the Labor Party, Girchi and Conservative Movement. Certain political leaders have also questioned the role of women in politics: Labor Party leader Shalva Natelashvili spoke out against gender-based quotas and gender-based violence legislation in 2020, Girchi leader Iago Khvichia claimed that &quot;men are more courageous and biologically determined to hold power&quot;.

Based on the 2016 Global Gender Gap report published by the World Economic Forum, Georgia ranked 114th out of 144 countries in women&#x27;s participation in politics. Salome Zourabichvili became the first woman elected President of Georgia in 2018, although Nino Burjanadze served as interim President twice in 2003–2004 and 2007–2008.

Sexual harassment and threats have regularly been used as an attack method against female politicians, such as MP Tinatin Bokuchava and Eka Beselia, the latter being a victim of a series of sex tape leaks in 2016.

Other quotas have been proposed, especially for a diaspora representation in electoral lists proposed by President Zourabichvili in 2021. The United National Movement has advocated for the launch of electronic voting in future parliamentary elections as a tool to guarantee more diaspora involvement in Georgian politics.

=== Decentralization ===
There have been proposal to increase decentralization of Georgian political management at the local and international levels. A 2020 report by Freedom House gave Georgia a 2.75/7 score on local government empowerment, indicating a strongly centralized system, while the European Parliament&#x27;s 2022 report on the implementation of the Georgia-EU Association Agreement criticized the lack of decentralization. Civil Georgia has described the issue as &quot;something that the Georgian democracy has failed to come to grips with since its independence.&quot;

Inheriting a centralized system of governance under the Soviet Union, Georgia&#x27;s first attempts at decentralization came with the Local Self-Governance Act of 1996 that created elected assemblies at the town-level, even though most powers remained at the time in the hands of district governors (&quot;Gambgebeli&quot;) appointed by the President. In 2001, the American International Institute drafted a bill sponsored by civil society organizations that envisioned direct elections at the local and district levels, while dividing Tbilisi into historical districts with their own independent elected boards, but Parliament instead passed a bill sponsored by President Shevardnadze that only allowed for the direct elections of municipal mayors, except in Tbilisi and Poti.

Following the Rose Revolution, several decentralization reforms were proposed, including handing over control of public schools to local governments and decentralizing the Ministry of Internal Affairs by creating the position of district-level elected sheriffs subordinate to local governments. However, most of these reforms were eventually abandoned by the Saakashvili administration. Instead, the latter implemented a major USAID and UNDP-backed reform in 2006 that abolished all town-level assemblies, maintaining only district-level elected boards, while partially decentralizing public property ownership. Removing the country&#x27;s political center from Tbilisi was promoted by Mikheil Saakashvili, leading to the move of the Constitutional Court to Batumi in 2005 and the Parliament to Kutaisi in 2012–2018.

A major decentralization reform proposal in 2014 that would have granted large powers to local governments and created elected regional governor positions failed after receiving major opposition from the Georgian Orthodox Church, while Prime Minister Bidzina Ivanishvili talked of slowing down decentralization reforms at the time. The Government adopted a Decentralization Strategy for 2020–2025 that envisioned fiscal decentralization, although to this day, the only step taken toward this goal has been to grant local governments the power to create LEPLs.

During the 2020 parliamentary election, most major opposition parties backed proposals to decentralize law enforcement and the judiciary system by implementing elections for municipal judges and sheriffs.

The local elections system has also been the subject of debates. Some groups advocating for decentralization have called for the election of regional governors, currently appointed by the Prime Minister. Others have also argued for the election of town-level assemblies, which were abolished in 2005.

=== Polarization ===

Political polarization has been identified as a major challenge to democratic development in Georgia by both domestic and international observes, including civil society organizations, diplomats, and political figures. Analyses of recent trends have shown that a major wave of polarization between supporters of the ruling Georgian Dream party and their opposition picked up following the 2018 presidential election. President Salome Zourabichvili, herself elected in that election, has cited &quot;depolarization&quot; as a priority of her presidency, calling it a &quot;cancer of society&quot; in a speech in front of the European Parliament in 2020. A March 2023 poll by the International Republican Institute revealed that political polarization was considered the largest national challenge for 5% of Georgians, in par with &quot;ethnic and religious internal conflicts&quot; and above healthcare and public safety. Polarization was described as a national security threat in a 2019 report by the State Security Service, while &quot;fomenting extreme political polarization&quot; was citing as a &quot;major national shortcoming&quot; by the Public Defender&#x27;s Office that same year.

A considerable rise in polarization has been noted since the 2018 presidential election and the 2019 Tbilisi protests. These were followed by a string of various political crises, culminating with allegations of massive voter fraud during the 2020 parliamentary election and a refusal to recognize its results by opposition parties. During the subsequent negotiations mediated by EU Council President Charles Michel, the latter stated that, &quot;political polarization must stop&quot;. Prime Minister Giorgi Gakharia named &quot;polarization and confrontation&quot; among the reasons for his abrupt resignation in February 2021, naming them as risks to the &quot;country&#x27;s future and economic development&quot;.

While there is no analytical consensus on the roots of polarization in Georgia, President Zourabichvili has long associated it with &quot;part of the Georgian nature&quot;, identifying divisions as far back as the anti-Soviet dissident movement. Some have blamed the widespread use of unregulated social networks, tensions against modernization, and increasingly radical electoral choices as contributing factors to polarization, while others, including Zourabichvili, have laid accused Russia&#x27;s &#x27;soft power&#x27; that &quot;accentuates the divide through fake news&quot;.

During the 2020–2021 Georgian political crisis, the President Salome Zourabichvili announced a process to &quot;find ways to reach a common understanding of the recent history, to help heal the wounds of the past and to move forward&quot;. This process, which she named the National Accord Process, received the blessing of the Georgian Orthodox Church and was inaugurated on 16 December 2021 during a reception of political parties held at the Orbeliani Palace. In the event, she condemned national division, the &quot;severe polarization on every issue&quot; that she cited as a cause for the wave of emigration, and the lack of national unity in the face of separatist conflicts. At the same time, the President publicly refused to pardon Saakashvili, to respect Sandro Girgvliani&#x27;s mother Irina Enukidze&#x27;s memory, as well as that of those who died during his presidency due to government actions. The President described the process as a &quot;Georgian project&quot; without the intervention of foreign help, in a sharp contrast to previous Western attempts to negotiate an end to the political crisis. She&#x27;s also attempted to frame a new analysis of Georgia&#x27;s post-Soviet history as part of the process. The National Accord Process has been described as &quot;unstructured&quot;, while the President stated that the first stage of the process would be one of listening: she met dozens of political figures representing various political parties and civil society leaders in the first weeks of the process, including a meeting with religious leaders from more than a dozen confessions. The first hearing of the NAP was held on 17 February 2022 at the Orbeliani Palace.

UNM&#x27;s Nika Melia refused to take part in the 16 December reception but backed the process on 21 December in a speech announcing a hunger strike to call for Saakashvili&#x27;s release. The latter also applauded the initiative but called nonetheless for massive anti-governmental demonstrations. GD Chairman Irakli Kobakhidze talked of &quot;justice&quot; as the foundation for any attempt of reconciliation between political forces.

While Zourabichvili remained opposed to pardoning Saakashvili, she used in December 2021 her predecessor Giorgi Margvelashvili as a mediator with Saakashvili, although she&#x27;s rejected a proposal by Saakashvili to hold a &quot;three-presidents summit&quot;.

The National Accord Process launched in December 2021, aiming to launch non-partisan public policy discussions, as a tool against polarization, collapsed within a few months.
Among the 12 reform priorities identified in June 2022 by the European Commission for Georgia to fulfill before being granted membership candidacy status, the first recommendation is &quot;addressing political polarization&quot;. Several steps have been proposed by various opposition and civil society groups, including power-sharing agreements within Parliament, an end to inflammatory rhetoric, a decrease in the cases of assaults against political opponents, ending the use of Strategic Communication Departments to spread information against opposition groups, and allowing more debates in Parliament. Several political parties, notably Girchi and Citizens, have called for abolishing the 5% electoral threshold to promote smaller parties and reduce polarization.

The ruling Georgian Dream party suggested to unite around common goals to overcome the polarization, such as securing the EU candidate status for Georgia.

Some analysts have argued that polarization in itself was not a problem, but rather a consequence of the democratic backsliding in Georgia. The public polling organization CRRC Georgia has disagreed with the interpretation that polarization was widespread in Georgia, given that a large majority of voters were self-described non-partisan.

=== Electoral concerns ===
Georgia has struggled with instituting a free and fair electoral environment since its independence, with major controversies and accusations of voter fraud directed at the administrations of Eduard Shevardnadze (1992–2003) and Mikheil Saakashvili (2004–2012), and the Georgian Dream government (since 2012).

A 2000 report by the U.S. Congress&#x27;s Helsinki Commission noted an overreaching &quot;influence over election commissions countrywide&quot; already during the 1999 parliamentary elections, which helped Shevardnadze&#x27;s Citizens Union party secure overwhelming victories that year and in the 2000 presidential election. Cases of ballot stuffing, protocol tampering, and a lack of transparency in the vote counting process were criticized throughout the Shevardnadze era by OSCE/ODIHR observation missions.

Large-scale voter fraud led to the Rose Revolution in November 2003, while presidential and parliamentary elections held subsequently in 2004 remain known as the most free polls in Georgian history, with an OSCE report noting that they &quot;demonstrated commendable progress in relation to previous elections&quot;. However, the Saakashvili administration was also plagued with accusations of voter manipulation during the 2008 presidential elections, the results of which would not be recognized by the opposition (leading to a permanent political crisis with opposition parties continuously calling for his resignation until the end of his term). The 2012 parliamentary elections were characterized by several instances of political parties (namely the then-ruling United National Movement and its opponent Georgian Dream) engaging in voter-bribing activities.
The 2020 Georgian parliamentary elections were a point of contention between the opposition and the ruling party, with the former claiming that the election results were rigged. They have alleged large-scale interference by the State Security Service (SSS) to influence elections results during 2020 elections and previously the 2018 presidential elections. The ruling party dismissed such accusations, pointing out that the opposition and NGOs failed to provide any relevant evidence of the electoral fraud. The 2020 elections were recognized as free and fair by the OSCE Parliamentary Assembly and other international organizations, although noting some flaws. The United States embassy in Georgia, commenting on the OSCE statement, said: &quot;We call on all parties to address these deficiencies in advance of the second round and in future elections. These efforts to corrupt the electoral process through voter intimidation, vote buying, interfering with ballot secrecy, blurring of party and official activities, and violence against election observers and journalists, while not sufficient to invalidate the results, continue to mar Georgia&#x27;s electoral process and are unacceptable.&quot;

==See also==
* Monarchism in Georgia

==References==
==Further reading==
* Mataradze, Teona; Mühlfried, Florian: &quot;Leaving and Being Left Behind: Labor Migration in Georgia&quot; in the Caucasus Analytical Digeast No. 4
* Organized Crime and Illegal Trafficking in the Caucasus. Articles in the Caucasus Analytical Digest No. 9
* Cooley, Alexander; Mitchell, Lincoln: &quot;Georgia: The Interconnections between Democracy and Security&quot; in the Caucasus Analytical Digest No. 17
* Anti-Corruption Reforms in Georgia. Articles in the Caucasus Analytical Digest No. 26</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1154607" start="0" end="19" title="Politics of Georgia (country)" label="Politics in Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="44" end="69" title="Representative democracy" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="86" end="104" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q843405" start="110" end="130" title="President of Georgia" label="President of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="149" end="162" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975365" start="171" end="196" title="Prime Minister of Georgia" label="Prime Minister of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="204" end="222" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613132" start="251" end="261" title="Cabinet of Georgia" label="Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="268" end="283" title="executive power" label="executive power"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="285" end="302" title="Legislative power" label="Legislative power"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="344" end="354" title="Unicameralism" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417210" start="355" end="376" title="Parliament of Georgia" label="Parliament of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q788176" start="436" end="446" title="Autonomous entity" label="autonomous"/>
<link wikidata="Q31354462" start="458" end="466" title="Abkhazia" label="Abkhazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45693" start="471" end="477" title="Adjara" label="Adjara"/>
<link wikidata="Q23427" start="514" end="527" title="South Ossetia" label="South Ossetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130229" start="587" end="599" title="Georgian SSR" label="Georgian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="607" end="618" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q46516" start="1124" end="1138" title="Georgian Dream" label="Georgian Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057495" start="1147" end="1171" title="United National Movement (Georgia)" label="United National Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q30676252" start="1230" end="1252" title="democratic backsliding" label="democratic backsliding"/>
<link wikidata="Q154853" start="1596" end="1603" title="Diauehi" label="Diaokhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q183150" start="1608" end="1615" title="Colchis" label="Colchis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12866504" start="1690" end="1702" title="mamasakhlisi" label="mamasakhlisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470636" start="1897" end="1915" title="Samara of Mtskheta" label="Samara of Mtskheta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="1961" end="1980" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q372698" start="2023" end="2032" title="Pharnavaz I of Iberia" label="Pharnavaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q19083" start="2056" end="2073" title="Kingdom of Iberia" label="Kingdom of Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210828" start="2254" end="2262" title="eristavi" label="eristavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993301" start="2552" end="2559" title="aznauri" label="aznauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q186387" start="2693" end="2700" title="mtavari" label="mtavari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043401" start="2726" end="2732" title="tavadi" label="tavadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q154667" start="2954" end="2972" title="Kingdom of Georgia" label="Kingdom of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36760" start="3086" end="3094" title="David IV of Georgia" label="David IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q12863629" start="3219" end="3226" title="Darbazi (State Council)" label="Darbazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q244007" start="3317" end="3322" title="Tamar of Georgia" label="Tamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209822" start="3579" end="3586" title="kingdom of Kakheti" label="Kakheti"/>
<link wikidata="Q195972" start="3588" end="3594" title="kingdom of Kartli" label="Kartli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069959" start="3596" end="3603" title="kingdom of Imereti" label="Imereti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029317" start="3609" end="3617" title="Samtskhe-Saatabago" label="Samtskhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16373036" start="3748" end="3768" title="mtsignobartukhutsesi" label="mtsignobartukhutsesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156996" start="4260" end="4267" title="House of Dadiani" label="Dadiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078602" start="4269" end="4276" title="House of Gurieli" label="Gurieli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368426" start="4278" end="4298" title="House of Mukhrani" label="Bagration-Mukhraneli"/>
<link wikidata="Q19044" start="4577" end="4584" title="Svaneti" label="Svaneti"/>
<link wikidata="Q956858" start="4586" end="4596" title="Khevsureti" label="Khevsureti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142561" start="4602" end="4609" title="Tusheti" label="Tusheti"/>
<link wikidata="Q192173" start="5314" end="5338" title="Georgian Orthodox Church" label="Georgian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011051" start="5382" end="5388" title="Mestia" label="Mestia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12864866" start="5565" end="5577" title="Free Svaneti" label="Free Svaneti"/>
<link wikidata="Q200173" start="6588" end="6602" title="South Caucasus" label="South Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q330756" start="6654" end="6699" title="Transcaucasian Democratic Federative Republic" label="Transcaucasian Democratic Federative Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="6887" end="6901" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="6924" end="6935" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q523154" start="6962" end="6976" title="Caucasus campaign" label="Caucasus front"/>
<link wikidata="Q245160" start="7081" end="7111" title="Democratic Republic of Georgia" label="Democratic Republic of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191515" start="7231" end="7240" title="Menshevism" label="Menshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q969782" start="7277" end="7291" title="Noe Ramishvili" label="Noe Ramishvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q379627" start="7326" end="7339" title="Noe Zhordania" label="Noe Zhordania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548086" start="7737" end="7767" title="1919 Georgian parliamentary election" label="proportional elections in 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867028" start="7779" end="7799" title="Constituent Assembly of Georgia" label="Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700617" start="7925" end="7948" title="Social Democratic Party of Georgia" label="Social-Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548046" start="8033" end="8082" title="Georgian Socialist-Federalist Revolutionary Party" label="Georgian Socialist-Federalist Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331103" start="8084" end="8109" title="National Democratic Party (Georgia)" label="National Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q217009" start="8114" end="8154" title="Socialist-Revolutionary Party of Georgia" label="Socialist-Revolutionary Party of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188592" start="8819" end="8839" title="Second International" label="Second International"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="9456" end="9472" title="social democracy" label="social democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271999" start="9861" end="9875" title="Sochi conflict" label="Sochi conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518576" start="9897" end="9926" title="Provisional National Government of the Southwestern Caucasus" label="South West Caucasian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208479" start="9928" end="9954" title="Georgian–Ossetian conflict (1918–1920)" label="Georgian–Ossetian conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859103" start="9959" end="9978" title="Armeno-Georgian War" label="Armeno-Georgian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q31354462" start="10071" end="10079" title="Abkhazia" label="Abkhazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920405" start="10081" end="10089" title="Saingilo" label="Saingilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q45693" start="10094" end="10100" title="Adjara" label="Adjara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560833" start="10506" end="10510" title="1920 Georgian coup attempt" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="10606" end="10614" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q131337" start="10636" end="10646" title="Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="10758" end="10771" title="Soviet Russia" label="Soviet Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446368" start="10906" end="10932" title="Communist Party of Georgia (Soviet Union)" label="Communist Party of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130229" start="11408" end="11444" title="Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Soviet Socialist Republic of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028373" start="11823" end="11836" title="11th Army (RSFSR)" label="11th Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="12044" end="12064" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q333024" start="14385" end="14394" title="Pluralism (political philosophy)" label="pluralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194400" start="14485" end="14505" title="April 9 tragedy" label="9 April 1989 tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651327" start="14537" end="14560" title="1990 Georgian Supreme Soviet election" label="were scheduled for 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q12867161" start="14715" end="14739" title="Round Table—Free Georgia" label="Round Table—Free Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218435" start="14799" end="14817" title="Zviad Gamsakhurdia" label="Zviad Gamsakhurdia"/>
<link wikidata="Q96593583" start="14858" end="14872" title="Supreme Soviet of the Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Supreme Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660003" start="14896" end="14911" title="Supreme Council of the Republic of Georgia" label="Supreme Council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14958" end="14985" title="Act of Restoration of State Independence of Georgia" label="declaration of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548088" start="15261" end="15298" title="1991 Georgian presidential election" label="presidential elections held on 26 May"/>
<link wikidata="Q672781" start="15511" end="15525" title="Helsinki Watch" label="Helsinki Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q334516" start="15634" end="15645" title="Declaration of war" label="declare war"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="15650" end="15661" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586527" start="16015" end="16029" title="National Guard of Georgia" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018516" start="16097" end="16109" title="Tengiz Sigua" label="Tengiz Sigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q967713" start="16139" end="16154" title="Tengiz Kitovani" label="Tengiz Kitovani"/>
<link wikidata="Q666374" start="16190" end="16200" title="Mkhedrioni" label="Mkhedrioni"/>
<link wikidata="Q15148956" start="16251" end="16270" title="Georgian mafia" label="Georgian underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070890" start="16301" end="16310" title="Georgian Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196" start="16577" end="16583" title="Grozny" label="Grozny"/>
<link wikidata="Q19084" start="16627" end="16636" title="Mingrelia" label="Samegrelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4114520" start="16690" end="16706" title="Military Council (Georgia)" label="Military Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q969062" start="16871" end="16885" title="Jaba Ioseliani" label="Jaba Ioseliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q111359130" start="17071" end="17084" title="State Council of the Republic of Georgia" label="State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q151929" start="17096" end="17115" title="Eduard Shevardnadze" label="Eduard Shevardnadze"/>
<link wikidata="Q29242" start="17386" end="17411" title="Georgian–Ossetian conflict" label="conflict in South Ossetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209169" start="17415" end="17430" title="War in Abkhazia (1992–1993)" label="war in Abkhazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60820213" start="17581" end="17585" title="1991–1992 Georgian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651384" start="18235" end="18247" title="1995 Georgian presidential election" label="presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651336" start="18252" end="18275" title="1995 Georgian parliamentary election" label="parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q639395" start="18360" end="18385" title="Union of Citizens of Georgia" label="Citizens Union of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983269" start="18477" end="18494" title="List of political parties in Georgia (country)" label="number of parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q312493" start="18642" end="18655" title="Zurab Zhvania" label="Zurab Zhvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489727" start="18663" end="18675" title="Greens Party of Georgia" label="Greens Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367178" start="18779" end="18813" title="Democratic Union for Revival" label="Democratic Revival Union of Adjara"/>
<link wikidata="Q438430" start="18840" end="18855" title="Aslan Abashidze" label="Aslan Abashidze"/>
<link wikidata="Q43330" start="19329" end="19348" title="Mikheil Saakashvili" label="Mikheil Saakashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057495" start="19377" end="19398" title="United National Movement (Georgia)" label="New National Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998894" start="19497" end="19506" title="Burjanadze-Democrats" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19566" end="19581" title="Levan Mamaladze" label="Levan Mamaladze"/>
<link wikidata="Q229493" start="19706" end="19721" title="Nino Burjanadze" label="Nino Burjanadze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509468" start="19804" end="19825" title="Georgian Labour Party" label="Georgian Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353739" start="20691" end="20718" title="2003 Georgian parliamentary election" label="2003 parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q219470" start="20838" end="20853" title="Rose Revolution" label="Rose Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q819264" start="20931" end="20947" title="Colour revolution" label="color revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691264" start="21858" end="21868" title="Healthcare in Georgia (country)" label="healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220035" start="22734" end="22760" title="2004 Georgian presidential election" label="2004 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649873" start="23577" end="23606" title="Sandro Girgvliani murder case" label="Sandro Girgvliani murder case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318057" start="24003" end="24031" title="2007 Georgian demonstrations" label="2007 Georgian demonstrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q380730" start="24551" end="24568" title="Vano Merabishvili" label="Vano Merabishvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899592" start="24587" end="24603" title="Zurab Adeishvili" label="Zurab Adeishvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q381891" start="24626" end="24644" title="Davit Kezerashvili" label="Davit Kezerashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849150" start="25057" end="25084" title="2012 Georgian parliamentary election" label="2012 parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q46516" start="25088" end="25102" title="Georgian Dream" label="Georgian Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q57794" start="25320" end="25339" title="Bidzina Ivanishvili" label="Bidzina Ivanishvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009796" start="25403" end="25415" title="cohabitation (government)" label="cohabitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107337" start="25571" end="25592" title="Giorgi Margvelashvili" label="Giorgi Margvelashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q6066533" start="25821" end="25841" title="Irakli Gharibashvili" label="Irakli Gharibashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q15277881" start="25851" end="25871" title="Giorgi Kvirikashvili" label="Giorgi Kvirikashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q54982996" start="25885" end="25901" title="Mamuka Bakhtadze" label="Mamuka Bakhtadze"/>
<link wikidata="Q183331" start="27349" end="27363" title="Free Democrats (Georgia)" label="Free Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429418" start="27377" end="27393" title="Republican Party of Georgia" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649358" start="27411" end="27425" title="National Forum (Georgia)" label="National Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q19428917" start="27443" end="27470" title="2016 Georgian parliamentary election" label="2016 parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057495" start="27758" end="27782" title="United National Movement (Georgia)" label="United National Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q58102" start="27791" end="27806" title="Grigol Vashadze" label="Grigol Vashadze"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="28096" end="28109" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="28289" end="28291" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="28296" end="28300" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182511" start="28442" end="28453" title="De-escalation" label="de-escalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q620735" start="28454" end="28462" title="Russo-Georgian War" label="conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898539" start="29005" end="29029" title="2006 Russian ban of Moldovan and Georgian wines" label="embargo on Georgian wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4131198" start="29401" end="29416" title="Sergei Gavrilov (politician)" label="Sergei Gavrilov"/>
<link wikidata="Q19895404" start="29492" end="29532" title="Interparliamentary Assembly on Orthodoxy" label="Interparliamentary Assembly on Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q87250913" start="30767" end="30784" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Georgia (country)" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30637657" start="30827" end="30855" title="2020 Georgian parliamentary election" label="2020 parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q105984587" start="31046" end="31062" title="2020-2021 Georgian political crisis" label="political crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q950958" start="31214" end="31228" title="Charles Michel" label="Charles Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q62572609" start="31304" end="31314" title="Nika Melia" label="Nika Melia"/>
<link wikidata="Q111082088" start="32235" end="32277" title="accession of Georgia to the European Union" label="European Union membership candidacy status"/>
<link wikidata="Q814923" start="32527" end="32543" title="Potential enlargement of the European Union" label="candidate status"/>
<link wikidata="Q208019" start="32727" end="32746" title="Eastern Partnership" label="Eastern Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="32755" end="32762" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="32767" end="32774" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="33061" end="33068" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="33074" end="33087" title="Parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="33088" end="33104" title="Unitary state" label="unitary republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30461" start="33119" end="33128" title="President (government title)" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="33144" end="33157" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613132" start="33164" end="33174" title="Government of Georgia (country)" label="Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="33196" end="33205" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977835" start="33308" end="33327" title="autonomous republic" label="autonomous republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468398" start="33427" end="33450" title="Constitution of Georgia (country)" label="Constitution of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q843405" start="33457" end="33477" title="President of Georgia" label="President of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975365" start="33668" end="33693" title="Prime Minister of Georgia" label="Prime Minister of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60776608" start="33761" end="33775" title="State Minister (Georgia)" label="state ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417210" start="33821" end="33831" title="Parliament of Georgia" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164290" start="34109" end="34129" title="Constitutional Court of Georgia" label="Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644905" start="34133" end="34146" title="Supreme Court of Georgia (country)" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q12868945" start="34229" end="34252" title="High Council of Justice of Georgia" label="High Council of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983269" start="34344" end="34364" title="List of political parties in Georgia (country)" label="15 political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468398" start="34686" end="34709" title="Constitution of Georgia (country)" label="Constitution of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="34997" end="35015" title="Commander-in-chief" label="Commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q770753" start="35023" end="35046" title="Defence Forces of Georgia" label="Georgian Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q12869050" start="35556" end="35583" title="Election Administration of Georgia" label="Central Election Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q87250913" start="36110" end="36127" title="COVID-19 pandemic in Georgia (country)" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q272416" start="36618" end="36638" title="Salome Zourabichvili" label="Salome Zourabichvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q711893" start="36643" end="36663" title="Mikheil Kavelashvili" label="Mikheil Kavelashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q45842337" start="36702" end="36728" title="2018 Georgian presidential election" label="2018 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141323" start="36988" end="37005" title="Electoral college" label="Electoral college"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548030" start="37619" end="37648" title="Georgian Intelligence Service" label="Georgian Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q21659239" start="37654" end="37676" title="State Security Service of Georgia" label="State Security Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574737" start="37721" end="37753" title="Special State Protection Service of Georgia" label="Special State Protection Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6066533" start="38127" end="38147" title="Irakli Garibashvili" label="Irakli Gharibashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q46516" start="38162" end="38176" title="Georgian Dream" label="Georgian Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q13589522" start="38911" end="38925" title="Thea Tsulukiani" label="Tea Tsulukiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q31354638" start="38947" end="38965" title="Levan Davitashvili" label="Levan Davitashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q200309" start="39174" end="39196" title="Samegrelo-Zemo Svaneti" label="Samegrelo-Zemo Svaneti"/>
<link wikidata="Q38893" start="39198" end="39227" title="Racha-Lechkhumi and Kvemo Svaneti" label="Racha-Lechkhumi-Kvemo Svaneti"/>
<link wikidata="Q19038" start="39229" end="39234" title="Guria" label="Guria"/>
<link wikidata="Q19039" start="39236" end="39254" title="Samtskhe–Javakheti" label="Samtskhe-Javakheti"/>
<link wikidata="Q200045" start="39256" end="39263" title="Imereti" label="Imereti"/>
<link wikidata="Q200048" start="39265" end="39277" title="Kvemo Kartli" label="Kvemo Kartli"/>
<link wikidata="Q200047" start="39279" end="39291" title="Shida Kartli" label="Shida Kartli"/>
<link wikidata="Q203339" start="39293" end="39310" title="Mtskheta-Mtianeti" label="Mtskheta-Mtianeti"/>
<link wikidata="Q169674" start="39316" end="39323" title="Kakheti" label="Kakheti"/>
<link wikidata="Q994" start="39465" end="39472" title="Tbilisi" label="Tbilisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q31354462" start="40225" end="40233" title="Abkhazia" label="Abkhazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23427" start="40238" end="40251" title="South Ossetia" label="South Ossetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914461" start="40418" end="40450" title="Government of the Autonomous Republic of Abkhazia" label="Autonomous Republics of Abkhazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45693" start="40452" end="40458" title="Adjara" label="Adjara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738411" start="40672" end="40694" title="Majoritarian representation" label="majoritarian districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="40739" end="40758" title="Proportional representation" label="proportional system"/>
<link wikidata="Q106528743" start="40992" end="41010" title="Shalva Papuashvili" label="Shalva Papuashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164290" start="42211" end="42242" title="Constitutional Court of Georgia" label="Constitutional Court of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644905" start="42544" end="42557" title="Supreme Court of Georgia (country)" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q12868945" start="42782" end="42805" title="High Council of Justice (Georgia)" label="High Council of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q16375306" start="43449" end="43473" title="Prosecutor&amp;#x27;s Office of Georgia" label="Prosecutor&amp;#x27;s Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="43983" end="44016" title="United States Department of State" label="United States Department of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667495" start="44368" end="44392" title="National Bank of Georgia" label="National Bank of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q113469782" start="44740" end="44770" title="10th Parliament of Georgia" label="10th Convocation of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q110612600" start="45236" end="45270" title="Second Garibashvili government" label="Government of Irakli Gharibashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="45462" end="45469" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="45471" end="45477" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q60675964" start="46889" end="46906" title="Tornike Rizhvadze" label="Tornike Rizhvadze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209169" start="47129" end="47139" title="War in Abkhazia (1992–1993)" label="since 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q63431889" start="47520" end="47536" title="Ruslan Abashidze" label="Ruslan Abashidze"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111" start="48044" end="48053" title="Abkhaz language" label="Abkhazian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026350" start="48183" end="48226" title="Provisional Administration of South Ossetia" label="Provisional Administration of South Ossetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232523" start="48291" end="48307" title="Dmitry Sanakoyev" label="Dimitri Sanakoev"/>
<link wikidata="Q620735" start="48534" end="48557" title="Russo-Georgian War" label="2008 Russo-Georgian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q877642" start="48591" end="48608" title="South Ossetian Autonomous Oblast" label="autonomous oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660003" start="48737" end="48763" title="Supreme Council of the Republic of Georgia" label="Supreme Council of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655841" start="49035" end="49052" title="List of municipalities in Georgia (country)" label="69 municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q484402" start="50397" end="50404" title="Anaklia" label="Anaklia"/>
<link wikidata="Q494978" start="50542" end="50563" title="special economic zone" label="special economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651327" start="51771" end="51783" title="1990 Georgian Supreme Soviet election" label="held in 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q96593583" start="51808" end="51842" title="Supreme Soviet of the Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Supreme Soviet of the Georgian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q12867161" start="51903" end="51929" title="Round Table—Free Georgia" label="Round Table – Free Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60820213" start="52285" end="52309" title="1991–1992 Georgian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1991–92 coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827880" start="52311" end="52336" title="1992 Georgian general election" label="new legislative elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q30637657" start="52887" end="52900" title="2020 Georgian parliamentary election" label="2020 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q143023" start="53406" end="53433" title="2008 Georgian parliamentary election" label="2008 parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q610055" start="53784" end="53797" title="Kodori Valley" label="Kodori Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q94698246" start="53904" end="53923" title="2019 protests in Georgia (country)" label="2019 demonstrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220035" start="54939" end="54946" title="2004 Georgian presidential election" label="in 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q219470" start="54977" end="54992" title="Rose Revolution" label="Rose Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827880" start="55200" end="55208" title="1992 Georgian general election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q188961" start="55566" end="55582" title="decentralization" label="decentralization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4114520" start="55936" end="55952" title="Military Council (Georgia)" label="Military Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q185345" start="56464" end="56468" title="Poti" label="Poti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648797" start="57031" end="57062" title="1991 Georgian independence referendum" label="Independence Referendum of 1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q102350982" start="58160" end="58188" title="2024 Georgian parliamentary election" label="2024 parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q25475" start="59109" end="59115" title="Batumi" label="Batumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172415" start="59117" end="59124" title="Kutaisi" label="Kutaisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q182521" start="59126" end="59133" title="Rustavi" label="Rustavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q108413721" start="59253" end="59267" title="2021 Georgian local elections" label="2021 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q116916583" start="60157" end="60180" title="V-Dem Democracy indices" label="V-Dem Democracy indices"/>
<link wikidata="Q116754464" start="60221" end="60247" title="democracy in Asia" label="democratic country in Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3720127" start="60599" end="60614" title="Georgia within the Russian Empire" label="Russian Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q333411" start="60616" end="60633" title="Ilia Chavchavadze" label="Ilia Chavchavadze"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="60641" end="60658" title="Classical liberalism" label="classical liberal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60663" end="60674" title="Georgain nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4504505" start="60692" end="60708" title="Giorgi Tsereteli (writer)" label="Giorgi Tsereteli"/>
<link wikidata="Q12866779" start="60728" end="60738" title="Meore Dasi" label="Meore Dasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3653149" start="60785" end="60802" title="Egnate Ninoshvili" label="Egnate Ninoshvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q4506243" start="60807" end="60824" title="Mikhail Tskhakaya" label="Mikhail Tskhakaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069833" start="60881" end="60892" title="Mesame Dasi" label="Mesame Dasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="60896" end="60913" title="Social democracy" label="social-democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700617" start="60967" end="61001" title="Social Democratic Party of Georgia" label="Social Democratic Party of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q245160" start="61213" end="61243" title="Democratic Republic of Georgia" label="Democratic Republic of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="61306" end="61321" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q218435" start="61533" end="61551" title="Zviad Gamsakhurdia" label="Zviad Gamsakhurdia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429418" start="61565" end="61581" title="Republican Party of Georgia" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331103" start="61599" end="61624" title="National Democratic Party (Georgia)" label="National Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q221382" start="62023" end="62059" title="1991 Soviet coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt" label="1991 Soviet coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q111359130" start="62172" end="62196" title="State Council of the Republic of Georgia" label="State Council of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151929" start="62370" end="62389" title="Eduard Shevardnadze" label="Eduard Shevardnadze"/>
<link wikidata="Q639395" start="62630" end="62655" title="Union of Citizens of Georgia" label="Citizens Union of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367178" start="62691" end="62709" title="Democratic Union for Revival" label="Democratic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q438430" start="62713" end="62728" title="Aslan Abashidze" label="Aslan Abashidze"/>
<link wikidata="Q43330" start="62811" end="62830" title="Mikheil Saakashvili" label="Mikheil Saakashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651346" start="63136" end="63165" title="Christian-Democratic Movement (Georgia)" label="Christian-Democratic Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q680769" start="63357" end="63375" title="The Way of Georgia" label="The Way of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q728094" start="63654" end="63673" title="Levan Gachechiladze" label="Levan Gachechiladze"/>
<link wikidata="Q183331" start="63696" end="63710" title="Free Democrats (Georgia)" label="Free Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q937937" start="63735" end="63750" title="Irakli Alasania" label="Irakli Alasania"/>
<link wikidata="Q57794" start="63903" end="63922" title="Bidzina Ivanishvili" label="Bidzina Ivanishvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649358" start="64053" end="64067" title="National Forum (Georgia)" label="National Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q30646238" start="64289" end="64314" title="Ilia Chavchavadze Society" label="Ilia Chavchavadze Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q13612721" start="64323" end="64349" title="Industry Will Save Georgia" label="Industry Will Save Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q97226505" start="64594" end="64613" title="Solidarity Alliance of Georgia" label="Solidarity Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q107053787" start="64622" end="64633" title="For Georgia" label="For Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q115806730" start="64646" end="64665" title="People&amp;#x27;s Power (Georgia)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q28408322" start="64733" end="64749" title="European Georgia — Movement for Liberty" label="European Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48988210" start="64761" end="64784" title="Strategy Aghmashenebeli" label="Strategy Aghmashenebeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q104521954" start="64896" end="64917" title="Girchi — More Freedom" label="Girchi – More Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q113134145" start="64957" end="64961" title="Droa" label="Droa"/>
<link wikidata="Q321780" start="65733" end="65760" title="Abkhaz–Georgian conflict" label="Georgian-Abkhazian conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446368" start="67659" end="67674" title="Communist Party of Georgia (Soviet Union)" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057495" start="67775" end="67799" title="United National Movement (Georgia)" label="United National Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q22093572" start="67824" end="67844" title="Alliance of Patriots of Georgia" label="Alliance of Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67935" end="67956" title="Alt-Info#Conservative Movement/Alt Info" label="Conservative Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q84628662" start="69987" end="69991" title="Lelo for Georgia" label="Lelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q108525566" start="70027" end="70046" title="European Socialists (Georgia)" label="European Socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q115806730" start="70221" end="70240" title="People&amp;#x27;s Power (Georgia)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q31354462" start="71915" end="71923" title="Abkhazia" label="Abkhazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23427" start="71928" end="71941" title="South Ossetia" label="South Ossetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218877" start="72065" end="72085" title="New Union Treaty" label="renewed Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209169" start="72227" end="72254" title="War in Abkhazia (1992–1993)" label="War in Abkhazia (1992–1993)"/>
<link wikidata="Q558773" start="72830" end="72846" title="Lyudvig Chibirov" label="Lyudvig Chibirov"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="72994" end="73000" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q151929" start="73207" end="73226" title="Eduard Shevardnadze" label="Eduard Shevardnadze"/>
<link wikidata="Q23427" start="73270" end="73283" title="South Ossetia" label="South Ossetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239" start="73315" end="73326" title="Vladikavkaz" label="Vladikavkaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025834" start="73339" end="73343" title="Dzau" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q208352" start="73360" end="73367" title="Borjomi" label="Borjomi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145466" start="73441" end="73444" title="Internally displaced person" label="IDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q843405" start="73885" end="73905" title="President of Georgia" label="President of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q959303" start="73978" end="73989" title="War in Abkhazia (1998)" label="six-day war"/>
<link wikidata="Q151929" start="74090" end="74109" title="Eduard Shevardnadze" label="Eduard Shevardnadze"/>
<link wikidata="Q208383" start="74298" end="74307" title="ceasefire" label="ceasefire"/>
<link wikidata="Q610055" start="74536" end="74549" title="Kodori Valley" label="Kodori Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q312493" start="74924" end="74937" title="Zurab Zhvania" label="Zurab Zhvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q151810" start="74964" end="74978" title="Eduard Kokoity" label="Eduard Kokoity"/>
<link wikidata="Q39420" start="74996" end="75001" title="Sochi" label="Sochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q219470" start="75213" end="75228" title="Rose Revolution" label="Rose Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q182219" start="75275" end="75296" title="Georgia-Russia relations" label="relations with Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25475" start="75563" end="75569" title="Batumi" label="Batumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q500888" start="75574" end="75585" title="Akhalkalaki" label="Akhalkalaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q242593" start="75715" end="75722" title="Gudauta" label="Gudauta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680686" start="75799" end="75849" title="Adapted Conventional Armed Forces in Europe Treaty" label="Adapted Conventional Armed Forces in Europe Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4594808" start="75861" end="75881" title="1999 Istanbul summit" label="1999 Istanbul summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893259" start="75896" end="75928" title="2008 Russo-Georgian diplomatic crisis" label="Russo-Georgian diplomatic crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q208383" start="76477" end="76486" title="ceasefire" label="ceasefire"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125668" start="76714" end="76729" title="self-proclaimed" label="self-proclaimed"/>
<link wikidata="Q79863" start="76757" end="76767" title="Tskhinvali" label="Tskhinvali"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590797" start="76880" end="76897" title="Pavel Felgenhauer" label="Pavel Felgenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q779763" start="76992" end="76999" title="pretext" label="pretext"/>
<link wikidata="Q932910" start="77214" end="77225" title="Roki Tunnel" label="Roki Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456466" start="77418" end="77435" title="peace enforcement" label="peace enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601767" start="77470" end="77483" title="Military of Abkhazia" label="Abkhaz forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344156" start="77527" end="77554" title="Battle of the Kodori Valley" label="Battle of the Kodori Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404198" start="77783" end="77834" title="Ethnic cleansing of Georgians in South Ossetia" label="ethnic cleansing against Georgians in South Ossetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151810" start="78144" end="78158" title="Eduard Kokoity" label="Eduard Kokoity"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="78209" end="78228" title="President of France" label="President of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q329" start="78230" end="78245" title="Nicolas Sarkozy" label="Nicolas Sarkozy"/>
<link wikidata="Q31354462" start="78493" end="78501" title="Abkhazia" label="Abkhazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q539241" start="78541" end="78585" title="European Union Monitoring Mission in Georgia" label="European Union Monitoring Mission in Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184784" start="78696" end="78725" title="Russian-occupied territories in Georgia" label="occupied Georgian territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752412" start="78964" end="78979" title="nation-building" label="nation-building"/>
<link wikidata="Q192173" start="79035" end="79059" title="Georgian Orthodox Church" label="Georgian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q11098821" start="79081" end="79135" title="Concordat of 2002" label="2002 Constitutional Agreement between the two entities"/>
<link wikidata="Q511502" start="80046" end="80053" title="Ilia II" label="Ilia II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816176" start="80580" end="80606" title="2008 Georgian presidential election" label="2008 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q44187" start="81687" end="81693" title="Patriarch Kirill of Moscow" label="Kirill"/>
<link wikidata="Q57794" start="82748" end="82767" title="Bidzina Ivanishvili" label="Bidzina Ivanishvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q182521" start="83266" end="83273" title="Rustavi" label="Rustavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="83296" end="83311" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q819214" start="84040" end="84076" title="International Day Against Homophobia" label="International Day Against Homophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q994" start="84294" end="84301" title="Tbilisi" label="Tbilisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13362779" start="84305" end="84327" title="2013 Tbilisi anti-homophobic rally protests" label="protest the LGBT rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q192173" start="84342" end="84366" title="Georgian Orthodox Church" label="Georgian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811480" start="84444" end="84457" title="family values" label="family values"/>
<link wikidata="Q688503" start="85887" end="85907" title="right of association" label="right of association"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="85912" end="85931" title="freedom of religion" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="86697" end="86724" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="86772" end="86786" title="constituency" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q94698246" start="86854" end="86865" title="2019–2020 Georgian protests" label="summer 2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q30637657" start="86958" end="86994" title="2020 Georgian parliamentary election" label="2020 Georgian parliamentary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q46516" start="87024" end="87038" title="Georgian Dream" label="Georgian Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q57794" start="87052" end="87071" title="Bidzina Ivanishvili" label="Bidzina Ivanishvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738411" start="87222" end="87234" title="Majoritarian representation" label="majoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="87587" end="87589" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="87594" end="87598" title="United States" label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q1196663" start="88875" end="88891" title="recall elections" label="recall elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q8886" start="89223" end="89239" title="European Council" label="European Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q56274263" start="89459" end="89479" title="United National Movement – United Opposition &amp;quot;Strength is in Unity&amp;quot; Faction" label="Strength is in Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="90750" end="90776" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International"/>
<link wikidata="Q20557144" start="91653" end="91671" title="Vakhtang Gomelauri" label="Vakhtang Gomelauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q105729181" start="91827" end="91845" title="Grigol Liluashvili" label="Grigol Liluashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q60361123" start="91892" end="91909" title="Maya Tskitishvili" label="Maia Tskitishvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q89066171" start="91972" end="91991" title="Ekaterine Tikaradze" label="Ekaterine Tikaradze"/>
<link wikidata="Q15108091" start="91996" end="92011" title="Davit Sergeenko" label="Davit Sergeenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q24008067" start="92097" end="92116" title="Dimitri Kumsishvili" label="Dimitri Kumsishvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178707" start="92270" end="92287" title="David Usupashvili" label="Davit Usupashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287680" start="92967" end="92982" title="Giorgi Gakharia" label="Giorgi Gakharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24238958" start="93113" end="93128" title="Kelly C. Degnan" label="Kelly C. Degnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="93147" end="93174" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q381891" start="93522" end="93540" title="Davit Kezerashvili" label="Davit Kezerashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q620735" start="93768" end="93786" title="Russo-Georgian war" label="Russo-Georgian war"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="94743" end="94746" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q207203" start="95368" end="95375" title="Europol" label="Europol"/>
<link wikidata="Q940784" start="95377" end="95385" title="Eurojust" label="Eurojust"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="95739" end="95749" title="Formula TV" label="Formula TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057495" start="95900" end="95924" title="United National Movement (Georgia)" label="United National Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q48988210" start="95926" end="95949" title="Strategy Aghmashenebeli" label="Strategy Aghmashenebeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q28408322" start="95951" end="95967" title="European Georgia" label="European Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104521954" start="95969" end="95990" title="Girchi — More Freedom" label="Girchi — More Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q113134145" start="95995" end="95999" title="Droa" label="Droa"/>
<link wikidata="Q105080892" start="96470" end="96488" title="Levan Khabeishvili" label="Levan Khabeishvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="96738" end="96757" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q110064473" start="97129" end="97156" title="The Bill on Oligarchs in Ukraine" label="Ukrainian anti-oligarch law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501335" start="97399" end="97420" title="Gender diversity" label="gender representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q24817923" start="98360" end="98366" title="Girchi" label="Girchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233280" start="99052" end="99072" title="positive obligations" label="positive obligations"/>
<link wikidata="Q84628662" start="99780" end="99784" title="Lelo for Georgia" label="Lelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q28408322" start="99786" end="99802" title="European Georgia — Movement for Liberty" label="European Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509468" start="99808" end="99819" title="Georgian Labour Party" label="Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q24817923" start="99821" end="99827" title="Girchi" label="Girchi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="99832" end="99853" title="Alt-Info#Conservative Movement/Alt Info" label="Conservative Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q252719" start="99952" end="99971" title="Shalva Natelashvili" label="Shalva Natelashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q61137934" start="100071" end="100084" title="Iago Khvichia" label="Iago Khvichia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170418" start="100238" end="100258" title="World Economic Forum" label="World Economic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q65284961" start="100629" end="100646" title="Tinatin Bokuchava" label="Tinatin Bokuchava"/>
<link wikidata="Q16402990" start="100651" end="100662" title="Eka Beselia" label="Eka Beselia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057495" start="100872" end="100896" title="United National Movement (Georgia)" label="United National Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="101221" end="101234" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="101348" end="101367" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124483" start="101490" end="101503" title="Civil Georgia" label="Civil Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649223" start="102590" end="102618" title="Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia" label="Ministry of Internal Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q578478" start="102670" end="102677" title="sheriff" label="sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q25475" start="103176" end="103182" title="Batumi" label="Batumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172415" start="103213" end="103220" title="Kutaisi" label="Kutaisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q192173" start="103440" end="103464" title="Georgian Orthodox Church" label="Georgian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082509" start="104327" end="104349" title="Political polarization" label="Political polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976268" start="105005" end="105039" title="International Republican Institute" label="International Republican Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q16375406" start="105474" end="105503" title="Public Defender of Georgia" label="Public Defender&amp;#x27;s Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q105984587" start="106835" end="106870" title="2020–2021 Georgian political crisis" label="2020–2021 Georgian political crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q272416" start="106886" end="106906" title="Salome Zourabichvili" label="Salome Zourabichvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q192173" start="107152" end="107176" title="Georgian Orthodox Church" label="Georgian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649873" start="107590" end="107607" title="Sandro Girgvliani murder case" label="Sandro Girgvliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q13107337" start="109061" end="109082" title="Giorgi Margvelashvili" label="Giorgi Margvelashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q107074183" start="110046" end="110054" title="Citizens (Georgia)" label="Citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="111018" end="111031" title="United States Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152740" start="111039" end="111058" title="Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe" label="Helsinki Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651340" start="111160" end="111188" title="1999 Georgian parliamentary election" label="1999 parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992941" start="111481" end="111486" title="Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights" label="ODIHR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816176" start="111934" end="111961" title="2008 Georgian presidential election" label="2008 presidential elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q21659239" start="112602" end="112624" title="State Security Service of Georgia" label="State Security Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110896" start="112942" end="112969" title="Parliamentary Assembly of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="OSCE Parliamentary Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4301379" start="113592" end="113613" title="Monarchism in Georgia" label="Monarchism in Georgia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12062" wikidata="Q282182" url="?curid=12062" title="Economy of Georgia (country)">
<text>The economy of Georgia is an emerging free market economy. Its gross domestic product fell sharply following the dissolution of the Soviet Union but recovered in the mid-2000s, growing in double digits thanks to the economic and democratic reforms brought by the peaceful Rose Revolution. Georgia continued its economic progress since &quot;moving from a near-failed state in 2003 to a relatively well-functioning market economy in 2014&quot;. In 2007, the World Bank named Georgia the World&#x27;s number one economic reformer.

Georgia&#x27;s economy is supported by a relatively free and transparent atmosphere in the country. According to Transparency International&#x27;s 2018 report, Georgia is the least corrupt nation in the Black Sea region, outperforming all of its immediate neighbors, as well as nearby European Union states. With a mixed news media environment, Georgia is also the only country in its immediate neighborhood where the press is not deemed unfree.

Since 2014, Georgia is part of the European Union&#x27;s Free Trade Area, with the EU continuing to be the country&#x27;s largest trading partner, accounting for over a quarter of Georgia&#x27;s total trade turnover. Following the EU trade pact, 2015 was marked by further increase in bilateral trade, whereas trade with the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) decreased precipitously.

== History ==
Before the 20th century Georgia had a largely agrarian economy.

Georgia&#x27;s modern economy has traditionally revolved around Black Sea tourism, cultivation of citrus fruits, tea and grapes; mining of manganese and copper; and the output of a large industrial sector producing wine, metals, machinery, chemicals, and textiles.

Like many post-Soviet countries, Georgia went through a period of sharp economic decline during the 1990s, partially due to persistent tax evasion. &quot;During that period, international financial institutions played a critical role in Georgia&#x27;s budgetary calculations. Multilateral and bilateral grants and loans totaled 116.4 million lari in 1997; they totaled 182.8 million lari in 1998.&quot;

Economic recovery had been hampered by the separatist disputes in Abkhazia and South Ossetia, resistance to reform on the part of some corrupt and reactionary factions, and the Asian financial crisis of 1997. Under the leadership of President Shevardnadze (in office 1995–2003), the government nonetheless made some progress on basic market reforms: it liberalized all prices and most trade, introduced a stable national currency (the lari), and massively downsized government.

During the late 1990s more than 10,500 small enterprises had been privatized, and although privatization of medium- and large-sized firms had been slow, more than 1,200 medium – and large-sized companies had been set up as joint stock companies. A law and a decree establishing the legal basis and procedures for state property privatization reduced the number of companies controlled by the state.

The United States began assisting Georgia in the process of reform soon after the country gained independence from the Soviet Union. Gradually, the focus shifted from humanitarian to technical and institution-building programs. Provision of legal and technical advisors was complemented by training opportunities for parliamentarians, law enforcement officials, and economic advisers.

==Recent macroeconomic performance==
Over the last few years, the Georgian economy has been one of the fastest in the FSU. Since 2003&#x27;s Rose Revolution, the new Government of Georgia implemented broad and comprehensive reforms, that touched every aspect of the country&#x27;s life. Economic reforms were addressed to liberalization of the economy and provision of sustainable economic growth, based on the private sector development. The establishment of an attractive business environment led to a significant inflow of Foreign Direct Investment in the country, facilitating high economic growth rates.

In 2013, Georgia ranked in the top ten countries in the Emerging Market Energy Security Growth Prosperity Index, according to an article published by &quot;CISTRAN Finance&quot; news. The index identifies emerging nations that have strong growth potential based on energy reserves and GDP.

Following reforms, Georgia&#x27;s economy successfully diversified and began showing rapid upward growth, averaging over 10% annual real GDP growth from 2004 to 2007, peaking at 12.3 percent in 2007. Overall, from 2004 to 2007, the economy of Georgia expanded by 35%.

Georgia&#x27;s economic liberalization policy demonstrated some resilience to external shocks – war with Russia in 2008 and the global financial crisis. Despite this, in 2008 Georgia economy grew by 2.3%. After contracting in 2009 (−3.8%), the economy recovered soon after, growing 6.3% in 2010 and 7.0% in 2011. The unemployment rate shrunk from 16.9% to 16.3% between 2009 and 2010.

In 2013, the annual inflation rate in Georgia equaled 2.4%. It has been decreased significantly after 11.2% in 2010. Growth of inflation rate was the result of increasing food prices in the world and essential share of the inflation fluctuations came on variability of food prices, as far as the share of food is relatively high in consumer basket of Georgia.

In 2011, IMF estimated current account balance of Georgia was −1.489 BN USD. Georgia has moderate deficits among the European and Transcaucasian Post-Soviet states. The trade with Georgia&#x27;s major partners continued growing. As an example, in 2016, Georgia exported $87,263.53 worth of products to Armenia, and imported $144,931.92 worth of products from Armenia. Deficits in the current account have been more than offset by strong foreign capital inflows, allowing the Georgian currency to appreciate.

The government has managed to preserve financial stability thanks to the considerable aid provided by the US and international institutions. EBRD analysts believe that substantial international financial support and remittances from workers living abroad will cover the current account deficit in the medium term. IMF positively evaluated the government&#x27;s economic policy.

== Foreign direct investment in Georgia ==

Large inflows of Foreign direct investment (FDI) have been a driving factor behind a rapid economic growth in Georgia since 2003.

An attractive and liberal investment environment and equal approach to local and foreign investors makes the country an attractive destination for FDI.

Stable economic development, liberal and free market oriented economic policy, 6 taxes only and reduced tax rates, reduced number of licenses and permissions, dramatically simplified administrative procedures, preferential trade regimes with foreign countries, advantageous geographic location, well-developed, integrated and multimodal transport infrastructure, educated, skilled and competitive workforce presents a solid ground for successful business in Georgia. In addition to other advantages, Georgia has Free Industrial Zones, where companies are exempt from all the corporate taxes.

From 2003 to 2011, FDI in Georgia amounted to US$8511.5 million. The highest volume of FDI – 2,015.0 million USD was reached in 2007, with 69.3% yearly growth. High rate of investment was maintained until 2008. In 2007, the EC27 accounted for over 56% of FDI inflows and in 2008 the EC, UAE, and Turkey accounted for nearly 60%. In 2009, FDI inflows were characterized by decreasing trend. The main reasons of decreasing were external shocks – Russian-Georgian war and the influences of global financial crisis.

In the first half of 2017, Armenian Investments to Georgia nearly doubled year-on-year to $5.6 million, while investments from Azerbaijan dropped by 20.3% year-on-year to the overall $224.18 million.

• In 2009–2011 the largest share of FDI felt on Industry sector (31.2) amounted to US$765 million, real estate sector (15.8%) amounting to US$389 million.

The table below shows FDI stock as a percentage of GDP in selected FSU countries. For statistical purposes, FDI is defined as a foreign company owning 10% or more of the ordinary shares of an incorporated firm or its equivalent for an unincorporated firm.

Foreign direct investment in the country of Georgia by year.

==Trade==
Since 2014, Georgia is part of the European Union&#x27;s Free Trade Area, with the EU continuing to be the country&#x27;s largest trading partner, accounting for over a quarter of Georgia&#x27;s total trade turnover. Following the EU trade pact, 2015 was marked by further increase in bilateral trade, whereas trade with the Russian-led Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) decreased by 22%.

In 2023, Georgia signed comprehensive economic agreement with UAE, under which two countries established free trade.

As of 2015, in the order of magnitude, Georgia&#x27;s main exports were: copper ores and concentrates, ferroalloys, hazelnut, medications, nitrogen fertilizers, wine, crude oil, mineral water, non-denatured ethanol and spirits.

In 2015, Georgia&#x27;s main imports, in the order of magnitude, were: oil products, vehicles, hydrocarbons, copper ores and concentrates, mobile phones and other wireless phones, wheat, cigarettes, iron tubes and pipes, structures and parts of structures of iron.

In 2019, Georgian exports to Armenia grew by 2% compared to the previous year, while imports decreased by 7%. Georgia exported 98.3 million $ worth of products to Armenia (4% of total exports), and imported 46.9 million $ (1% of total imports) in 2019.
== International money transfers ==
Money transferred from abroad to Georgia in 2019 amounted to US$1.73 billion, according to figures released by Georgia&#x27;s central bank. Money transfers from Russia, which has been the largest source of remittances for Georgia for many years already, stood at US$428.89 million in 2019.

Among other largest sources of remittances for Georgia are: Greece with US$192.56 million in 2019, Italy – USD 239.17 million; the United States – USD 178.41 million; Ukraine – USD 47.3 million; Spain – USD 30.9 million; Turkey – USD 94.85 million; Kazakhstan – USD 26.63 million; the UK – USD 16.89 million; Israel – USD 162.55 million; Azerbaijan – USD 22.17 million; Germany – USD 49.81 million; France – USD 26.37 million; Canada – USD 14.21 million.

==Institutional reforms==

Under the Saakashvili administration, Georgia undertook a number of profound institutional reforms aimed at modernizing the economy and improving the business climate. Kakha Bendukidze (1956–2014) was one of the most notable team members during his governance, coordinating the Ministry of Economical Reforms of Georgia. Implemented institutional reforms created an effective, professional and transparent public sector, motivated to protect the principles of democracy. Due to the economic deregulation policy, number of state regulated spheres sharply decreased, as well as regulation procedures were simplified.

Georgia succeeded in fighting against corruption, that was one of the main obstacles for development. The success of Georgia is recognized by different rating agencies. According to the Transparency International, Georgia is the top country in the post-Soviet region in terms of fighting corruption. According to the Corruption Perception Index published by Transparency International, Georgia ranked 50th in 2014 (up from 113rd in 2004). &quot;Global Corruption Barometer 2010&quot; ranks Georgia the first among world countries in the term of decreasing corruption level. According to International Finance Corporation Business Perception Survey 2012, only 0.11% of surveyed (1 respondent out of 920) named corruption as a problem in relations with public organizations.

Georgia has the most liberal tax jurisdiction in Europe. The number of taxes is decreased from 21 to only 6, tax rates were reduced also. In addition, significant procedural and institutional reforms were implemented – simplified system of tax disputes was established, tax administration system was streamlined and most of the taxes currently are paid on-line.

Due to the customs reform, customs procedures were dramatically simplified. Customs tariffs reform significantly simplified and sharply reduced the costs connected to the foreign trade. The number of import tariffs was abolished on approximately 90% of products and only 3 tariff rates exist instead of the previous 16. Currently, 86% of tariff lines are duty-free compared to 26% in 2005. Modern Customs Clearance Zones were established and customs clearness procedures could be made starting from 15 minutes only.

Modernization of the system of licenses and permits resulted in decrease in the number of licenses and permits and simplification of related administrative procedures.

Privatization of state property – Starting from 2004, provision of a transparent privatization policy was one of the important reforms of the Government of Georgia, that was addressed to denationalization of the remained state property in order to attract foreign investments, increase and develop the private sector and effective use of country&#x27;s resources.

Liberal labour legislation simplified the relations between employers and employees. As a result of the reform, ”Heritage Foundation” and other analytical centers named Georgian Labour Code as one of the most liberal in the world because it significantly reduced hiring and firing expenses.

Georgia offers the most simplified procedures for registration of business, property, for getting different documentations via “One-Stop-Shops”, where the most procedures could be done on-line. Doing Business 2012 report (WB) places Georgia 16th in terms of Ease of Doing Business index (up from 112 in 2006), naming Georgia as the top reformer amongst the 174 countries over the last 5 years. Georgia is amongst the leaders in other ratings, namely, registering property – first place; Dealing Construction Permits – 4th place, starting a Business – 7th place; Getting Credits – 8th place.

===Licensing regulation===

Due to the reform of the system of licenses and permits, the number of licenses and permits was reduced by 90%. Currently, licenses and permits are only used in the production of highly risky goods and services; also usage of natural resources and specific activities. The procedures of issuing licenses and permits were significantly simplified, the “One-Stop Shop” and “Silence is Consent” principles were introduced which implies that if a person is not notified with argumentation rejection about the issuance of license in limited framework, the license is considered as issued from the relevant body.

The procedures for getting a construction permit was dramatically simplified, and it requires just 3 procedures. The time for getting the construction permits was sharply reduced. According to Doing Business 2012 (WB) Georgia is the best performer in the Eastern Europe and Central Asia (ECA) region and places on 4-th position in the world. The number of procedures and days, the cost (% of income per capita) is much lower, than in ECA region and OECD countries.

Things have changed after the new Law on Issuance of Licenses and permits was introduced in 2005. The approval process for building a warehouse in Georgia is now more efficient than in all EU countries except Denmark.

===Tax collection===

Since January, 2011 the new Tax Code came into force. It unifies the old Tax and Customs Codes. The new Tax Code increased confidence towards the Georgian tax system and enhanced trust in the Georgian tax authorities, by improving communication between taxpayers and the tax authorities, by protecting the taxpayers’ rights, by making administration more efficient, and by harmonizing the Georgian laws with the best international tax practices and EU directives.

Only 6 taxes exist in Georgia with law tax rates: Income Tax (personal income tax) 20%; Profit Tax (corporate tax) – 15%; Value Added Tax – 18%; Excise – varies; Property Tax up to 1% of the self-assessed value of property; Customs Tax – 0%; 5%; 12%. In addition, significant procedural and institutional reforms were performed, simplified tax dispute settlement, streamlined tax administration decreased the time and cost of paying taxes. Georgia made paying taxes easier for firms by simplifying the reporting for value added tax and introducing electronic filling and payment of taxes.

The number of import tariffs was abolished on approximately 90% of products and only 3 tariff rates (0%, 5%, 12%) exist instead of the previous 16. Georgia sets Import Taxes on only several kinds of agricultural and manufactured goods . In addition, there are no quantitative restrictions (quotas) on imports and exports.

===Labour regulation===

With unemployment around 16% and many jobs in the informal sector, Georgia undertook a far-reaching reform of labour regulation. The new Labour Code was adopted on 17 December 2010. The new law eases restrictions on the duration of term contracts and the number of overtime hours, and discards the premium required for overtime work. It also eliminates the requirement to notify and get permission from the labour union to fire a redundant worker. The new law provides for 1 month&#x27;s severance pay at least, replacing complex rules under which required notice periods depended on seniority and the manager had to write long explanations to labor unions and the relevant ministry. In general, new regulations make the Georgian labor market much more flexible.

Coupled with the fact that Georgia also reduced the social security contributions paid on wages by businesses from 31% to 20% in 2005, and abolished them entirely starting January 2008, these changes make Georgia the sixth-easiest place to employ workers globally.

=== Judicial procedure ===

Reducing corruption in the courts was one of the chief priorities of the new government. Since 2004, when the Saakashvili administration came in, seven judges have been detained for taking bribes and 15 brought before the criminal courts. In 2005 alone, the judicial disciplinary council reviewed cases against 99 judges, about 40% of the judiciary, and 12 judges were dismissed. At the same time, judges’ salaries were increased fourfold, to reduce dependence on bribe money.

According to Global Property Guide index, Georgia currently holds 40 points out of 100. That stands for &quot;The court system is highly inefficient, and delays are so long that they deter the use of the court system. Corruption is present, and the judiciary is influenced by other branches of government. Expropriation is possible.&quot;

==Unemployment==

Unemployment has been a persistent problem in Georgia ever since the country gained independence in 1991. According to the National Statistics Office, unemployment rate stood at 16.9% in 2013 and it has decreased at 16.4% in 2023.

Nearly a half of Georgia&#x27;s population lives in rural areas, where low-intensity self-sufficient farming provides the principal source of livelihood. Georgian statistics service puts individual persons into the category of self-employed workers. As of 2007 416,900 persons were listed as self-employed in agriculture. For large families, heads of households are typically described as &quot;individual entrepreneurs&quot;, members of the family that help to cultivate land are classified as &quot;unpaid family business workers&quot;. The use of this methodology produces relatively low unemployment rates for rural areas rather in urban areas and in Tbilisi.
Neighbouring countries show somewhat similar results. For example, Armenia in 2015 had 18.26% unemployment rate, which is 532.644 people.

== Structure of the economy ==

=== Energy ===
In recent years Georgia has fully deregulated its electricity sector, and now there is free and open access to the market.

Georgia has a sizable hydroelectric capacity, a factor that has become an increasingly important component of its energy supplies and policies. The country&#x27;s topography and abundance of hydro resources give it serious potential to dominate hydroelectric markets in the Caucasus region. The Georgian Ministry of Energy estimates that there are around 26,000 rivers within Georgian territory, with approximately 300 of those rivers being significant in terms of energy production. The Ministry also claims that current projects for hydroelectric power plants total around US$2.4 billion. Alexander Khetaguri, the former Georgian Minister of Energy, proposed new hydroelectric projects worth well over 22,000 megawatts of capacity, which would cost over US$40 billion and would be privately funded. These projects alone would transform Georgia into the world&#x27;s second-largest hydropower producer.

In 2007, Georgia generated 8.34 billion kilowatt-hours of electricity while consuming 8.15 billion kWh. Most of Georgia&#x27;s electricity generation comes from hydroelectric facilities. In 2005, the country generated 6.17 billion kWh of hydropower, or 86% of total electricity generation. In 2006, rapid growth in hydroelectricity output (by 27%) was matched by equally strong growth in thermal electricity (by 28%). Since then, the share of hydropower has grown even bigger, when Inguri power plant reached full capacity in November 2007. In addition to state-owned Inguri, which has an installed capacity of 1,300 megawatts, Georgia&#x27;s hydroelectric infrastructure consists of many small private plants.

In recent years, Georgia became a major exporter of electricity in the region, exporting 1.3 billion KWh in 2010. Hydropower stations of Georgia produce 80-85% of the electricity utilized within the country, the remaining 15–20% is produced by thermal power stations. According to Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources, so far, Georgia has been exploiting only 18% of its hydro resource potential.

Georgia&#x27;s reliance on hydropower leaves the country vulnerable to climatic fluctuations, which requires imports to meet seasonal shortages, but also opens the possibility of exports during wetter conditions. Georgia still has the potential to increase hydro-generated power, through refurbishing existing facilities, as well as constructing new hydropower plants.

One of the more difficult realities facing many of the former Soviet republics was the loss of Soviet-subsidized fuel and utility transfers. Prior to 2004, Georgia&#x27;s transmission network was in critical condition, with electricity blackouts being common throughout the country. In response to mounting pressures, the Georgian government initiated a series of legislative reforms in 1998 and 1999 to begin to develop the power sector and electricity markets. While measures were taken to unbundle and liberalize the energy sector, a new law was drafted and Georgia&#x27;s independent regulatory authority, the Georgian National Energy Regulatory Commission (GNERC), was formed. In addition to providing government subsidies, the GNERC was able to increase the prices of electricity and natural gas in Georgia to buffer the costs of recovery from the state&#x27;s reform process. Following these reforms, distribution has been increasingly more reliable, approaching consistent 24-hour-a-day services. Investments in infrastructure have been made as well.
Currently, a privately owned Energo-Pro Georgia, controls 62.5% of the electricity distribution market.

Georgia has transmission lines that connect its power grid to Russia, Turkey, Armenia and Azerbaijan. In July 2008, Georgia began exporting electricity to Russia through the Kavkasioni power line. Later in 2009, Georgian Energy Minister Alexander Khetaguri incited scandal for a business deal struck with the Russian energy company, Inter RAO, to jointly manage the Georgian Inguri hydropower plant for 10 years. Khetaguri&#x27;s proposal would entail a cash flow of around US$9 million into Georgia for use of the plant. Tensions ran high, however, as the Inguri hydropower plant provides nearly 40 to 50 percent of the country&#x27;s electricity and is located at the administrative border of the secessionist Abkhazia region.

Georgian Natural gas consumption stood at 1.8 billion cubic meters in 2007. Natural gas used to be supplied to Georgia by Russia. In recent years, however, Georgia has been able to eliminate its dependency on imports from Russia, thanks to increased hydroelectricity production, and the availability of natural gas sources from Azerbaijan. In addition, all Russian gas exports to Armenia pass through the Georgian pipeline system. Georgia takes 10% of that gas as a transit fee.

Georgia is a partner country of the EU INOGATE energy programme, which has four key topics: enhancing energy security,
convergence of member state energy markets on the basis of EU internal energy market principles,
supporting sustainable energy development, and attracting investment for energy projects of common and regional interest.

=== Agriculture ===
Currently, about 55% of the total labor force is employed in agriculture, though much of this is subsistence farming.

Georgian agricultural production is beginning to recover following the devastation caused by the civil unrest and the necessary restructuring following the breakup of the Soviet Union. Livestock production is beginning to rebound, although it continues to be confronted by minor and sporadic disease outbreaks. Domestic grain production is increasing, and the government invests in improvement of infrastructure improvements to ensure appropriate distribution and revenues to farmers. Tea, hazelnut and citrus production have suffered greatly as a result of the conflict in Abkhazia, a crucial area for planting the latter crops.

Approximately 7% of the Georgian GDP (2011) is generated by the agrarian sector.

Viticulture and winemaking are the most important fields of Georgia&#x27;s agriculture. Over 450 species of local vine are bred in Georgia, and the country is considered as one of the oldest places of producing top-quality wines in the world. Russia was traditionally the biggest export market for Georgian wine. This, however, changed in 2006, when Russia banned imports of wine and mineral water from Georgia, preceded by statements of Georgian governmental officials about low quality requirements of the Russian market. Since then Georgian wine producers have struggled to maintain output and break into new markets.

In 2011 Georgia sold wine in total amount of 54 mln USD in 48 countries and alcoholic beverages in total amount of 68 mln USD in 32 countries. Vines and alcoholic beverages are in the top 10 export commodity&#x27;s list with 2,5% and 3.1% share respectively.
According to National Wine Agency of Georgia, export of Georgian wine is increasing. 2011 wine export is 109% higher than 2007 exports. According to 2012 information, Georgia trades wine with 43 countries, selling over 23 million bottles. Biggest export partners for Georgia in wine industry are Ukraine (47.3% of wine export), Kazakhstan (18.9%) and Belarus (6.9%).
In 2011 export of vines, mineral waters and alcoholic beverages exceeded export of all years after 2006. 
Georgia is rich with spring waters and production of mineral waters is one of the main spheres of industry. Export of mineral waters in 2011 amounted to 48 mln USD in 35 countries. Share of mineral water in total export is 2.1%.
Food processing industry is developing to align with the primary agricultural production and export of processed products is increasing year by year. Export of nuts constituted about 6% of Georgian export (2011) and is among 10 top export commodity list with total amount of 130 mln USD. Nuts was exported in 53 countries.

Rural population as a percentage of total population in Georgia was 48.2% in 2011 and decreased to 46.3% in 2014.

In 2018, in addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products, Georgia had produced:
* 259 thousand tons of grape;
* 237 thousand tons of potato;
* 194 thousand tons of maize;
* 107 thousand tons of wheat;
* 82 thousand tons of apple;
* 62 thousand tons of tangerine;
* 57 thousand tons of barley;
* 57 thousand tons of watermelon;
* 51 thousand tons of tomato;
* 33 thousand tons of cucumber;
* 27 thousand tons of peach.

=== Tourism ===

Tourism in Georgia is one of the fastest growing sectors of the local economy, which has high potential for further development. During recent years the number of visitors to Georgia increased significantly contributing to the growth of other tourism related sectors. In 2011, more, about 3 million visitors visited Georgia 40 percent more, than in 2010. To foster the development of the tourism sector the Government of Georgia invests heavily in the development of the transportation and basic infrastructure, renovation and development of tourism destinations, which is a stimulus for the private investment generation. In 2011, total output of tourism related services production increased by 77% compared to 2006 and constituted 7.1% of total output of economy. In 2018 tourism generated 3.4 billion dollars in tax revenue for Georgia.

The following table shows the monthly average for incoming tourists in Georgia by citizenship and number of visits (in thousands).

According to data from Georgia&#x27;s National Tourism Administration, TASS reported that Armenia is third on the list of countries with the most visits from citizens in 2021. Turkey leads the pack in terms of trips made by visitors to Georgia last year, with 326 thousand, 2.7% fewer than in the previous year. With more than 212 thousand tourist visitors, 2.1% more than in 2020, Russia comes in second. Georgia received over 1.8 million international visits in total in 2021, an increase of 7.7% from the previous year.

=== Logistics ===

Georgia is one of the key members in international TRACECA programme due to its important geographical and political location. Since it is situated right in between of Europe and Asia, the country is supposed to become a busy transitional hub of a modern Silk Road in the near future. On March 11 of 2015, Georgian media declared that the Chinese and Georgian companies have reached an agreement in Beijing concerning the developing of the deep-water port at Anaklia, which existence is crucial for the TRACECA route. The port will be constructed on a plot of over 1,000 hectares and have access to a deep sea canyon. US-Based SSA Marine was later finally chosen to Invest in and Operate Container Terminal of Anaklia Deep Sea Port in Georgia by signing an agreement with Anaklia Development Consortium on 1 August 2017.

First train containing 82 containers and 41 platforms came from China to Baku, Azerbaijan on July 28. It is planned to launch a first carriage using this way through Georgia to Istanbul in September 2015. Baku–Tbilisi–Kars railway became operational on October 30, 2017.

Re-exportation of vehicles which is one of the income sources for Georgia has lowered much during 2014–2015 stagnation, most noticeably to Azerbaijan: it became 5.1 times less (on 10 337 cars) comparing to the previous year.

=== Finance ===

Like most other post-soviet countries, Georgia&#x27;s finance sector is dominated by banks. As of 2015, there were 21 commercial banks, of which 5 large banks controlled most of financial assets. There are some major challenges facing the banking sector. For instance, banks play a limited role in financing the real economy and in investing in activities that are required to stabilize the country&#x27;s persistent trade.

=== Companies ===

In 2022, the sector with the highest number of companies registered in Georgia is Manufacturing with 3,905 companies, followed by Services and Wholesale Trade with 2,934 and 1,036 companies respectively.

== Human Development Index of Georgia ==
Human Development Index is a composite statistic of life expectancy, education, and income indices used to rank countries into four tiers of human development.
Georgia&#x27;s HDI value for 2017 is 0.780— in the high human development category—positioning it at 70 out of 189 countries and territories. The rank is shared with Antigua and Barbuda. Between 2000 and 2017, Georgia&#x27;s HDI value increased from 0.673 to 0.780, an increase of 15.9 percent or average annual increase of about 0.9 percent. Between 1990 and 2017, Georgia&#x27;s life expectancy at birth increased by 3.1 years, mean years of schooling increased by 1.1 years and expected years of schooling increased by 2.6 years, also Georgia&#x27;s GNI per capita increased by about 21.0%. However, it is misleading to compare values and rankings with those of previously published reports, because the underlying data and methods have changed over time.

== See also ==
* List of Georgian companies
* List of countries by received FDI
* Kulevi Oil Terminal

==Further reading==
* Gugushvili, Alexi: &quot;Understanding Poverty in Georgia&quot; in the Caucasus Analytical Digerst No.34

== Notes ==
== References ==

* Government press release on unemployment in 2007
* How to register company in Georgia?

== External links ==
* Official site of American Chamber of Commerce in Georgia
* &quot;Sakartvelos Ekonomika&quot; , an online monthly on Georgia&#x27;s economy.
* online English language business magazine in Georgia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q282182" start="4" end="22" title="Economy of Georgia (country)" label="economy of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q546395" start="29" end="37" title="Emerging markets" label="emerging"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="38" end="49" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="63" end="85" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="113" end="144" title="dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q219470" start="272" end="287" title="Rose Revolution" label="Rose Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="289" end="296" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="457" end="467" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q535347" start="591" end="602" title="Transparency (behavior)" label="transparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="643" end="669" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International"/>
<link wikidata="Q366" start="711" end="718" title="Corruption" label="corrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="733" end="742" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="815" end="829" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193236" start="851" end="861" title="news media" label="news media"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="968" end="974" title="Freedom of the press" label="unfree"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1012" end="1026" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q16720712" start="1034" end="1049" title="Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area" label="Free Trade Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="1302" end="1336" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="Commonwealth of Independent States"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="1512" end="1521" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="1522" end="1529" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="1546" end="1558" title="citrus fruit" label="citrus fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097" start="1561" end="1564" title="tea" label="tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978" start="1569" end="1574" title="grape" label="grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="1587" end="1596" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="1601" end="1607" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859167" start="1663" end="1667" title="Georgian wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="1724" end="1735" title="Former Soviet Union" label="post-Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502151" start="1849" end="1860" title="tax evasion" label="tax evasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q31354462" start="2184" end="2192" title="Abkhazia" label="Abkhazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23427" start="2197" end="2210" title="South Ossetia" label="South Ossetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80880" start="2295" end="2317" title="Asian financial crisis" label="Asian financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q484275" start="2337" end="2347" title="leadership" label="leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q151929" start="2361" end="2373" title="Eduard Shevardnadze" label="Shevardnadze"/>
<link wikidata="Q4608" start="2553" end="2557" title="Lari (Georgia)" label="lari"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3001" end="3014" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="3116" end="3128" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="3501" end="3504" title="Former Soviet Union" label="FSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q219470" start="3524" end="3539" title="Rose Revolution" label="Rose Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q645029" start="3705" end="3734" title="Economic liberalization" label="liberalization of the economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131201" start="3752" end="3779" title="Sustainable development" label="sustainable economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="3794" end="3808" title="private sector" label="private sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="3909" end="3934" title="Foreign Direct Investment" label="Foreign Direct Investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q189833" start="3969" end="3984" title="economic growth" label="economic growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q645029" start="4568" end="4591" title="economic liberalization" label="economic liberalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q620735" start="4649" end="4664" title="2008 South Ossetia war" label="war with Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570844" start="4677" end="4704" title="Global financial crisis in September 2008" label="the global financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="4870" end="4887" title="Unemployment" label="unemployment rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="5066" end="5075" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q685550" start="5099" end="5121" title="2007–2008 world food price crisis" label="increasing food prices"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="5162" end="5171" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758955" start="5271" end="5286" title="consumer basket" label="consumer basket"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="5290" end="5297" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q746687" start="5323" end="5338" title="Current account (balance of payments)" label="current account"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="5445" end="5463" title="Post-Soviet states" label="Post-Soviet states"/>
<link wikidata="Q488981" start="5950" end="5954" title="EBRD" label="EBRD"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="6123" end="6126" title="IMF" label="IMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="6249" end="6274" title="Foreign direct investment" label="Foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="6381" end="6388" title="Liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q557880" start="6452" end="6460" title="investor" label="investor"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="6510" end="6513" title="Foreign direct investment" label="FDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="6557" end="6568" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="6853" end="6877" title="transport infrastructure" label="transport infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q13440398" start="6913" end="6922" title="workforce" label="workforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="7128" end="7131" title="Foreign direct investment" label="FDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="7135" end="7142" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q620735" start="7553" end="7573" title="2008 South Ossetia war" label="Russian-Georgian war"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570844" start="7596" end="7619" title="Global financial crisis in September 2008" label="global financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="7859" end="7862" title="Foreign direct investment" label="FDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q684740" start="7922" end="7933" title="real estate" label="real estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5425281" start="8001" end="8010" title="FDI stock" label="FDI stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="8046" end="8049" title="Former Soviet Union" label="FSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="8087" end="8090" title="Foreign direct investment" label="FDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178478" start="8171" end="8183" title="Incorporation (business)" label="incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="8343" end="8357" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q16720712" start="8365" end="8380" title="Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area" label="Free Trade Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="8645" end="8679" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="Commonwealth of Independent States"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="8767" end="8770" title="United Arab Emirates" label="UAE"/>
<link wikidata="Q6613675" start="8896" end="8906" title="copper ore" label="copper ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q907347" start="8926" end="8936" title="ferroalloy" label="ferroalloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q578307" start="8939" end="8947" title="hazelnut" label="hazelnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="8949" end="8959" title="medication" label="medication"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="8962" end="8981" title="nitrogen fertilizer" label="nitrogen fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="8984" end="8988" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="8990" end="8999" title="crude oil" label="crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q178921" start="9001" end="9014" title="mineral water" label="mineral water"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="9030" end="9037" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614834" start="9123" end="9135" title="oil products" label="oil products"/>
<link wikidata="Q42889" start="9137" end="9144" title="vehicle" label="vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="9147" end="9158" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="9191" end="9203" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="9232" end="9237" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578" start="9239" end="9248" title="cigarette" label="cigarette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="9813" end="9823" title="remittance" label="remittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="9958" end="9964" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="9997" end="10002" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="10029" end="10042" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="10065" end="10072" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="10093" end="10098" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="10119" end="10125" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="10147" end="10157" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="10183" end="10185" title="UK" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="10207" end="10213" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="10236" end="10246" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="10268" end="10275" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="10297" end="10303" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="10325" end="10331" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q43330" start="10391" end="10402" title="Saakashvili" label="Saakashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395782" start="10549" end="10565" title="Kakha Bendukidze" label="Kakha Bendukidze"/>
<link wikidata="Q210463" start="11314" end="11341" title="Corruption Perception Index" label="Corruption Perception Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="11355" end="11381" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International"/>
<link wikidata="Q656801" start="11584" end="11617" title="International Finance Corporation" label="International Finance Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200749" start="13671" end="13685" title="Ease of doing business index" label="Doing Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="13698" end="13702" title="World Bank" label="(WB)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200749" start="13735" end="13763" title="Ease of doing business index" label="Ease of Doing Business index"/>
<link wikidata="Q79719" start="15224" end="15232" title="Licenses" label="Licenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q944235" start="16865" end="16880" title="Informal economy" label="informal sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q320033" start="17303" end="17316" title="severance pay" label="severance pay"/>
<link wikidata="Q43330" start="17983" end="17994" title="Saakashvili" label="Saakashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q5938294" start="18832" end="18858" title="National Statistics Office (Georgia)" label="National Statistics Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="19026" end="19041" title="Subsistence agriculture" label="self-sufficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q724834" start="20210" end="20237" title="Ministry of Energy (Georgia)" label="Georgian Ministry of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719303" start="20506" end="20525" title="Alexander Khetaguri" label="Alexander Khetaguri"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="20981" end="20994" title="Hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q504388" start="21302" end="21308" title="Inguri" label="Inguri"/>
<link wikidata="Q182098" start="21633" end="21636" title="KWh" label="KWh"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="21646" end="21665" title="Hydropower plant" label="Hydropower stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q200297" start="21776" end="21797" title="thermal power station" label="thermal power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q724834" start="21813" end="21853" title="Ministry of Energy (Georgia)" label="Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q6618883" start="22918" end="22972" title="List of energy regulatory bodies" label="Georgian National Energy Regulatory Commission (GNERC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589009" start="23376" end="23391" title="Private company" label="privately owned"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="23530" end="23536" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="23538" end="23544" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="23546" end="23553" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="23558" end="23568" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719303" start="23705" end="23724" title="Alexander Khetaguri" label="Alexander Khetaguri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963801" start="23801" end="23810" title="Inter RAO" label="Inter RAO"/>
<link wikidata="Q162887" start="23843" end="23849" title="Inguri Dam" label="Inguri"/>
<link wikidata="Q31354462" start="24180" end="24188" title="Abkhazia" label="Abkhazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="24207" end="24218" title="Natural gas" label="Natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="24320" end="24326" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="24526" end="24536" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="24714" end="24716" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459896" start="24717" end="24724" title="INOGATE" label="INOGATE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700433" start="24780" end="24795" title="energy security" label="energy security"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239166" start="24825" end="24838" title="energy market" label="energy market"/>
<link wikidata="Q535437" start="24856" end="24881" title="Internal energy market" label="EU internal energy market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962383" start="24905" end="24923" title="sustainable energy" label="sustainable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351664" start="24952" end="24962" title="Investment (macroeconomics)" label="investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="25134" end="25153" title="Subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q253140" start="25869" end="25880" title="Viticulture" label="Viticulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859167" start="26167" end="26180" title="Georgian wine" label="Georgian wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978" start="28012" end="28017" title="grape" label="grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="28042" end="28048" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="28073" end="28078" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="28103" end="28108" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="28132" end="28137" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q516494" start="28161" end="28170" title="tangerine" label="tangerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="28194" end="28200" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507129" start="28224" end="28234" title="watermelon" label="watermelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23501" start="28258" end="28264" title="tomato" label="tomato"/>
<link wikidata="Q23425" start="28288" end="28296" title="cucumber" label="cucumber"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189" start="28320" end="28325" title="peach" label="peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q15633510" start="28345" end="28363" title="Tourism in Georgia (country)" label="Tourism in Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159810" start="28415" end="28422" title="economy" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="28520" end="28527" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613132" start="28752" end="28773" title="Cabinet of Georgia" label="Government of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q453562" start="29913" end="29920" title="TRACECA" label="TRACECA"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="30117" end="30126" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q484402" start="30321" end="30328" title="Anaklia" label="Anaklia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="30748" end="30753" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q9248" start="30757" end="30761" title="Baku" label="Baku"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="30861" end="30869" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q802523" start="30889" end="30914" title="Baku–Tbilisi–Kars railway" label="Baku–Tbilisi–Kars railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136657" start="30956" end="30970" title="Re-exportation" label="Re-exportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="31095" end="31105" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38994" start="31889" end="31912" title="Human Development Index" label="Human Development Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612400" start="32826" end="32852" title="List of Georgian companies" label="List of Georgian companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7072186" start="32855" end="32888" title="List of countries by received FDI" label="List of countries by received FDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q367859" start="32891" end="32910" title="Kulevi Oil Terminal" label="Kulevi Oil Terminal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12063" wikidata="Q4454030" url="?curid=12063" title="Telecommunications in Georgia (country)">
<text>Telecommunications in Georgia include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.

==Radio and television==

* Radio broadcast stations: AM 7, FM 12, shortwave 4 (1998). There are 35 FM stations in the country, as of 2021.
* Radios: 3.02 million (1997).
* Television broadcast stations: 25 (plus repeaters) (2011).
* Televisions: 2.57 million (1997).

==Cellular Networks==
* Calling code: +995
* Mobile Phone subscribers: 4,955,272 million lines (April 2021)

There are three cellular telephone networks: MagtiCom LTD, Silknet JSC, and Cellfie Mobile (Formerly known as Beeline). The cellular network market counts more than 4,955,272 active customers in total.

Coverage extends to over 98% of the populated territory as of 2010; In urban areas there are 20 telephones per 100 people and in rural areas 4 telephones per 100 people.

In 2020, the Georgian National Communications Commission announced its plans to introduce Mobile virtual network operators in 2021. The first MVNO in the country, Hallo, launched in Q4 of 2022 and it is based on Silknet&#x27;s infrastructure. Tele 1 (also marketed as Tele One) is going to launch soon. It is not yet clear which operator&#x27;s infrastructure the company will use. Tele 1 has already started operating in the country partially, but its services (video and audio calling) are available only through their apps as of now (VoIP). 

The Georgian National Communications Commission has announced an auction for the 5G spectrum. It will be held in August 2023 and most of the lots come with a requirement for MNOs to start talks with MVNOs, which means they will not be able to keep their infrastructure closed off if they want to buy licenses for specific 5G frequencies.

==Fixed Telephony, Internet and IP Television==

*Internet Service Providers: at least 10 ISPs.
*Fixed Internet Subscribers: 977,6 thousand lines (April 2021)
*Internet Protocol television Subscribers: 551 thousand lines (April 2021)
*Fixed Phone Subscribers: 830,222 lines in use (2009), 366,250 lines in use (April 2021)
*Top-level domain: .ge

The fixed telephony, internet and IP television in Georgia is mainly operated by MAGTICOM, Silknet and New Net, all of which controlled 90% of the market in 2018. By the end of 2008, there were 618,000 fixed telephone users in Georgia. In urban areas there are 20 telephones per 100 people, and in rural areas there are four telephones per 100 people.

Additionally, Datahouse Global LLC, Geonet LLC, Inexphone LLC, and Myphone LLC are providing VoIP-based fixed telephony services over the country.

Fiber-optic lines connect the major cities and Georgia and Bulgaria are connected with fiber-optic line between Poti and Varna (Bulgaria). The home internet provider industry in Georgia is heavily monopolized by 2 major competitors: Silknet and MAGTICOM. There are other smaller, more obscure providers as well, but these two are the most popular and have the biggest nationwide coverage. Both companies offer TV and mobile packages that can be combined with home internet as well.
===Internet censorship and surveillance===

Listed as engaged in selective Internet filtering in the political and conflict/security areas and as no evidence of filtering in the social and Internet tools areas by the OpenNet Initiative (ONI) in November 2010.

Access to Internet content in Georgia is largely unrestricted as the legal constitutional framework, developed after the 2003 Rose Revolution, established a series of provisions that should, in theory, curtail any attempts by the state to censor the Internet. At the same time, these legal instruments have not been sufficient to prevent limited filtering on corporate and educational networks. Georgia&#x27;s dependence on international connectivity makes it vulnerable to upstream filtering, evident in the March 2008 blocking of YouTube by Türk Telekom.

On March 14, 2016, access to YouTube was restricted nationwide. This restriction of access was to presumably prevent Georgian citizens from accessing a video which threatened a number of journalists and opposition figures with the exposure of covertly recorded video tapes of sex acts. YouTube access went down throughout Georgia until the threatening video was removed from the internet.

==See also==

* Georgian National Communications Commission

==References==


==External links==
* Georgian National Communications Commission, website.
* Sidorenko, Alexey, &quot;Internet, Society and Democracy in Georgia&quot;, in &quot;Caucasus Analytical Digest No. 15&quot;.
* Robakidze, Nino, &quot;Georgia: Immature Media&quot;, in &quot;Caucasus Analytical Digest No. 25&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4454030" start="0" end="29" title="Telecommunications in Georgia (country)" label="Telecommunications in Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="133" end="138" title="Radio" label="Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="278" end="288" title="Television" label="Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q34768" start="398" end="410" title="Calling code" label="Calling code"/>
<link wikidata="Q6732495" start="528" end="536" title="MagtiCom" label="MagtiCom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12869272" start="542" end="549" title="Silknet" label="Silknet"/>
<link wikidata="Q402880" start="593" end="600" title="Beeline (brand)" label="Beeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548039" start="870" end="913" title="Georgian National Communications Commission" label="Georgian National Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058891" start="947" end="978" title="Mobile virtual network operator" label="Mobile virtual network operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548039" start="1407" end="1450" title="Georgian National Communications Commission" label="Georgian National Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941618" start="1577" end="1580" title="MNO" label="MNO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058891" start="1602" end="1607" title="Mobile virtual network operator" label="MVNOs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="1792" end="1817" title="Internet Service Provider" label="Internet Service Provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q177518" start="1902" end="1930" title="Internet Protocol television" label="Internet Protocol television"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="2066" end="2082" title="Top-level domain" label="Top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q40683" start="2084" end="2087" title=".ge" label=".ge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6732495" start="2170" end="2178" title="MagtiCom" label="MAGTICOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q12869272" start="2180" end="2187" title="Silknet" label="Silknet"/>
<link wikidata="Q22916680" start="2192" end="2199" title="New Net" label="New Net"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2456" end="2476" title="Datahouse Global LLC" label="Datahouse Global LLC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2478" end="2488" title="Geonet LLC" label="Geonet LLC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2490" end="2503" title="Inexphone LLC" label="Inexphone LLC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2509" end="2520" title="Myphone LLC" label="Myphone LLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="2590" end="2601" title="Fiber-optic" label="Fiber-optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="2649" end="2657" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q185345" start="2702" end="2706" title="Poti" label="Poti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506" start="2711" end="2716" title="Varna, Bulgaria" label="Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q12869272" start="2823" end="2830" title="Silknet" label="Silknet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6732495" start="2835" end="2843" title="MagtiCom" label="MAGTICOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861440" start="3289" end="3307" title="OpenNet Initiative" label="OpenNet Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q219470" start="3459" end="3474" title="Rose Revolution" label="Rose Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="3865" end="3872" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q263700" start="3876" end="3888" title="Türk Telekom" label="Türk Telekom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548039" start="4297" end="4340" title="Georgian National Communications Commission" label="Georgian National Communications Commission"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12064" wikidata="Q1274162" url="?curid=12064" title="Transport in Georgia (country)">
<text>For Soviet transportation, see Transport in the Soviet Union.

==Railways==

&lt;br&gt;&quot;total:&quot;
1,683 km in common carrier service; does not include industrial lines
&lt;br&gt;&quot;broad gauge:&quot;
1,583 km of gauge (1993)
&lt;br&gt;&quot;narrow gauge:&quot;
100 km of gauge.

City with metro system: Tbilisi (see Tbilisi Metro).

* In April 2005, an agreement was signed to build a railway from Turkey through Georgia to Azerbaijan (see Kars Baku Tbilisi railway line). The line under construction is using Standard gauge until Akhalkalaki. There will be axle change station for wagons to proceed with broad gauge to Baku.
* In August 2007, Georgia handed over the management rights of the state-owned Georgian Railway company to the U.K.-based company Parkfield Investment for 89 years.

===Railway links with adjacent countries===

* Russia - yes - - via the breakaway Autonomous Republic of Abkhazia - closed for political reasons.
* Azerbaijan - yes - .
* Armenia - yes 
* Turkey - yes - break-of-gauge with through (Standard Gauge).

===2007===

* February 7 - agreement signed for Kars-Tbilisi-Baku railway

===Towns served by rail===

* Poti - port
* Batumi - port
* Kutaisi
* Akhaltsike

==Highways==

The total length of the road network is approximately kilometers (2020), divided over roughly of international trunk roads, of domestic main roads and some local roads. Only a limited number of kilometers are express roads or motorways which are in good condition. The quality of the other roads varies greatly.


===Motorways===
Georgia has a limited multilane expressroad/motorway system, that is under development. In 2021 these sections are: 
* S1 highway Mukhatgverdi (Tbilisi West) - Surami 
* S1 highway Argveta - Samtredia 
* S4 highway Ponichala (Tbilisi) - Rustavi 
* S12 highway Japana - Lanchkhuti 
Additionally, the S2 highway has limited access two-lane freeway (Kobuleti Bypass).

==Pipelines==
Crude oil 370 km; refined products 300 km; natural gas 440 km (1992)

==Ports and harbours==
Batumi, Poti, Sokhumi, Kulevi Oil Terminal

==Merchant marine==
&lt;br&gt;&quot;total:&quot;
17 ships (with a volume of or over) totaling /
&lt;br&gt;&quot;ships by type:&quot;
cargo ship 10, chemical tanker 1, petroleum tanker 6 (1999 est.)

==Airports==


28 (1994 est.)
In February 2007 a brand new, modern and fully equipped international Airport was inaugurated in Tbilisi.
*Tbilisi - Shota Rustaveli Airport
*Batumi - Alexander Kartveli Airport
*Kutaisi - David The Builder Airport
*Mestia - Queen Tamar Airport
*Ambrolauri - Ambrolauri Airport
*Poti - Poti International Airport

===Airports - with paved runways===
&quot;total:&quot;
14
&lt;br&gt;&quot;over 3,047 m:&quot;
1
&lt;br&gt;&quot;2,438 to 3,047 m:&quot;
7
&lt;br&gt;&quot;1,524 to 2,437 m:&quot;
4
&lt;br&gt;&quot;914 to 1,523 m:&quot;
1
&lt;br&gt;&quot;under 914 m:&quot;
1 (1994 est.)

===Airports - with unpaved runways===
&quot;total:&quot;
14
&lt;br&gt;&quot;over 3,047 m:&quot;
1
&lt;br&gt;&quot;2,438 to 3,047 m:&quot;
1
&lt;br&gt;&quot;1,524 to 2,437 m:&quot;
1
&lt;br&gt;&quot;914 to 1,523 m:&quot;
5
&lt;br&gt;&quot;under 914 m:&quot;
6 (1994 est.)

==See also==
* Georgia
* List of Tbilisi metro stations

==External links==

*Roads Department of Georgia (ENG)
*United Transport Administration (ENG)

==Notes==
 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5645915" start="31" end="60" title="Transport in the Soviet Union" label="Transport in the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="300" end="305" title="rapid transit" label="metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q994" start="314" end="321" title="Tbilisi" label="Tbilisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q37006" start="327" end="340" title="Tbilisi Metro" label="Tbilisi Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="409" end="415" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="424" end="431" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="435" end="445" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q802523" start="451" end="481" title="Kars Baku Tbilisi railway line" label="Kars Baku Tbilisi railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999572" start="521" end="535" title="Standard gauge" label="Standard gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q500888" start="542" end="553" title="Akhalkalaki" label="Akhalkalaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q967045" start="850" end="856" title="Transportation in Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31354462" start="885" end="916" title="Autonomous Republic of Abkhazia" label="Autonomous Republic of Abkhazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268738" start="951" end="961" title="Transportation in Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q975740" start="974" end="981" title="Transportation in Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q765503" start="991" end="997" title="Transportation in Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959245" start="1006" end="1020" title="break-of-gauge" label="break-of-gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999572" start="1035" end="1049" title="Standard Gauge" label="Standard Gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q802523" start="1101" end="1126" title="Kars-Tbilisi-Baku railway" label="Kars-Tbilisi-Baku railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q185345" start="1158" end="1162" title="Poti" label="Poti"/>
<link wikidata="Q25475" start="1172" end="1178" title="Batumi" label="Batumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q172415" start="1188" end="1195" title="Kutaisi" label="Kutaisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q212546" start="1198" end="1208" title="Akhaltsike" label="Akhaltsike"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="1586" end="1606" title="Controlled-access highway" label="expressroad/motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899539" start="1673" end="1683" title="S1 highway (Georgia)" label="S1 highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q994" start="1698" end="1705" title="Tbilisi" label="Tbilisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474275" start="1714" end="1720" title="Surami" label="Surami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899539" start="1724" end="1734" title="S1 highway (Georgia)" label="S1 highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q513727" start="1745" end="1754" title="Samtredia" label="Samtredia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358039" start="1758" end="1768" title="S4 highway (Georgia)" label="S4 highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q182521" start="1791" end="1798" title="Rustavi" label="Rustavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358115" start="1802" end="1813" title="S12 highway (Georgia)" label="S12 highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q956922" start="1823" end="1833" title="Lanchkhuti" label="Lanchkhuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638717" start="1853" end="1863" title="S2 highway (Georgia)" label="S2 highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q159184" start="1883" end="1899" title="Two-lane expressway" label="two-lane freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="1934" end="1943" title="petroleum" label="Crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="1977" end="1988" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q25475" start="2027" end="2033" title="Batumi" label="Batumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q185345" start="2035" end="2039" title="Poti" label="Poti"/>
<link wikidata="Q40811" start="2041" end="2048" title="Sukhumi" label="Sokhumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q367859" start="2050" end="2069" title="Kulevi Oil Terminal" label="Kulevi Oil Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q105999" start="2204" end="2214" title="cargo ship" label="cargo ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q15254" start="2219" end="2234" title="chemical tanker" label="chemical tanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q14928" start="2238" end="2254" title="oil tanker" label="petroleum tanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q994" start="2407" end="2414" title="Tbilisi" label="Tbilisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q778213" start="2417" end="2440" title="Tbilisi International Airport" label="Shota Rustaveli Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q25475" start="2442" end="2448" title="Batumi" label="Batumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200570" start="2451" end="2477" title="Batumi International Airport" label="Alexander Kartveli Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q172415" start="2479" end="2486" title="Kutaisi" label="Kutaisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156904" start="2489" end="2514" title="David the Builder Kutaisi International Airport" label="David The Builder Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011051" start="2516" end="2522" title="Mestia" label="Mestia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875860" start="2525" end="2544" title="Queen Tamar Airport" label="Queen Tamar Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q456842" start="2546" end="2556" title="Ambrolauri" label="Ambrolauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q28797312" start="2559" end="2577" title="Ambrolauri Airport" label="Ambrolauri Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q185345" start="2579" end="2583" title="Poti" label="Poti"/>
<link wikidata="Q590005" start="2586" end="2612" title="Poti Airport" label="Poti International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="3171" end="3178" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336564" start="3181" end="3211" title="List of Tbilisi metro stations" label="List of Tbilisi metro stations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12065" wikidata="Q770753" url="?curid=12065" title="Defence Forces of Georgia">
<text>The Defence Forces of Georgia (), or Georgian Defence Forces (GDF), are the combined military forces of Georgia, tasked with the defence of the nation&#x27;s independence, sovereignty, and territorial integrity. They consist of the Land Force, Air Force, National Guard, and Special Operations Forces. The Defence Forces are under overall leadership of the Minister of Defence of Georgia and directly headed by the Chief of Defence Forces.

The first regular military was established in the first Georgian Republic in 1918 and was in existence until after the republic&#x27;s overthrow by the invading Soviet Russian forces in 1921. The modern Georgian military were founded in accordance with the government decree of 24 April 1991. 30 April, the day when the first conscripts were called up for military service in 1991, has been celebrated as the day of the Georgian military forces.

The Georgian military have fought in the civil war and separatist conflicts in the 1990s and the Russo-Georgian War of 2008 as well as major international military missions such as in Iraq and Afghanistan. Georgia was one of the first former Soviet republics to join the NATO Partnership for Peace program in 1994 and Individual Partnership Action Plan (IPAP) in 2004 and has sought to bring its military in line with the NATO standards.

==History of the Defence Forces==
=== Establishment and early years ===
On 20 December 1990, President Zviad Gamsakhurdia ordered the creation of what is now the Defence Forces. In January 1991, Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev and Supreme Soviet Chairman Anatoly Lukyanov, demanded that Gamsakhurdia to stop the creation of the National Guard. The first military parade of the National Guard was held at Boris Paichadze Stadium on 30 April 1991, where for the first time in 70 years, Georgians swore allegiance to the Georgian people. This day is today commemorated as Defence Forces Day.

The new military was mainly manned by volunteers as well as ethnically Georgian officers who were serving in Soviet Army at the time. The transfer of former Transcaucasian Military District facilities, weapons and formations located in Georgia, which began in early 1992, lasted until 1997. On 30 April 1992, an agreement was signed on the transfer of military units and facilities by the heads of the defence ministries of the Russian Federation and Georgia. According to it, Georgia received the following formations:

* 10th Armoured Division (without 403rd Motorized Rifle Regiment) – Akhaltsikhe
* 6th Fortified Area – Akhaltsikhe
* 8th Fortified Area 
During the Georgian Civil War, units waged war with supporters of the ousted Gamsakhurdia. The Georgian Armed Forces also took part in the 1991–1992 South Ossetia War and the War in Abkhazia (1992–1993), losing both, after which Georgia lost control over most of the territory of these republics.

=== 21st century ===
The Georgia Train and Equip Program (GTEP) training was conducted using U.S. Special Operations Forces and U.S. Marine Corps forces from May 2002 to May 2004. During this time approximately 2,600 Georgian soldiers, including a headquarters staff element and 5 tactical units, received training. Another assistance program, the Georgia Security and Stability Operations Program (Georgia SSOP), was launched in January 2005 as a continuation of the (GTEP) of 2002–2004. Georgian contingents were involved in the Kosovo Force and continue to participate in the operations in Iraq and Afghanistan.

The DFG have been extensively reformed in the recent years to meet Georgia&#x27;s aspirations to join NATO and for better response to the existing challenges such as the ongoing tensions in the unresolved separatist conflict areas in Abkhazia and South Ossetia as well as to the threats of global terrorism. Georgia also views a large-scale foreign invasion and the spillover of conflicts from Russia&#x27;s North Caucasus as the worst potential near- and long-term scenarios, respectively.

On 8 August 2008 the Georgian military conducted an operation in Georgia&#x27;s breakaway region South Ossetia (see 2008 South Ossetia War) in response to separatist attacks. The operation led to an armed conflict with forces from the Russian Federation and resulted in the defeat and expulsion of Georgian forces from South Ossetia and Abkhazia. Following the military operations, Russia recognized independence of the regions.

The military budget of Georgia increased from $411.83 million in 1991 to $1.07 billion in 2008. Currently the budget is $398.92 million.

=== Russo-Georgian War ===

In August 2008, following a series of fierce clashes in South Ossetia, Georgia attempted to re-take the separatist territory by force. In the resulting military conflict with Russia, Georgia was driven out of South Ossetia and Abkhazia, and lost parts of its military capabilities. Russian forces sank four Georgian naval vessels in the port of Poti and hauled away nine rigid-hull inflatable boats. Georgia Land Forces lost approximately 30 T-72&#x27;s, 6 BMP&#x27;s, 2 BTR&#x27;s and around 10 artillery pieces of all types in combat. The Russians also captured 5 intact BMP&#x27;s, approximately 5 artillery pieces, BUK SAM system and OSA SAM system. The Georgian Air Force lost three AN-2&#x27;s, 2 Mi-24&#x27;s and 1 Mi-14 on the ground. Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia lost 2 Hermes 450 reconnaissance drones and 1 Otokar Cobra APC. The Russian military lost more military equipment in combat than Georgia.

=== Reconstruction ===
Georgia immediately began a process of re-armament after the war. The conflict was immediately followed by a replenishment program of the gaps in the single GAF arms components with an additional massive re-equipment and modernization program. Two Georgian naval vessels sunk in Poti were raised and returned to service. The Georgian Navy&#x27;s remaining operational units were merged into the Coast Guard, which received training in search and seizure tactics from the United States. Ukraine supplied Georgia with 30 BTR-70 armored personnel carriers, 2 BUK SAM system batteries and 6 OSA mobile SAM systems. Israel supplied Georgia with 13 Wolf APC&#x27;s and SPYDER-SR SAM systems and many types of firearms. The U.S. supplied Georgia with many types of infantry equipment to Georgia such as infantry personal protection equipment, firearms, APC&#x27;s and anti tank missiles. Georgia has also received MANPADs and radars from France. NATO militaries also often train with Georgian military and have annual military drills in Georgia. Georgia also rebuilt its damaged military bases and constructed more military barracks. By late 2010 the Georgian military had reached a strength greater than pre-war levels and, after completing the reforms, decisively reduced military spending. Beginning in 2010, Georgia started to produce its own line of APC&#x27;s, IFV&#x27;s, infantry personal protection equipment, small arms and mortars.

== Structure ==
The Defence Forces of Georgia consist of four branches: Land Forces, Air Force, National Guard, and Special Operations Forces.

The overall command is exercised by the Chief of Defence Forces, who is aided by the General Staff of the Defence Forces. The Defence Forces are further organized into several structural units:
* Eastern Command
* Western Command 
* Air and Air Defence Command
* Special Operations Forces 
* Military Training and Education Command
* Army Logistics Command
* National Guard
* Military Police
* Department of Military Intelligence

In wartime, several other bodies fall under the control of the Defence Forces additionally. These are: 
* Border Police of Georgia, a subordinate agency of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia
* Department of Special Operations - Public Security Forces, a subunit of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia
* Department for Protection of Strategic Pipelines, a subunit of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia
* Department for Protection of Strategic Infrastructure, a subunit of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia
* National Defence Academy of Georgia, a legal entity under the Ministry of Defence
* Military Hospital of the Ministry of Defence
* Cybersecurity Bureau, a legal entity under the Ministry of Defence
* Data Exchange Agency, a legal entity under the Ministry of Justice of Georgia.

The Eastern Command and its Western counterpart are two main regional operational groupings, respectively, for eastern and western Georgia. They were created in the 2010s in order to have two autonomous territorial commands, with their own military staffs, logistical and administrative resources.

=== Branches ===
The Land Forces form the largest component of the DFG responsible for providing land defence against any threat to the nation&#x27;s sovereignty and territorial integrity, supporting Border Police in border protection and civil authorities in counter-terrorist operations as well as providing units for NATO-led and coalition operations abroad. They are organized into infantry brigades, artillery and other supporting capacities operating at a battalion level.

The Special Operations Forces are responsible for conducting special reconnaissance, unconventional warfare and counter-terrorism operations. The Georgian National Guard organizes and trains reservists in the peacetime and mobilizes them during a crisis or wartime.

==== Ground arms ====

The structure of the Georgian Land Forces is based on brigade and battalion-sized military units. The main force consists of four infantry, one special operations, two artillery, one air defence brigades and several independent battalions. Georgian brigades have a total manpower of 3,000 each excluding non-combat personnel. The overall strength of the land forces in 2013 was 37,825 (excluding active reserve), from which 21 were high-ranking officers, 6,166 officers and sergeants, 28,477 corporals and privates, 125 cadets and 388 civilians. Accordingly, to reach NATO structures and higher standards the brigades were downsized to optimal as well as the 5th brigade disbanded, also to increase the percentage of spending on arms acquirement, which was previously 2%, to 6% of the military budget. The goal is to reach at least 15% until 2020. The ground forces are equipped with a variety of weapons and vehicles. Special forces operate independently under MOD direction.

The Georgian Land Force consists of following primary combat formations (incomplete):

==== Force composition ====


* HQ, Land Forces Command (Tbilisi)
** Central Command Point
* Operational Command East
**1st Infantry Brigade (Tbilisi)
***11th Light Infantry Battalion 
***12th Light Infantry Battalion - NRF
***13th Light Infantry Battalion 
***14th Mixed Armored Battalion
***Artillery Battalion
***Logistics Battalion
***Reconnaissance Company
***Engineer Company
***Signal Company
**4th Mechanized Infantry Brigade (Vaziani)
***41st Mechanized Infantry Battalion
***43rd Mechanized Infantry Battalion
***42nd Mixed Armored Battalion
***44th Artillery Battalion
***Logistics Battalion
***Reconnaissance Company
***Engineer Company
***Signal Company
**5th Artillery Brigade (Vaziani)
***51st Artillery Battalion
***52nd Artillery Battalion
***53rd Security Battalion
***Air Defence Company
** Special Operations Battalion
** Ranger Battalion
** Combat Engineer Battalion
* Operational Command West
** 2nd Infantry Brigade (Senaki)
***21st Light Infantry Battalion
***22nd Light Infantry Battalion
***23rd Light Infantry Battalion
***21st Mixed Armored Battalion
***Artillery Battalion
***Logistics Battalion
***Reconnaissance Company
***Engineer Company
***Signal Company
**3rd Infantry Brigade (&quot;The Mamelukes&quot;) (Kutaisi)
***31st Light Infantry Battalion
***32nd Light Infantry Battalion
***33rd Mixed Armored Battalion
***34th Artillery Battalion
***Logistics Battalion
***Reconnaissance Company
***Engineer Company
***Signal Company
** 6th Artillery Brigade (Khoni)
***61st Artillery Battalion
***62nd Artillery Battalion
***63rd Security Battalion
***Air Defence Company
** Naval Special Operations Company
** Combat Engineer Battalion
** Medical Company
** Separate Communications Company

====Separate Elements====

* Aviation and Air-Defence Command
* Army Logistics Command
* Training and Education Command
* Engineer Brigade
* Separate Reconnaissance Battalion (Kobuleti)
* Separate Medical Battalion (Saguramo)
* Separate Signal Battalion
* Separate Logistics Battalion

In 2011 the Georgian high command decided to divide its military forces into two main operational units; the Eastern and Western Operational Groups. The aim was to create two independently acting military districts which would consist of forces in accordance to the strategic value of their deployment areas yet being balanced in their type of equipment. In case of war each group will be able to coordinate its operations independently from high command, having its own logistical and administrative reserves.

===Special Operations Forces===
The Special Operations Forces of the Defence Forces of Georgia were established to conduct unconventional warfare and the full spectrum of special operation missions. They also serve in supporting capacity for regular military forces, primarily in the areas of education and training.

Georgian special forces became first active in 1999 as part of KFOR. Georgian commandos participated in the Iraq War from 2003 until the complete withdrawal of the Georgian contingent in 2008 due to an escalation of hostilities in South Ossetia. According to independent accounts, a number of Georgian operatives were also deployed prior in Afghanistan to aide US Special Forces in hunting down Taliban leaders. Georgian officials have stated that a group of servicemen were deployed in Afghanistan for medical purposes.

=== Air Force ===
The Georgian Air Force (Georgian: საქართველოს საჰაერო ძალები, &quot;sak&#x27;art&#x27;velos sahaero dzalebi&quot;) is the air force of the Defence Forces of Georgia. It was established as part of the Georgian Armed Forces in 1992 and merged into Army Air Section in 2010. As part of reforms in the Georgian military, the Air Force was reestablished as a separate branch of the Defence Forces in 2016. Under the leadership of Georgian Minister of Defence Irakli Garibashvili the Air Force was re-prioritized and aircraft owned by the Georgian Air Force are being modernized and re-serviced after they were left abandoned for 4 years. The Minister of Defence also announced plans to acquire strike drones to increase Georgia&#x27;s combat readiness.

=== Georgian Coast Guard (Former Naval Force) ===

The Georgian Navy was abolished in 2009 and was incorporated into the Coast Guard, which is not structurally part of the Defence Forces, but rather it is a subunit of the Border Guard of Georgia, which is under the control of Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia. The Coast Guard of Georgia is responsible for maintenance of the sovereignty of the country and for protection of internal territorial waters and economic zones. The headquarters and a principal Coast Guard base are located at the Black Sea port of Poti.
The other, smaller Coast Guard base is in Batumi. Besides the naval force, the navy also includes a Special Counter-terrorist Detachment force. Georgia is also one of the founding members and a participant of the Black Sea Naval Co-operation Task Group. Before the war with Russia, the Georgian navy had 19 naval vessels. Four of them were sunk during the conflict, and nine rigid-hull inflatables were captured by Russia. The Georgians raised and returned to service two of the sunken vessels, and partially replaced their losses with Turkish-built patrol/fast attack boats.

=== National Guard of Georgia ===
The National Guard of Georgia was established on 20 December 1990 and was manned mainly by volunteers. It represents the first Georgian armed formation, which became the base of the foundation for modern Defence Forces of Georgia. The Guard actively participated in the conflicts that occurred in Georgian territory (Samachablo, Abkhazia).

The National Guard used to consist of 20,554 personnel, but has now been reduced to 550.

#Support civil government in crisis situations (natural, technological, ecological);
#Register mobilization resources, study and deliver;
#Convene, select and man of citizens on the basis of the agreement, for the units, subunits and bases of the Defence Forces;
#Provide ceremonial activity support;
#Assisting in training the Reserve Forces.

=== Army Reserve and Territorial Defence Forces ===

The Army Reserve is a professional reserve force consisting of former regular army personnel only. Due to the amount of experience, the Reserve personnel would be drawn from to replace losses in the ranks of regular formations, but will if needed operate in the vanguard of a combined mechanized group or an infantry assault.

The Territorial Defence Forces were established for immediate readiness of the population in crisis events, such as war. Its main goals would be the fortification and defence of all populated and strategically important areas as well as providing quick aid or security for evacuation operations in case of natural catastrophes.

Other than the active army reserve which consists of only ex military personnel, the Territorial Defence Forces are rather sparsely prepared for complex military operations. It instead provides more comfort for the regular forces in case of war, by acting as an additional logistical arm and leaving the actual combat to the regular forces. With the land forces and reserve army engaged in direct action, the Defence Force&#x27;s most important task would be to construct trenches, bunkers and obstacles around strategically important areas and position themselves on systematically formed defensive lines. Mobilization capacity is around 140,000 troops and is reasonably large.

The TDF reservist is comparably poorly equipped for modern warfare. It is rumored that Georgia possess thousands of firearms of all types and infantry personal protection equipment inherited from the Soviet Union which could be used by reservists. Georgia also possess few dozen T-55 tanks that are in storage that could be used by the reservist forces.

=== Commissioned officers ===

== International cooperation ==
The Georgian Defence Forces frequently have large scale military drills involving heavy armor and parachute units with their NATO counterparts on Georgian soil to increase interoperability.

=== Peacekeeping missions ===
About 200 Georgian troops were deployed in the Kosovo (KFOR) in 1999–2008, 70 were deployed in Iraq (OIF) in 2003 and 50 in Afghanistan in 2004 (ISAF). From 2004 in Iraq were 300 Georgian troops. From 2005 approximately 850 troops were serving under Coalition Command (OIF and UNAMI). In July 2007 Georgia sent an extra 1,400 troops to Iraq; that brought the total number of troops in Iraq to 2,000. About 300 of these troops were assigned to Taskforce Petro and stationed at COP Cleary outside the town of Wahida near Salman Pak, Iraq. On 8 August 2008 Georgia announced it will withdraw 1,000 troops from Iraq due to rising hostilities with Russia. Their preparedness and training skills are evaluated on highest level by international experts. The entire Iraq contingent has been airlifted back to Georgia.

Hence, owing to participation in international peacekeeping missions the military members are able to obtain practical experience and to show readiness to cooperate with NATO and with other partner countries&#x27; forces.

Currently there are more than 1,570 Georgian combat troops deployed in Helmand, Afghanistan where Georgia has thus far suffered 22 deaths and over a hundred injuries. In September 2012, Georgia stated that it would continue its contributions in Afghanistan following the 2014 NATO withdrawal.

In November 2012, Georgia had doubled the number of troops deployed to fight with Nato-led forces in Afghanistan to over 1,500. Georgia has 1,570 troops serving there, making the small Caucasus country of 4.5 million people the largest non-Nato contributor to the Afghanistan mission.

Since 2014 Georgia has contributed 140 troops to the EUFOR RCA peacekeeping mission in the Central African Republic, Georgia also contributes its military units to Resolute Support Mission in Afghanistan.
== Commanders ==

The Chief of General Staff is the highest-ranking officer in the military, heading the General Staff and being the ex officio Deputy Chief of the Defence Forces, who is the commander of the Defence Forces, being appointed by the Minister of Defence. The senior enlisted advisor of the Georgian military is the Sergeant Major of the Georgian Defence Forces (), currently Sergeant Major Koba Tsirekidze (appointed on 11 April 2016).

== Military industry ==
Georgia has a long history of weapon production tracing back to ancient times. The modern arms industry began during the Soviet era. In 1941 Georgia became one of the most important Soviet weapon manufacturing states during the Second World War. It was responsible for providing the Soviet Army with all types of aircraft and ammunition. Tbilisi Aircraft Manufacturing&#x27;s role didn&#x27;t change after the war. Up until 1990 Georgia was producing various types of fighter aircraft, most notably the Su-25 since it was produced almost exclusively in Georgia, unmanned areal vehicles, missiles, satellite components and orbital satellites. The company lost most of its functionality and production capability when the Soviet Union dissolved, yet was not abandoned. In the late 1990s Georgia&#x27;s JSC RMP and later the newly established Ministry of Defence section &quot;Delta&quot; started to work on the development of ballistic equipment using their own ingredients. The advanced research unit had successfully developed a variety of personal protection gear, such as bomb disposal suits and level I-IV body armour using classified mixtures of domestic resource. These projects never went beyond some prototypes, mainly due to poor attention and financing from the government.

With foreign support primarily from the United States since 2005, Georgia became able to start building a solid industrial base for the military. From 2001 to 2007, Delta experimented with unmanned aerial vehicles and modified parts for helicopters and Su-25 aircraft until it got involved in the modification of Georgia&#x27;s T-72 tank fleet. In 2009–10, with enough experience and expertise and the assistance of designer Zviad Tsikolia, Delta created its first prototype of an armored personnel carrier, the Didgori. Early tests were highly successful so that its first production line started already in 2011. Two versions would initially serve in the armed forces in 2012, followed by different modifications from 2013 on. The Lazika is Delta&#x27;s attempt to manufacture a suitable modular infantry fighting vehicle created for multiple tasks. Delta considers the Lazika as one of the best vehicles of its class bearing armour technology similar to that of Israel. The remotely operated systems are locally produced as well. Due to &quot;misdirected financing&quot; and heavy interfering of former government officials, project Lazika was temporarily cancelled in late 2012, also due to &quot;sabotage&quot; and shortcomings in its armour research, but then later continued in early 2013 when a newly elected government took charge.

As of 2007 Georgia has been domestically producing uniforms for its military personnel. Other main production lines include various types of artillery systems such as MLRS, mortars and corresponding ammunition, anti-tank weapons and devices, full uniform sets for ceremonies and for all service branches, including boots, hats, assault vests, pouches, and backpacks. New kind of ballistic vests and helmets have been developed and produced for military service since 2013. The Georgian production uses techniques based on know-how from aerospace research whose methods differ slightly yet significantly from foreign ones. In 2018 plans were announced for decisive expansions in manufacturing capabilities. With assistance from the United States and Israel, a weapon manufacturing plant was established for the development and production of AR-15 based firearms.


== Bases ==
==See also==
*Georgia and NATO
*List of equipment of the Defence Forces of Georgia

==Notes==
==References==
 2005
==Further reading==
*Denise Hammick, Country Briefing: Georgia On the Cusp, Jane&#x27;s Defence Weekly, 2 January 2008

==External links==

*geo-army.ge, an information website (archived)
*Ministry of Defence of Georgia: The Strategic Defence Review 2007 (archived). &quot;mod.gov.ge&quot;. Retrieved 7 May 2008.
*GlobalSecurity.org on Georgia&#x27;s military
*Ministry of the defence of Georgia: Armed Forces of Georgia (archived). Retrieved 6 March 2009.
*Military Heraldry of Georgian Armed Forces.



*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/People%27s_Guard_of_Georgia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q770753" start="4" end="29" title="Defence Forces of Georgia" label="Defence Forces of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q770753" start="37" end="60" title="Defence Forces of Georgia" label="Georgian Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q770753" start="62" end="65" title="Defence Forces of Georgia" label="GDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="104" end="111" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951484" start="232" end="242" title="Georgian Land Forces" label="Land Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q129884" start="244" end="253" title="Georgian Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586527" start="255" end="269" title="National Guard of Georgia" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574566" start="275" end="300" title="Georgian Special Operations Forces" label="Special Operations Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q111943569" start="357" end="387" title="Minister of Defence of Georgia" label="Minister of Defence of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60544011" start="415" end="438" title="Chief of Georgian Defence Forces" label="Chief of Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q245160" start="491" end="514" title="First Republic of Georgia" label="first Georgian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q60963" start="593" end="601" title="Red Army invasion of Georgia" label="invading"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="602" end="616" title="Russian SFSR" label="Soviet Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q127328486" start="767" end="777" title="Conscription in Georgia" label="conscripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070890" start="929" end="963" title="Georgian Civil War" label="civil war and separatist conflicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q620735" start="985" end="1003" title="Russo-Georgian War" label="Russo-Georgian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="1072" end="1076" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="1081" end="1092" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q236036" start="1130" end="1146" title="Republics of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="1159" end="1163" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q653277" start="1164" end="1185" title="Partnership for Peace" label="Partnership for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6025242" start="1206" end="1240" title="Individual Partnership Action Plan" label="Individual Partnership Action Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q218435" start="1430" end="1448" title="Zviad Gamsakhurdia" label="Zviad Gamsakhurdia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="1539" end="1556" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q487779" start="1585" end="1601" title="Anatoly Lukyanov" label="Anatoly Lukyanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586527" start="1658" end="1672" title="National Guard of Georgia" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q290801" start="1734" end="1757" title="Boris Paichadze Stadium" label="Boris Paichadze Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q43456" start="2029" end="2040" title="Soviet Army" label="Soviet Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432230" start="2077" end="2109" title="Transcaucasian Military District" label="Transcaucasian Military District"/>
<link wikidata="Q212546" start="2509" end="2520" title="Akhaltsikhe" label="Akhaltsikhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070890" start="2589" end="2607" title="Georgian Civil War" label="Georgian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143379" start="2717" end="2744" title="1991–1992 South Ossetia War" label="1991–1992 South Ossetia War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209169" start="2753" end="2780" title="War in Abkhazia (1992–1993)" label="War in Abkhazia (1992–1993)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838760" start="2901" end="2932" title="Georgia Train and Equip Program" label="Georgia Train and Equip Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893188" start="2969" end="2999" title="U.S. Special Operations Forces" label="U.S. Special Operations Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="3004" end="3021" title="U.S. Marine Corps" label="U.S. Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q16838760" start="3224" end="3273" title="Georgia Security and Stability Operations Program" label="Georgia Security and Stability Operations Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839901" start="3365" end="3385" title="Georgian Kosovo contingent" label="Georgian contingents"/>
<link wikidata="Q159470" start="3407" end="3419" title="Kosovo Force" label="Kosovo Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="3469" end="3473" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="3478" end="3489" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31354462" start="3726" end="3734" title="Abkhazia" label="Abkhazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23427" start="3739" end="3752" title="South Ossetia" label="South Ossetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37736" start="3900" end="3914" title="North Caucasus" label="North Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23427" start="4081" end="4094" title="South Ossetia" label="South Ossetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q620735" start="4100" end="4122" title="2008 South Ossetia War" label="2008 South Ossetia War"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="4219" end="4237" title="Russian Federation" label="Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23427" start="4636" end="4649" title="South Ossetia" label="South Ossetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="4755" end="4761" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31354462" start="4807" end="4815" title="Abkhazia" label="Abkhazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q207700" start="5268" end="5272" title="AN-2" label="AN-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q155651" start="5283" end="5288" title="Mil Mi-24" label="Mi-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q316212" start="5302" end="5307" title="Mil Mi-14" label="Mi-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325379" start="5370" end="5380" title="Elbit Hermes 450" label="Hermes 450"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419370" start="5409" end="5421" title="Otokar Cobra" label="Otokar Cobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q185345" start="5804" end="5808" title="Poti" label="Poti"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5996" end="6009" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="6011" end="6018" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q159927" start="6044" end="6050" title="BTR-70" label="BTR-70"/>
<link wikidata="Q950158" start="6081" end="6084" title="Buk missile system" label="BUK"/>
<link wikidata="Q694993" start="6112" end="6115" title="9K33 Osa" label="OSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="6136" end="6142" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905143" start="6168" end="6176" title="Wolf Armoured Vehicle" label="Wolf APC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157008" start="6188" end="6197" title="SPYDER" label="SPYDER-SR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465101" start="6432" end="6439" title="Man-portable air-defense system" label="MANPADs"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="6456" end="6462" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951484" start="7034" end="7045" title="Georgian Land Forces" label="Land Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q129884" start="7047" end="7056" title="Georgian Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586527" start="7058" end="7072" title="National Guard of Georgia" label="National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574566" start="7078" end="7103" title="Georgian Special Operations Forces" label="Special Operations Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q60544011" start="7146" end="7169" title="Chief of Defence Forces of Georgia" label="Chief of Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q60792993" start="7191" end="7226" title="General Staff of the Defence Forces of Georgia" label="General Staff of the Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726691" start="7643" end="7667" title="Border Police of Georgia" label="Border Police of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3649223" start="7697" end="7736" title="Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia" label="Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314828" start="8080" end="8104" title="National Defence Academy (Georgia)" label="National Defence Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931169" start="8164" end="8208" title="Gori Military Hospital" label="Military Hospital of the Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3651856" start="8327" end="8357" title="Ministry of Justice of Georgia" label="Ministry of Justice of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951484" start="9450" end="9470" title="Georgian Land Forces" label="Georgian Land Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="9483" end="9490" title="brigade" label="brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="9495" end="9504" title="battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q994" start="10551" end="10558" title="Tbilisi" label="Tbilisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q994" start="10636" end="10643" title="Tbilisi" label="Tbilisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q573044" start="10714" end="10717" title="NATO Response Force" label="NRF"/>
<link wikidata="Q4549392" start="10721" end="10750" title="13th &amp;quot;Shavnabada&amp;quot; Light Infantry Battalion" label="13th Light Infantry Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q269194" start="10929" end="10936" title="Vaziani" label="Vaziani"/>
<link wikidata="Q269194" start="11186" end="11193" title="Vaziani" label="Vaziani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574566" start="11304" end="11332" title="Georgian Special Operations Forces" label="Special Operations Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q320519" start="11434" end="11440" title="Senaki" label="Senaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q172415" start="11735" end="11742" title="Kutaisi" label="Kutaisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011011" start="11983" end="11988" title="Khoni" label="Khoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q328975" start="12392" end="12400" title="Kobuleti" label="Kobuleti"/>
<link wikidata="Q12868591" start="12432" end="12440" title="Saguramo Range" label="Saguramo"/>
<link wikidata="Q159470" start="13395" end="13399" title="Kosovo Force" label="KFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="13440" end="13448" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q620735" start="13534" end="13576" title="2008 South Ossetia War" label="escalation of hostilities in South Ossetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="13727" end="13734" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q8108" start="13896" end="13904" title="Georgian language" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q61883" start="13994" end="14003" title="air force" label="air force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6066533" start="14326" end="14345" title="Irakli Garibashvili" label="Irakli Garibashvili"/>
<link wikidata="Q59264348" start="14943" end="14965" title="Coast Guard of Georgia" label="Coast Guard of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="15170" end="15179" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q185345" start="15188" end="15192" title="Poti" label="Poti"/>
<link wikidata="Q25475" start="15236" end="15242" title="Batumi" label="Batumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q880547" start="15407" end="15446" title="Black Sea Naval Co-operation Task Group" label="Black Sea Naval Co-operation Task Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586527" start="15809" end="15834" title="National Guard of Georgia" label="National Guard of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q328272" start="18249" end="18253" title="T-54/T-55" label="T-55"/>
<link wikidata="Q159470" start="18664" end="18668" title="Kosovo Force" label="KFOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="18710" end="18713" title="Operation Iraqi Freedom" label="OIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q155654" start="18754" end="18758" title="International Security Assistance Force" label="ISAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="18878" end="18881" title="Operation Iraqi Freedom" label="OIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115478" start="18886" end="18891" title="United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq" label="UNAMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="18945" end="18949" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="19467" end="19479" title="peacekeeping" label="peacekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="19590" end="19594" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q173821" start="19714" end="19721" title="Helmand" label="Helmand"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="19723" end="19734" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15695444" start="20276" end="20285" title="EUFOR RCA" label="EUFOR RCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q60792993" start="20533" end="20546" title="General Staff of the Defence Forces of Georgia" label="General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q17353577" start="20561" end="20571" title="ex officio" label="ex officio"/>
<link wikidata="Q60544011" start="20572" end="20606" title="Chief of Defence Forces of Georgia" label="Deputy Chief of the Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648988" start="20675" end="20694" title="Ministry of Defence of Georgia" label="Minister of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="21130" end="21146" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q287734" start="21240" end="21270" title="Tbilisi Aircraft Manufacturing" label="Tbilisi Aircraft Manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q192137" start="21405" end="21410" title="Su-25" label="Su-25"/>
<link wikidata="Q18274252" start="21770" end="21787" title="STC Delta" label="&amp;quot;Delta&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q18692696" start="22611" end="22625" title="Zviad Tsikolia" label="Zviad Tsikolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210468" start="22698" end="22705" title="Didgori Armoured Personnel Carrier" label="Didgori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531274" start="22919" end="22925" title="Lazika" label="Lazika"/>
<link wikidata="Q506219" start="23695" end="23699" title="multiple rocket launcher" label="MLRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889079" start="24368" end="24373" title="AR-15" label="AR-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q4339866" start="24418" end="24434" title="Georgia and NATO" label="Georgia and NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q18325800" start="24436" end="24486" title="List of equipment of the Defense Forces of Georgia" label="List of equipment of the Defence Forces of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446733" start="24595" end="24621" title="Jane&amp;#x27;s Defence Weekly" label="Jane&amp;#x27;s Defence Weekly"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12066" wikidata="Q789928" url="?curid=12066" title="Foreign relations of Georgia">
<text>Georgia&#x27;s location, nestled between the Black Sea, Russia, and Turkey, renders it strategically important. It is developing as the gateway from the Black Sea to the Caucasus and the larger Caspian region, but also serves as a buffer between Russia and Turkey. Georgia has a long and tumultuous relationship with Russia, but it is reaching out to its other neighbours and looking to the West in search of alternatives and opportunities. It signed a partnership and cooperation agreement with the European Union, participates in the Partnership for Peace, and encourages foreign investment. France, Germany, South Korea, the United Kingdom, and the United States all have embassies in Tbilisi. Georgia in 2004-2008 sought to become a member of NATO, but did not succeed in the face of strong Russian opposition.

Georgia is a member of the United Nations, the Council of Europe, and the OSCE.
Because of its strategic location, Georgia is in both the Russian and American spheres of influence; however, Georgia&#x27;s relationship with Russia is at its lowest point since 1921 due to Russo-Georgian War. As a result, Georgia broke off diplomatic relations with Russia and has left the Commonwealth of Independent States.

== Diplomatic relations ==
List of countries which Georgia maintains diplomatic relations with:
== Relations by country ==

===Multilateral===
===Africa===
===Americas===
===Asia===
===Europe=== 

===Oceania===
==Overview==
Georgia has established relations with 186 countries and the Sovereign Military Order of Malta. Georgia has terminated its diplomatic relations with Russia, Nicaragua and Syria.

Georgia has not yet established diplomatic relations with:
*Venezuela, Nauru
*Bhutan, Cook Islands, Niue
*Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic and the rest of states with limited recognition.

==See also==
*Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Georgia
*List of diplomatic missions in Georgia
*List of diplomatic missions of Georgia 
*Accession of Georgia to the European Union
*Georgia–European Union relations 
*Georgia–NATO relations
* EU Neighbourhood Info Centre: Country profile of Georgia 

==Further reading==
* NATO and the South Caucasus. Analyses, Chronicles, Opinion Polls in the &quot;Caucasus Analytical Digest No. 5&quot;
* Edilashvili, Maia: &quot;Foreign Direct Investment Declines in Georgia&quot; in the &quot;Caucasus Analytical Digest No. 28&quot;

== Notes ==
==References==
==External links==
*MFA of Georgia - Bilateral relations
*Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Georgia
*The Permanent Mission of Georgia to the United Nations
*United Nations Observer Mission in Georgia
*Georgia v. Russia Provisional Measures Order and President Rosalyn Higgins concurring and Joint Dissenting Opinion and ASIL</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="0" end="7" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="45" end="54" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="56" end="62" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="68" end="74" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="170" end="178" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q182219" start="279" end="311" title="Georgian-Russian relations" label="long and tumultuous relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="500" end="514" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q653277" start="536" end="557" title="Partnership for Peace" label="Partnership for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q994" start="688" end="695" title="Tbilisi" label="Tbilisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="747" end="751" title="North Atlantic Treaty Organization" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="843" end="857" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="863" end="880" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q81299" start="890" end="894" title="Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe" label="OSCE"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="954" end="960" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="966" end="974" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q60963" start="1069" end="1079" title="Red Army invasion of Georgia" label="since 1921"/>
<link wikidata="Q620735" start="1087" end="1105" title="Russo-Georgian War" label="Russo-Georgian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7779" start="1188" end="1222" title="Commonwealth of Independent States" label="Commonwealth of Independent States"/>
<link wikidata="Q190353" start="1510" end="1543" title="Sovereign Military Order of Malta" label="Sovereign Military Order of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q40362" start="1734" end="1766" title="Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic" label="Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q199683" start="1783" end="1814" title="List of states with limited recognition" label="states with limited recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568695" start="1831" end="1869" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Georgia" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616351" start="1871" end="1909" title="List of diplomatic missions in Georgia (country)" label="List of diplomatic missions in Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498476" start="1911" end="1949" title="List of diplomatic missions of Georgia" label="List of diplomatic missions of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q111082088" start="1952" end="1994" title="Accession of Georgia to the European Union" label="Accession of Georgia to the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398021" start="1996" end="2028" title="Georgia–European Union relations" label="Georgia–European Union relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4339866" start="2031" end="2053" title="Georgia–NATO relations" label="Georgia–NATO relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q273691" start="2671" end="2686" title="Rosalyn Higgins" label="Rosalyn Higgins"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12067" wikidata="Q117" url="?curid=12067" title="Ghana">
<text>Ghana, officially the Republic of Ghana, is a country in West Africa. It lies adjacent to the Gulf of Guinea and the Atlantic Ocean to the south, sharing a border with Ivory Coast in the west, Burkina Faso in the north, and Togo in the east. Ghana covers an area of , spanning diverse ecologies, from coastal savannas to tropical rainforests. With nearly 35 million inhabitants, Ghana is the second-most populous country in West Africa. The capital and largest city is Accra; other significant cities include Tema, Kumasi, Sunyani, Wa, Cape Coast, Techiman, Tamale, and Sekondi-Takoradi. In 1957 Ghana became the first colony in Sub-Saharan Africa to achieve sovereignty, under the leadership of Kwame Nkrumah. 

The earliest kingdoms to emerge in Ghana were Bonoman in the south and the Kingdom of Dagbon in the north, with Bonoman existing in the area during the 11th century. The Ashanti Empire and other Akan kingdoms in the south emerged over the centuries. Beginning in the 15th century, the Portuguese Empire, followed by other European powers, contested the area for trading rights, until the British ultimately established control of the coast by the 19th century. Following more than a century of colonial resistance, the current borders of the country took shape, encompassing four separate British colonial territories: Gold Coast, Ashanti, the Northern Territories, and British Togoland. These were unified as an independent dominion within the Commonwealth of Nations. On 6 March 1957 Ghana became the first colony in Sub-Saharan Africa to achieve sovereignty - that is, gain independence. Under President Kwame Nkrumah, it became influential in decolonisation efforts and the Pan-African movement.

Ghana is a multi-ethnic country with diverse linguistic and religious groups; while the Akan are the largest ethnic group, they constitute a plurality. Most Ghanaians are Christians (71.3%); almost a fifth are Muslims; a tenth practice traditional faiths or report no religion. Ghana is a unitary constitutional democracy led by a president who is head of state and head of government. For political stability in Africa, Ghana ranked seventh in the 2012 Ibrahim Index of African Governance and fifth in the 2012 Fragile States Index. It has maintained since 1993 one of the freest and most stable governments on the continent, and it performs relatively well in healthcare, economic growth, and human development, so that it has a significant influence in West Africa and Africa as a whole. Ghana is highly integrated in international affairs, being a founding member of the Non-Aligned Movement and the African Union, and a member of the Economic Community of West African States, the Group of 24 and the Commonwealth of Nations.

==Etymology==
The name &quot;Ghana&quot; comes from Wagadu, a vast empire in west Africa from the 3rd to 12th centuries; Wagadu was termed &quot;Ghana&quot; by Arab traders involved in the trans-Saharan trade. &quot;Ghana&quot; is thought to originate from the title &quot;Kaya Maghan&quot; of the rulers of Wagadu, which translates as &quot;ruler of gold&quot;. As the Gold Coast colony prepared for independence, the nation&#x27;s leader and first prime minister later first president Kwame Nkrumah the one who led Ghana to independence, settled on &quot;Ghana&quot;, aiming to evoke a sense of unity and liberation among the Ghanaian people. The name was a powerful reminder of their shared heritage and the legacy of the ancient empire that once thrived in the wider region. It encapsulated the aspirations of the Ghanaian people for self-governance, progress, and a future marked by dignity and resilience.

==History==
===Medieval kingdoms===

The earliest kingdoms to emerge in Ghana were Bonoman in the south and the Kingdom of Dagbon in the north, with Bonoman existing in the area during the 11th century. From the 17th century, different Akan states begun to emerge from what is believed to have been the Bonoman area, mainly based on gold trading. These states included Bonoman (Brong-Ahafo region), Ashanti (Ashanti Region), Denkyira (Western North region), Mankessim Kingdom (Central region), and Akwamu (Eastern region). By the 19th century, the territory of the southern part of Ghana was included in the Kingdom of Ashanti. The government of the Ashanti Empire operated first as a loose network and eventually as a centralised kingdom with a specialised bureaucracy centred in the capital city of Kumasi. Prior to Akan contact with Europeans, the Akan people created an economy based on principally gold and gold bar precious metals, which were traded with other states in Africa.

The Ga-Dangme and Ewe migrated westward from south-western Nigeria. The Ewe – formerly known as Dogbo- migrated from Oyo area with their Gbe-speaking kinsmen (Adja, Fon, Phla/Phera and Ogun/Gun) and in transition, settled at Ketou in Benin Republic, Tado in Togo, Dogbo Nyigbo in Benin Republic and with Nortsie (a walled town in present-day Togo) as their final dispersal point. Their dispersal from Nortsie was necessitated by the high-handed rule of King Agorkorli (Agɔ Akɔli) who was the reigning monarch of the tribe at that time. The Ewe in Ghana speak three principal dialects: Anlo(along the coast),Tongu(along the Volta river) and Ewedome (in the hill country side).The Ga-Dangme occupy the Greater Accra Region and parts of the Eastern Region, while the Ewe are found in the Volta Region as well as the neighbouring Togo, Benin Republic and Nigeria (around Badagry area).

===European contact and colonialism===

Akan trade with European states began after contact with the Portuguese in the 15th century. European contact was by the Portuguese people, who came to the Gold Coast region in the 15th century to trade. The Portuguese then established the Portuguese Gold Coast (Costa do Ouro), focused on the availability of gold. The Portuguese built a trading lodge at a coastal settlement called Anomansah (the perpetual drink), which they renamed São Jorge da Mina. In 1481, King John II of Portugal commissioned Diogo de Azambuja to build the Elmina Castle, which was completed in three years. By 1598, the Dutch had joined the Portuguese in the gold trade, establishing the Dutch Gold Coast (&quot;Nederlandse Bezittingen ter Kuste van Guinea&quot; – &#x27;Dutch properties at the Guinea coast&#x27;) and building forts at Fort Komenda and Kormantsi. In 1617, the Dutch captured the Elmina Castle from the Portuguese and Axim in 1642 (Fort St Anthony).

European traders had joined in gold trading by the 17th century, including the Swedes, establishing the Swedish Gold Coast (&quot;Svenska Guldkusten&quot;), and Denmark–Norway, establishing the Danish Gold Coast (&quot;Danske Guldkyst&quot; or &quot;Dansk Guinea&quot;). European traders participated in the Atlantic slave trade in this area. More than 30 forts and castles were built by the merchants. The Germans established the Brandenburger Gold Coast or Groß Friedrichsburg. In 1874, Great Britain established control over some parts of the country, assigning these areas the status of the British Gold Coast. Military engagements occurred between British colonial powers and Akan nation-states. The Kingdom of Ashanti defeated the British some times in the 100-year-long Anglo-Ashanti wars and eventually lost with the War of the Golden Stool in 1900.

===Transition to independence===
In 1947, the newly formed United Gold Coast Convention led by &quot;The Big Six&quot; called for &quot;self-government within the shortest possible time&quot; following the 1946 Gold Coast legislative election. Kwame Nkrumah, a Ghanaian nationalist who led Ghana from 1957 to 1966 as the country&#x27;s first prime minister and president, formed the Convention People&#x27;s Party in 1949 with the motto &quot;self-government now&quot;. The party initiated a &quot;positive action&quot; campaign involving non-violent protests, strikes and non-cooperation with the British authorities. Nkrumah was arrested and sentenced to one year imprisonment during this time. In the Gold Coast&#x27;s 1951 general election, he was elected to Parliament and was released from prison. He became prime minister in 1952 and began a policy of Africanization.

At midnight of March 6, 1957, the Gold Coast, Ashanti, the Northern Territories, and British Togoland were unified as one single independent dominion within the British Commonwealth under the name Ghana. This was done under the Ghana Independence Act 1957. The current flag of Ghana, consisting of the colours red, gold, green, and a black star, dates back to this unification. On 1 July 1960, following the Ghanaian constitutional referendum and Ghanaian presidential election, Nkrumah declared Ghana a republic and assumed the presidency. 6 March is the nation&#x27;s Independence Day, and 1 July is celebrated as Republic Day.

Nkrumah led an authoritarian regime in Ghana, as he repressed political opposition and conducted elections that were not free and fair. In 1964, a constitutional amendment made Ghana a one-party state, with Nkrumah as president for life of both the nation and its party. Nkrumah was the first African head of state to promote the concept of Pan-Africanism, which he had been introduced to during his studies at Lincoln University, Pennsylvania in the United States, at the time when Marcus Garvey was known for his &quot;Back to Africa Movement&quot;. He merged the teachings of Garvey, Martin Luther King Jr. and the naturalised Ghanaian scholar W. E. B. Du Bois into the formation of 1960s Ghana. Osagyefo Dr. Kwame Nkrumah, as he became known, played an instrumental part in the founding of the Non-Aligned Movement, and in establishing the Kwame Nkrumah Ideological Institute to teach his ideologies of communism and socialism. His life achievements were recognised by Ghanaians during his centenary birthday celebration, and the day was instituted as a public holiday in Ghana (Founders&#x27; Day).

===Operation Cold Chop and aftermath===

The government of Nkrumah was subsequently overthrown in a coup by the Ghana Armed Forces, codenamed &quot;Operation Cold Chop&quot;. This occurred while Nkrumah was abroad with Zhou Enlai in the People&#x27;s Republic of China, on a mission to Hanoi, Vietnam, to help end the Vietnam War. The coup took place on 24 February 1966, led by Colonel Emmanuel Kwasi Kotoka and Brigadier Akwasi Afrifa. The National Liberation Council was formed, chaired by Lieutenant General Joseph A. Ankrah.

A series of alternating military and civilian governments, often affected by economic instabilities, ruled Ghana from 1966, ending with the ascent to power of Flight Lieutenant Jerry John Rawlings of the Provisional National Defence Council in 1981. These changes resulted in the suspension of the constitution in 1981 and the banning of political parties. The economy soon declined, so Rawlings negotiated a structural adjustment plan, changing many old economic policies, and growth recovered during the mid-1980s. A new constitution restoring multi-party system politics was promulgated in the presidential election of 1992, in which Rawlings was elected, and again in the general election of 1996.

In a tribal war in Northern Ghana in 1994, between the Konkomba and other ethnic groups, including the Nanumba, Dagomba and Gonja, between 1,000 and 2,000 people were killed and 150,000 people were displaced.
After the 2000 general election, John Kufuor of the New Patriotic Party became president of Ghana on 7 January 2001 and was re-elected in 2004, thus also serving two terms (the term limit) as president of Ghana and marking the first time under the fourth republic that power was transferred from one legitimately elected head of state and head of government to another.

Nana Akufo-Addo, the ruling party candidate, was defeated in a very close 2008 general election by John Atta Mills of the National Democratic Congress. Mills died of natural causes and was succeeded by Vice President John Mahama on 24 July 2012. Following the 2012 general election, Mahama became president in his own right, and Ghana was described as a &quot;stable democracy&quot;. As a result of the 2016 general election, Nana Akufo-Addo became president on 7 January 2017. He was re-elected after a tightly contested election in 2020.

To combat deforestation, on 11 June 2021 Ghana inaugurated Green Ghana Day, with the aim of planting five million trees in a concentrated effort to preserve the country&#x27;s rainforest cover.

==Geography==


Ghana is located on the Gulf of Guinea, a few degrees north of the Equator. It spans an area of and has an Atlantic coastline that stretches on the Gulf of Guinea in the Atlantic Ocean to its south. Dodi Island and Bobowasi Island are near the south coast. It lies between latitudes 4°45&#x27;N and 11°N, and longitudes 1°15&#x27;E and 3°15&#x27;W. The prime meridian passes through Ghana, specifically through Tema. Ghana is geographically closer to the intersection of the Prime Meridian and the Equator than any other country, since this point, (0°, 0°), is located in the Atlantic Ocean approximately 614km (382mi) off the south-east coast of Ghana.

Grasslands mixed with south coastal shrublands and forests dominate Ghana, with forest extending northward from the coast and eastward for a maximum of about with locations for mining of industrial minerals and timber. Ghana is home to five terrestrial ecoregions: Eastern Guinean forests, Guinean forest–savanna mosaic, West Sudanian savanna, Central African mangroves, and Guinean mangroves. 

The White Volta River and its tributary Black Volta, flow south through Ghana to Lake Volta, the world&#x27;s third-largest reservoir by volume and largest by surface area, formed by the hydroelectric Akosombo Dam, completed in 1965. The Volta flows out of Lake Volta into the Gulf of Guinea. The northernmost part of Ghana is Pulmakong and the southernmost part of Ghana is Cape Three Points.

The climate of Ghana is tropical, and there is wet season and dry season. Ghana sits at the intersection of three hydro-climatic zones. Changes in rainfall, weather conditions and sea-level rise affect the salinity of coastal waters. This is expected to negatively affect both farming and fisheries.

In 2015, the government produced a document titled &quot;Ghana&#x27;s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution&quot;. Following that, Ghana signed the Paris Climate Agreement in 2016.

==Politics==


Ghana is a unitary presidential constitutional democracy with a parliamentary multi-party system that is dominated by two parties—the National Democratic Congress (NDC) and the New Patriotic Party (NPP). Ghana alternated between civilian and military governments until January 1993, when the military government gave way to the Fourth Republic of Ghana after presidential and parliamentary elections in late 1992. The 1992 constitution of Ghana divides powers among a commander-in-chief of the Ghana Armed Forces (President of Ghana), parliament (Parliament of Ghana), cabinet (Cabinet of Ghana), council of state (Ghanaian Council of State), and an independent judiciary (Judiciary of Ghana). The government is elected by universal suffrage after every four years.

Nana Akufo-Addo won the presidency in the general election in 2016, defeating incumbent John Mahama. He also won the 2020 election after the presidential election results were challenged at the Supreme Court by flagbearer of the NDC, John Mahama. Presidents are limited to two four-year terms in office.

The 2012 Fragile States Index indicated that Ghana is ranked the 67th-least fragile state in the world and the fifth-least fragile state in Africa. Ghana ranked 112th out of 177 countries on the index. Ghana ranked as the 64th-least corrupt and politically corrupt country in the world out of all 174 countries ranked and ranked as the fifth-least corrupt and politically corrupt country in Africa out of 53 countries in the 2012 Transparency International Corruption Perception Index. Ghana was ranked seventh in Africa out of 53 countries in the 2012 Ibrahim Index of African Governance. The Ibrahim Index is a comprehensive measure of African government, based on variables which reflect the success with which governments deliver essential political goods to its citizens. According to 2023 V-Dem Democracy indices Ghana is ranked 67th electoral democracy worldwide and 10th electoral democracy in Africa.

===Foreign relations===
Since independence, Ghana has been devoted to ideals of nonalignment and is a founding member of the Non-Aligned Movement. Ghana favours international and regional political and economic co-operation, and is an active member of the United Nations and the African Union.

Ghana has a strong relationship with the United States. Three recent U.S. presidents—Bill Clinton, George W. Bush, and Barack Obama—and a Vice President—Kamala Harris—have made diplomatic trips to Ghana. Many Ghanaian diplomats and politicians hold positions in international organisations, including Ghanaian diplomat and former Secretary-General of the United Nations Kofi Annan, International Criminal Court Judge Akua Kuenyehia, as well as former President Jerry John Rawlings and former President John Agyekum Kufuor, who both served as diplomats of the United Nations. The most notable among diplomats from Ghana is the Late Kofi Annan, who served as the 7th Secretary-General of the United Nations.

In September 2010, President John Atta Mills visited China on an official visit. Mills and China&#x27;s former President Hu Jintao marked the 50th anniversary of diplomatic ties between the two nations, at the Great Hall of the People. China reciprocated with an official visit in November 2011, by the vice-chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People&#x27;s Congress of China, Zhou Tienong who visited Ghana and met with Ghana&#x27;s President John Mahama. China recently became one of the top investing countries of Ghana, which predominantly focus on infrastructure, natural resources, and manufacturing sectors, have promoted economic growth, job creation, and technology transfer in Ghana. However, concerns regarding the sustainability of Chinese-financed projects, environmental impacts, and the lack of transparency in their investments call for a careful assessment of these collaborations. Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad met with Mahama in 2013 to hold discussions on strengthening the Non-Aligned Movement and also co–chair a bilateral meeting between Ghana and Iran at the Ghanaian presidential palace Flagstaff House.

The Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) were integrated into Ghana&#x27;s development agenda and the budget. According to reports, the SDGs were implemented through a decentralized planning approach. This allows for stakeholders&#x27; participation, such as in UN agencies, traditional leaders, civil society organizations, academia, and others. The 17 SDGs are a global call to action to end poverty among others, and the UN and its partners in the country are working towards achieving them. According to the President Nana Akufo-Addo, Ghana was &quot;the first sub-Saharan African country to achieve the goal of halving poverty, as contained in Goal 1 of the Millennium Development Goals&quot;.

===Military===

In 1957, the Ghana Armed Forces (GAF) consisted of its headquarters, support services, three battalions of infantry and a reconnaissance squadron with armoured vehicles. President Nkrumah aimed at rapidly expanding the GAF to support the United States of Africa ambitions. Thus, in 1961, 4th and 5th Battalions were established, and in 1964 6th Battalion was established, from a parachute airborne unit originally raised in 1963. Today, Ghana is a regional power and regional hegemon. In his book &quot;Shake Hands with the Devil&quot;, Canadian Forces commander Roméo Dallaire highly rated the GAF soldiers and military personnel.

The military operations and military doctrine of the GAF are conceptualised in the constitution, Ghana&#x27;s Law on Armed Force Military Strategy, and Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Training Centre agreements to which GAF is attestator. GAF military operations are executed under the auspices and imperium of the Ministry of Defence. Although Ghana is relatively peaceful and is often considered being one of the least violent countries in the region, Ghana has experienced political violence in the past and 2017 has thus far seen an upward trend in incidents motivated by political grievances.

===Law enforcement===
The Ghana Police Service and the Criminal Investigation Department are the main law enforcement agencies, responsible for the detection of crime, maintenance of law and order and the maintenance of internal peace and security. The Ghana Police Service has eleven specialised police units, including a Militarized police Rapid deployment force and Marine Police Unit. The Ghana Police Service operates in 12 divisions: ten covering the regions of Ghana, one assigned specifically to the seaport and industrial hub of Tema, and the twelfth being the Railways, Ports and Harbours Division. The Ghana Police Service&#x27;s Marine Police Unit and Division handles issues that arise from the country&#x27;s offshore oil and gas industry.

The Ghana Prisons Service and the sub-division Borstal Institute for Juveniles administers incarceration. Ghana retains and exercises the death penalty for treason, corruption, robbery, piracy, drug trafficking, rape, and homicide. The new sustainable development goals adopted by the United Nations call for the international community to come together to promote the rule of law; support equal access to justice for all; reduce corruption; and develop effective, accountable, and transparent institutions at all levels.

Ghana is used as a key narcotics industry transshipment point by traffickers, usually from South America as well as some from other African nations. In 2013, the UN chief of the Office on Drugs and Crime stated that &quot;West Africa is completely weak in terms of border control and the big drug cartels from Colombia and Latin America have chosen Africa as a way to reach Europe.&quot; There is not a wide or popular knowledge about the narcotics industry and intercepted narcotics within Ghana, since it is an underground economy. The social context within which narcotic trafficking, storage, transportation, and repacking systems exist in Ghana and the state&#x27;s location along the Gulf of Guinea makes Ghana an attractive country for the narcotics business. The Narcotics Control Board has impounded container ships at the Sekondi Naval Base in the Takoradi Harbour. These ships were carrying thousands of kilograms of cocaine, with a street value running into billions of Ghana cedis. However, drug seizures saw a decline in 2011. Drug cartels are using new methods in narcotics production and narcotics exportation, to avoid Ghanaian security agencies. Underdeveloped institutions, porous open borders, and the existence of established smuggling organisations contribute to Ghana&#x27;s position in the narcotics industry. President Mills initiated ongoing efforts to reduce the role of airports in Ghana&#x27;s drug trade.

=== Human rights ===

Homosexual acts are prohibited by law in Ghana. According to a 2013 survey by the Pew Research Center, 96% of Ghanaians believe that homosexuality should not be accepted by society. Sometimes elderly women in Ghana are accused of witchcraft, particularly in rural Ghana. Issues of witchcraft mainly remain as speculations based on superstitions within families. In some parts of northern Ghana, there exist what are called witch camps. These are said to house a total of around 1,000 people accused of witchcraft. The Ghanaian government has announced that it intends to close the camps.

==Economy==


Ghana possesses industrial minerals, hydrocarbons and precious metals. It is an emerging designated digital economy with mixed economy hybridisation and an emerging market. It has an economic plan target known as the &quot;Ghana Vision 2020&quot;. This plan envisions Ghana as the first African country to become a developed country between 2020 and 2029 and a newly industrialised country between 2030 and 2039. This excludes fellow Group of 24 member and Sub-Saharan African country South Africa, which is a newly industrialised country.

Ghana&#x27;s economy has ties to the Chinese yuan renminbi along with Ghana&#x27;s vast gold reserves. In 2013, the Bank of Ghana began circulating the renminbi throughout Ghanaian state-owned banks and to the Ghana public as hard currency along with the national Ghanaian cedi for second national trade currency.

Between 2012 and 2013, 38% of rural dwellers were experiencing poverty whereas only 11% of urban dwellers were. Urban areas hold greater opportunity for employment, particularly in informal trade, while nearly all (94 percent) of &quot;rural poor households&quot; participate in the agricultural sector.

The Volta River Authority and the Ghana National Petroleum Corporation, both state-owned, are the two major electricity producers. The Akosombo Dam, built on the Volta River in 1965, along with the Bui Dam, the Kpong Dam and several other hydroelectric dams, provide hydropower. In addition, the government sought to build the second nuclear power plant in Africa.

The Ghana Stock Exchange is the fifth largest on continental Africa and 3rd largest in sub-saharan Africa with a market capitalisation of GH¢ 57.2 billion or CN¥180.4 billion in 2012 with the South Africa JSE Limited as first. The Ghana Stock Exchange was the second best performing stock exchange in sub-saharan Africa in 2013.

Ghana produces high-quality cocoa. It is the second largest producer of cocoa globally and its ICCO membership helps in its international cocoa trade. Ghana is classified as a middle income country. Services account for 50% of GDP, followed by manufacturing (24.1%), extractive industries (5%), and taxes (20.9%). Ghana has an increasing primary manufacturing economy and export of digital technology goods along with assembling and exporting automobiles and ships, diverse resource rich exportation of industrial minerals, agricultural products primarily cocoa, petroleum and natural gas, and industries such as information and communications technology primarily via Ghana&#x27;s state digital technology corporation Rlg Communications which manufactures tablet computers with smartphones and various consumer electronics. Urban electric cars have been manufactured in Ghana since 2014.

It announced plans to issue government debt by way of social and green bonds in Autumn 2021, making it the first African country to do so. The country, which was planning to borrow up to $5 billion in international markets, would use the proceeds from these sustainable bonds to refinance debt used for social and environmental projects and pay for educational or health. Only a few other nations have sold them so far, including Chile and Ecuador. The country will use the proceeds to forge ahead with a free secondary-school initiative started in 2017 among other programs, despite having recorded its lowest economic growth rate in 37 years in 2020.
It produces and exports hydrocarbons such as sweet crude oil and natural gas. The 100%-state-owned filling station company, Ghana Oil Company, is the number 1 petroleum and gas filling station, and the 100%-state-owned state oil company Ghana National Petroleum Corporation oversees hydrocarbon exploration and production of petroleum and natural gas reserves. Ghana aims to further increase the output of oil to per day and gas to per day. The Jubilee Oil Field, which contains up to of sweet crude oil, was discovered in 2007. Ghana is believed to have up to to of petroleum in reserves, which is the fifth-largest in Africa and the 21st-to-25th-largest proven reserves in the world. It also has up to of natural gas in reserves. The government has drawn up plans to nationalise petroleum and natural gas reserves to increase government revenue.

In 2015, Ghana produced 88 metric tonnes of gold as per the our world in data report. As of 2019, Ghana was the 7th largest producer of gold in the world, producing ~140 tonnes that year. This record saw Ghana surpass South Africa in output for the first time, making Ghana the largest gold producer in Africa. In addition to gold, Ghana exports silver, timber, diamonds, bauxite, and manganese, and has other mineral deposits. Ghana ranks 9th in the world in diamond export and reserve size. The government has drawn up plans to nationalize mining industry to increase government revenue.

&quot;Shortages&quot; of electricity in 2015 and 2016 led to dumsor (&quot;persistent, irregular and unpredictable&quot; electric power outages), increasing the interest in renewables. As of 2019, there is a surplus of electricity.

The judicial system of Ghana deals with corruption, economic malpractice and lack of economic transparency. According to Transparency International&#x27;s Corruption Perceptions Index of 2018, out of 180 countries, Ghana was ranked 78th, with a score of 41 on a scale where a 0–9 score means highly corrupt, and a 90–100 score means very clean. This was based on perceived levels of public sector corruption.

===Science and technology===
Ghana launched a cellular mobile network in 1992. It was later connected to the Internet and introduced ADSL broadband services. It was ranked 99th in the Global Innovation Index in 2024.

The Ghana Space Science and Technology Centre (GSSTC) and Ghana Space Agency (GhsA) oversee space exploration and space programmes. GSSTC and GhsA worked to have a national security observational satellite launched into orbit in 2015. Ghana&#x27;s annual space exploration expenditure has been 1% of its GDP, to support research in science and technology. In 2012, Ghana was elected to chair the Commission on Science and Technology for Sustainable Development in the South (Comsats); Ghana has a joint effort in space exploration with the South African National Space Agency.

===Tourism===

In 2011, tourists visiting Ghana numbered 1,087,000, with arrivals including South Americans, Asians, Europeans, and North Americans. Among the attractions and tourist destinations are waterfalls such as Kintampo waterfalls and the largest waterfall in west Africa, Wli waterfalls, the coastal palm-lined sandy beaches, caves, mountains, rivers, and reservoirs and lakes such as Lake Bosumtwi and the largest human-made lake in the world by surface area, Lake Volta, dozens of forts and castles, World Heritage Sites, nature reserves and national parks. Notable castles are Cape Coast Castle and the Elmina Castle. Castles mark where blood was shed in the slave trade and preserve and promote the African heritage stolen and destroyed through the slave trade. The World Heritage Convention of UNESCO named Ghana&#x27;s castles and forts as World Heritage Monuments, based on the criterion: &quot;The Castles and Forts of Ghana shaped not only Ghana’s history but that of the world over four centuries as the focus of first the gold trade and then the slave trade. They are a significant and emotive symbol of European-African encounters and of the starting point of the African Diaspora.&quot;

The World Economic Forum statistics in 2010 showed that out of the world&#x27;s favourite tourist destinations, Ghana was ranked 108th out of 139 countries. The country had moved two places up from the 2009 rankings. In 2011, &quot;Forbes&quot; magazine published that Ghana was ranked the 11th most friendly country in the world. The assertion was based on a survey in 2010 of a cross-section of travellers. Of all the African countries that were included in the survey, Ghana ranked highest. Tourism is the fourth highest earner of foreign exchange for the country. In 2024, Ghana ranked as the 55th most peaceful country in the world.

Up and down the coastline, surfing spots have been identified and cultivated by locals and internationals. Surfers have made trips to the country to sample the waves. Surfers carried their boards amid traditional fishing vessels.

According to Destination Pride—a data-driven search platform used to visualize the world&#x27;s LGBTQ+ laws, rights and social sentiment—Ghana&#x27;s Pride score is 22 (out of 100).

==Demographics==

 United Nations&#x27; reports, Ghana has a population of 34,581,288. , around 29% of the population is under the age of 15, while persons aged 15–64 make up 57.8% of the population. The 2010 census reported that the largest ethnic groups are the Akan (47.3%), the Mole-Dagbani (18.5%), the Ewe (13.9%), the Ga-Dangme (7.4%), the Gurma (5.7%) and the Guan (3.7%). United Nations&#x27; reports, the median age of Ghanaian citizens is 21 years old. Ghana contributes 0.42% to the total world population.

With recent legal immigration of skilled workers who possess Ghana Cards, there is a small population of Chinese, Malaysian, Indian, Middle Eastern and European nationals. In 2010, the Ghana Immigration Service reported many economic migrants and Illegal immigrants inhabiting Ghana: 14.6% (or 3.1 million) of Ghana&#x27;s 2010 population (predominantly Nigerians, Burkinabe citizens, Togolese citizens, and Malian citizens). In 1969, under the &quot;Ghana Aliens Compliance Order&quot; enacted by then Prime Minister Kofi Abrefa Busia, the Border Guard Unit deported more than 3,000,000 aliens and illegal immigrants in three months as they made up 20% of the population at the time. In 2013, there was a mass deportation of illegal miners, more than 4,000 of whom were Chinese nationals.
===Languages===
English is the official language of Ghana. Additionally, there are eleven languages that have the status of government-sponsored languages:
*Akan languages (Asante Twi, Akuapem Twi, Fante, Bono which have a high degree of mutual intelligibility, and Nzema, which is less intelligible with the above)
*Dangme
*Ewe
*Ga
*Guan
*Kasem
*Mole–Dagbani languages (Dagaare and Dagbanli)

Of these, Asante Twi is the most widely spoken.

Because Ghana is surrounded by French-speaking countries, French is widely taught in schools and used for commercial and international economic exchanges. Since 2005, Ghana has been an associate member of the , the global organisation that unites French-speaking countries (84 nations on six continents). In 2005, more than 350,000 Ghanaian children studied French in schools. Since then, its status has been progressively updated to a mandatory language in every junior high school, and it is in the process of becoming an official language.

Ghanaian Pidgin English, also known as Kru English (or in Akan, &quot;kroo brofo&quot;), is a variety of West African Pidgin English spoken in Accra and in the southern towns. It can be divided into two varieties, referred to as &quot;uneducated&quot; or &quot;non-institutionalized&quot; pidgin and &quot;educated&quot; or &quot;institutionalized&quot; pidgin, the former associated with uneducated or illiterate people and the latter acquired and used in institutions such as universities.

===Religion===

Christianity is the largest religion in Ghana, with 71.3% of the population being members of various Christian denominations as of the 2021 census. Islam is practised by 20% of the total population. According to a 2012 report by Pew Research, 51% of Muslims are followers of Sunni Islam, while approximately 16% belong to the Ahmadiyya movement and around 8% identify with Shia Islam, while the remainder are non-denominational Muslims. There is &quot;no significant link between ethnicity and religion in Ghana&quot;.

Ghana has around 150,000 Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses.

=== Universal health care and life expectancy ===

Ghana has a universal health care system, National Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS), which is strictly designated for Ghanaian nationals. Health care is variable throughout Ghana and in 2012, more than 12 million Ghanaian nationals were covered by the NHIS. Urban centres are well served and contain most of the hospitals, clinics, and pharmacies. There are more than 200 hospitals, and Ghana is a destination for medical tourism. In 2010, there were 0.1 physicians per 1,000 people and , 0.9 hospital beds per 1,000 people. In 2010, 5.2% of Ghana&#x27;s GDP was spent on health. In 2020, the WHO announced Ghana became the second country in the WHO African Region to attain regulatory system &quot;maturity level 3&quot;, the second-highest in the four-tiered WHO classification of National medicines regulatory systems.

Life expectancy at birth in 2021 was 68.6 for a female and 63.7 for a male. In 2013, infant mortality was to 39 per 1,000 live births. Sources vary on life expectancy at birth; the World Health Organization (WHO) estimated 62 years for men and 64 years for women born in 2016. The fertility rate declined from 3.99 (2000) to 3.28 (2010) with 2.78 in urban region and 3.94 in rural region. The United Nations reports a fertility decline from 6.95 (1970) to 4.82 (2000) to 3.93 live births per woman in 2017.

, the HIV/AIDS prevalence was estimated at 1.40% among adults aged 15–49.

===Education===

The education system is divided into three parts: basic education, secondary cycle, and tertiary education. &quot;Basic education&quot; lasts 11 years (ages 4‒15). It is divided into kindergarten (two years), primary school (two modules of three years) and junior high (three years). Junior high school ends with the Basic Education Certificate Examination. Once certified, the pupil can proceed to the secondary cycle. Hence, the pupil has the choice between general education (offered by the senior high school) and vocational education (offered by the technical senior high school or the technical and vocational institutes). Senior high school lasts 3 years and leads to the West African Senior School Certificate Examination, which is a prerequisite for enrollment in a university bachelor&#x27;s degree programme. Polytechnics are open to vocational students.

A bachelor&#x27;s degree requires four years of study. It can be followed by a one- or two-year master&#x27;s degree programme, which can be followed by a PhD programme of at least three years. A polytechnic programme lasts two or three years. Ghana possesses colleges of education. Some of the universities are the University of Ghana, Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, and University of Cape Coast.

There are more than 95% of children in school. The female and male ages 15–24 years literacy rate was 81% in 2010, with males at 82%, and females at 80%. An education system annually attracts foreign students particularly in the university sector.

Ghana has a free education six-year primary school education system beginning at age 6. The government largely funds basic education comprising public primary schools and public junior high schools. Senior high schools were subsidised by the government until September 2017/2018 academic year that senior high education became free. At the higher education level, the government funds more than 80% of resources provided to public universities, polytechnics and teacher training colleges. As part of the Free Compulsory Universal Basic Education, Fcube, the government supplies all basic education schools with all their textbooks and other educational supplies, like exercise books. Senior high schools are provided with all their textbook requirements by the government. Private schools acquire their educational material from private suppliers.

== Culture ==
===Food and drink===
Ghanaian cuisine includes an assortment of soups and stews with varied seafoods; most Ghanaian soups are prepared with vegetables, meat, poultry or fish. Fish is important in the diet, with tilapia, roasted and fried whitebait, smoked fish and crayfish, all being common components of Ghanaian dishes. Banku (akple) is a common starchy food made from ground corn (maize), and cornmeal based staples kɔmi (kenkey) and banku (akple) are usually accompanied by some form of fried fish (chinam) or grilled tilapia and a very spicy condiment made from raw red and green chillies, onions and tomatoes (pepper sauce). Banku and tilapia is a combo served in most restaurants. Fufu is the most common exported Ghanaian dish and is a delicacy across the African diaspora. Rice is an established staple meal across the country, with various rice-based dishes serving as breakfast, lunch and dinner, the main variants are waakye, plain rice and stew (either kontomire or tomato gravy), fried rice and jollof rice.

===Literature===
=== Clothing ===

During the 13th century, Ghanaians developed their unique art of &quot;adinkra&quot; printing. Hand-printed and hand-embroidered adinkra clothes were made and used exclusively by royalty for devotional ceremonies. Each of the motifs that make up the corpus of adinkra symbolism has a name and meaning derived from a proverb, a historical event, human attitude, ethology, plant life-form, or shapes of inanimate and man-made objects. The meanings of the motifs may be categorised into aesthetics, ethics, human relations, and concepts. The Adinkra symbols have a decorative function as tattoos but also represent objects that encapsulate evocative messages that convey traditional wisdom, aspects of life, or the environment. There are many symbols with distinct meanings, often linked with proverbs. In the words of Anthony Appiah, they were one of the means in a pre-literate society for &quot;supporting the transmission of a complex and nuanced body of practice and belief&quot;.
Along with the &quot;adinkra cloth,&quot; Ghanaians use many cloth fabrics for their traditional attire. The different ethnic groups have their own individual cloth. The most well known is the Kente cloth. Kente is a very important national costume and clothing, and these clothes are used to make traditional and modern Kente attire. Different symbols and different colours mean different things. Kente is the most famous of all the Ghanaian clothes. Kente is a ceremonial cloth hand-woven on a horizontal treadle loom and strips measuring about 4 inches wide are sewn together into larger pieces of cloths. Cloths come in various colours, sizes and designs and are worn during very important social and religious occasions. In a cultural context, kente is more important than just a cloth as it is a visual representation of history and also a form of written language through weaving. The term kente has its roots in the Akan word &quot;kɛntɛn&quot; which means a basket and the first kente weavers used raffia fibres to weave cloths that looked like kenten (a basket); and thus were referred to as &quot;kenten ntoma&quot;; meaning basket cloth. The original Akan name of the cloth was &quot;nsaduaso&quot; or &quot;nwontoma&quot;, meaning &quot;a cloth hand-woven on a loom&quot;; however, &quot;kente&quot; is the most frequently used term today.
Kente is also woven by the Ewe people (Ewe Kente) in the Volta Region. The main weaving centres are Agortime area and Agbozume. Agbozume has a vibrant kente market attracting patrons from all over west Africa and the diaspora.

Contemporary Ghanaian fashion includes traditional and modern styles and fabrics and has made its way into the African and global fashion scene. The cloth known as African print fabric was created out of Dutch wax textiles. It is believed that in the late 19th century, Dutch ships on their way to Asia stocked with machine-made textiles that mimicked Indonesian batik stopped at many West African ports on the way. The fabrics did not do well in Asia. However, in West Africa—mainly Ghana where there was an already established market for cloths and textiles—the client base grew and it was changed to include local and traditional designs, colours and patterns to cater to the taste of the new consumers. Today outside of Africa it is called &quot;Ankara&quot;, and it has a client base well beyond Ghana and Africa as a whole. It is popular among Caribbean peoples and African Americans; celebrities such as Solange Knowles and her sister Beyoncé have been seen wearing African print attire. Many designers from countries in North America and Europe are now using African prints, and they have gained a global interest. British luxury fashion house Burberry created a collection around Ghanaian styles. American musician Gwen Stefani has repeatedly incorporated African prints into her clothing line and can often be seen wearing it. Internationally acclaimed Ghanaian-British designer Ozwald Boateng introduced African print suits in his 2012 collection.

===Music and dance===

Music incorporates types of musical instruments such as the talking drum ensembles, Akan Drum, goje fiddle and koloko lute, court music, including the Akan Seperewa, the Akan atumpan, the Ga kpanlogo styles, and log xylophones used in asonko music. African jazz was created by Kofi Ghanaba. A form of secular music is highlife. Highlife originated in the 19th and 20th centuries and spread throughout West Africa.

In the 1990s, a genre of music was created incorporating the influences of highlife, Afro-reggae, dancehall and hip hop. This hybrid was called hiplife.

There are dances for occasions. Dances for celebrations include the Adowa, Kpanlogo, Azonto, Klama, Agbadza, Borborbor and Bamaya. The Nana Otafrija Pallbearing Services, also known as the Dancing Pallbearers, come from the coastal town of Prampram. The group was featured in a BBC feature story in 2017, and footage from the story became part of an Internet meme in the wake of the COVID-19 world pandemic.

===Media===


Chapter 12 of the 1992 Constitution of Ghana guarantees freedom of the press and independence of the media, while Chapter 2 prohibits censorship. Post-independence, private outlets closed during the military governments, and media laws prevented criticism of government. Press freedoms were restored in 1992, and after the election in 2000 of Kufuor, the tensions between the private media and government decreased. Kufuor supported press freedom and repealed a libel law, and maintained that the media had to act responsibly. The media have been described as &quot;one of the most unfettered&quot; in Africa.

In 1948, the Gold Coast Film Unit was set up in the Information Services Department.

===Architecture===

There are two types of construction: the series of adjacent buildings in an enclosure around a common, and the round huts with grass roof. The round huts with grass roof architecture are situated in the northern regions, while the series of adjacent buildings are in the southern regions. Postmodern architecture and high-tech architecture buildings are in the southern regions, while heritage sites are evident in the more than 30 forts and castles in the country, such as Fort William and Fort Amsterdam. Ghana has museums that are situated inside castles, and two are situated inside a fort. The Military Museum and the National Museum organise temporary exhibitions.

Ghana has museums that allow an in-depth look at specific regions, with a number of museums providing insight into the traditions and history of the geographical areas. The Cape Coast Castle Museum and St. Georges Castle (Elmina Castle) Museum offer guided tours. The Museum of Science and Technology provides its visitors with a look into the domain of scientific development, through exhibits of objects of scientific and technological interest.

===Sports===
Association football is the top spectator sport in Ghana. Ghana has won the Africa Cup of Nations four times, the FIFA U-20 World Cup once, and has participated in four FIFA World Cups (2006, 2010, 2014 and 2022) and has also won the FIFA U-17 World Cup twice. The International Federation of Football History and Statistics crowned Asante Kotoko SC as the African club of the 20th century.

Ghana competes in the Commonwealth Games, sending athletes in every edition since 1954 (except for the 1986 games). Ghana has won 57 medals at the Commonwealth Games, including 15 gold, with all but one of their medals coming in athletics and boxing. The country has also produced a number of boxers, including Azumah Nelson a three-time world champion, Nana Yaw Konadu also a three-time world champion, Ike Quartey, and Joshua Clottey.

==See also==

*Index of Ghana-related articles
*Outline of Ghana

== Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==

*Arhin, Kwame, &quot;The Life and Work of Kwame Nkrumah&quot; (Africa Research &amp; Publications, 1995)
*Babatope, Ebenezer, &quot;The Ghana Revolution: From Nkrumah to Jerry Rawlings&quot; (Fourth Dimension Publishing, 1982)
*Birmingham, David, &quot;Kwame Nkrumah: Father Of African Nationalism&quot; (Ohio University Press, 1998)
*Boafo-Arthur, Kwame, &quot;Ghana: One Decade of the Liberal State&quot; (Zed Books, 2007)
*Briggs, Philip, &quot;Ghana (Bradt Travel Guide)&quot; (Bradt Travel Guides, 2010)
*Clark, Gracia, &quot;African Market Women: Seven Life Stories from Ghana&quot; (Indiana University Press, 2010)
*Davidson, Basil, &quot;Black Star: A View of the Life and Times of Kwame Nkrumah&quot; (James Currey, 2007)
*Falola, Toyin, and Salm, Stephen J, &quot;Culture and Customs of Ghana&quot; (Greenwood, 2002)
*Grant, Richard, &quot;Globalizing City: The Urban and Economic Transformation of Accra, Ghana&quot; (Syracuse University Press, 2008)
*Hadjor, Kofi Buenor, &quot;Nkrumah and Ghana&quot; (Africa Research &amp; Publications, 2003)
*Hasty, Jennifer, &quot;The Press and Political Culture in Ghana&quot; (Indiana University Press, 2005)
*James, C.L.R., &quot;Kwame Nkrumah and the Ghana Revolution&quot; (Allison &amp; Busby, 1977)
*Kuada, John, and Chachah Yao, &quot;Ghana. Understanding the People and their Culture&quot; (Woeli Publishing Services, 1999)
*Miescher, Stephan F, &quot;Making Men in Ghana&quot; (Indiana University Press, 2005)
*Milne, June, &quot;Kwame Nkrumah, A Biography&quot; (Panaf Books, 2006)
*Nkrumah, Kwame, &quot;Ghana: The Autobiography of Kwame Nkrumah&quot; (International Publishers, 1971)
*Utley, Ian, &quot;Ghana – Culture Smart!: the essential guide to customs &amp; culture&quot; (Kuperard, 2009)
*Various, &quot;Ghana: An African Portrait Revisited&quot; (Peter E. Randall Publisher, 2007)
*Younge, Paschal Yao, &quot;Music and Dance Traditions of Ghana: History, Performance and Teaching&quot; (Mcfarland &amp; Co Inc., 2011)


== External links ==

* , Government of Ghana
* The Parliament of Ghana 
* National Commission on Culture
* Country Profile from BBC News
* Ghana from &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;
* Ghana profile from ECOWAS
* News headline links from Al Jazeera.
* The African Activist Archive Project website has photographs of the All Africa People&#x27;s Conference held in Accra, Ghana, 5–13 December 1958 including Kwame Nkrumah, Prime Minister of Ghana, addressing the conference, the American Committee on Africa delegation meeting with Nkrumah, and of Patrick Duncan and Alfred Hutchinson of South Africa at the conference.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="0" end="5" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="22" end="39" title="Ghana" label="Republic of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="57" end="68" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41430" start="94" end="108" title="Gulf of Guinea" label="Gulf of Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="117" end="131" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088889" start="156" end="162" title="Ghana–Ivory Coast border" label="border"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="168" end="179" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q870155" start="180" end="191" title="Western Region (Ghana)" label="in the west"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="193" end="205" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089016" start="206" end="218" title="Burkina Faso–Ghana border" label="in the north"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="224" end="228" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089075" start="229" end="240" title="Ghana–Togo border" label="in the east"/>
<link wikidata="Q101998" start="285" end="293" title="biome" label="ecologie"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="301" end="306" title="coast" label="coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="309" end="316" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q199403" start="321" end="340" title="tropical rainforest" label="tropical rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q153211" start="392" end="420" title="List of African countries by population" label="second-most populous country"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="424" end="435" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="441" end="448" title="Capital city" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q492773" start="453" end="465" title="List of cities in Ghana" label="largest city"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761" start="469" end="474" title="Accra" label="Accra"/>
<link wikidata="Q492773" start="494" end="500" title="List of cities in Ghana" label="cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q726143" start="509" end="513" title="Tema" label="Tema"/>
<link wikidata="Q182059" start="515" end="521" title="Kumasi" label="Kumasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q406037" start="523" end="530" title="Sunyani" label="Sunyani"/>
<link wikidata="Q250733" start="532" end="534" title="Wa, Ghana" label="Wa"/>
<link wikidata="Q221283" start="536" end="546" title="Cape Coast" label="Cape Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q964069" start="548" end="556" title="Techiman" label="Techiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q217040" start="558" end="564" title="Tamale, Ghana" label="Tamale"/>
<link wikidata="Q243293" start="570" end="586" title="Sekondi-Takoradi" label="Sekondi-Takoradi"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="629" end="647" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="659" end="670" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8620" start="696" end="709" title="Kwame Nkrumah" label="Kwame Nkrumah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248546" start="759" end="766" title="Bono state" label="Bonoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q24697413" start="788" end="805" title="Kingdom of Dagbon" label="Kingdom of Dagbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q722071" start="883" end="897" title="Ashanti Empire" label="Ashanti Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="998" end="1015" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q185145" start="1035" end="1050" title="European Powers" label="European powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="1101" end="1108" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q578" start="1165" end="1172" title="century" label="century"/>
<link wikidata="Q503623" start="1332" end="1342" title="Gold Coast (British colony)" label="Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q96372444" start="1344" end="1351" title="Ashanti (Crown Colony)" label="Ashanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998749" start="1357" end="1377" title="Northern Territories of the Gold Coast" label="Northern Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q797527" start="1383" end="1399" title="British Togoland" label="British Togoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="1458" end="1481" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="1532" end="1550" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8620" start="1620" end="1633" title="Kwame Nkrumah" label="Kwame Nkrumah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146918" start="1660" end="1682" title="Decolonisation of Africa" label="decolonisation efforts"/>
<link wikidata="Q282739" start="1691" end="1711" title="Pan-Africanism" label="Pan-African movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378555" start="1725" end="1737" title="multi-ethnic" label="multi-ethnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q415693" start="1802" end="1806" title="Akan people" label="Akan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15307583" start="1871" end="1880" title="Ghanaian people" label="Ghanaians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110518" start="1885" end="1895" title="Christianity in Ghana" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q32307" start="1924" end="1931" title="Islam in Ghana" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q179164" start="2003" end="2010" title="Unitary state" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="2011" end="2035" title="Liberal democracy" label="constitutional democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672728" start="2045" end="2054" title="President of Ghana" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="2062" end="2075" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="2080" end="2098" title="head of government" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200721" start="2168" end="2203" title="Ibrahim Index of African Governance" label="Ibrahim Index of African Governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q14818820" start="2226" end="2246" title="Fragile States Index" label="Fragile States Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089114" start="2376" end="2386" title="Healthcare in Ghana" label="healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q777007" start="2388" end="2396" title="Economy of Ghana" label="economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q123982811" start="2589" end="2609" title="Ghana and the Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="2618" end="2631" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="2653" end="2694" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589222" start="2700" end="2711" title="Group of 24" label="Group of 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="2720" end="2743" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q206789" start="2798" end="2804" title="Ghana Empire" label="Wagadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q465279" start="2935" end="2954" title="trans-Saharan trade" label="trans-Saharan trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q503623" start="3116" end="3133" title="Gold Coast (British colony)" label="Gold Coast colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q8620" start="3233" end="3246" title="Kwame Nkrumah" label="Kwame Nkrumah"/>
<link wikidata="Q15307583" start="3374" end="3389" title="Ghanaian people" label="Ghanaian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248546" start="3742" end="3749" title="Bono state" label="Bonoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q24697413" start="3771" end="3788" title="Kingdom of Dagbon" label="Kingdom of Dagbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q398417" start="4067" end="4081" title="Ashanti Region" label="Ashanti Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164302" start="4084" end="4092" title="Denkyira" label="Denkyira"/>
<link wikidata="Q846323" start="4094" end="4114" title="Central Region (Ghana)" label="Western North region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395929" start="4117" end="4134" title="Mankessim Kingdom" label="Mankessim Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q870155" start="4136" end="4150" title="Western Region (Ghana)" label="Central region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791839" start="4157" end="4163" title="Akwamu" label="Akwamu"/>
<link wikidata="Q405670" start="4164" end="4180" title="Eastern Region (Ghana)" label="(Eastern region)"/>
<link wikidata="Q722071" start="4267" end="4285" title="Ashanti Empire" label="Kingdom of Ashanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q182059" start="4460" end="4466" title="Kumasi" label="Kumasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q945025" start="4571" end="4579" title="gold bar" label="gold bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q627897" start="5324" end="5333" title="Ga-Adangbe people" label="Ga-Dangme"/>
<link wikidata="Q712832" start="5430" end="5442" title="Volta Region" label="Volta Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="5629" end="5639" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="5689" end="5706" title="Portuguese people" label="Portuguese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535868" start="5724" end="5741" title="Gold Coast (region)" label="Gold Coast region"/>
<link wikidata="Q770048" start="5808" end="5829" title="Portuguese Gold Coast" label="Portuguese Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q968662" start="6004" end="6021" title="Elmina" label="São Jorge da Mina"/>
<link wikidata="Q217637" start="6037" end="6056" title="John II of Portugal" label="John II of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226869" start="6070" end="6087" title="Diogo de Azambuja" label="Diogo de Azambuja"/>
<link wikidata="Q55264655" start="6101" end="6114" title="Elmina Castle" label="Elmina Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q200569" start="6165" end="6170" title="Dutch people" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q770776" start="6233" end="6249" title="Dutch Gold Coast" label="Dutch Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471446" start="6382" end="6394" title="Fort Komenda" label="Fort Komenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q792509" start="6480" end="6484" title="Axim" label="Axim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1998460" start="6494" end="6509" title="Fort Saint Anthony" label="Fort St Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q165192" start="6592" end="6598" title="Swedes" label="Swedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q769320" start="6617" end="6635" title="Swedish Gold Coast" label="Swedish Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q62651" start="6674" end="6688" title="Denmark–Norway" label="Denmark–Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q770833" start="6707" end="6724" title="Danish Gold Coast" label="Danish Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="6821" end="6841" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="Atlantic slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q700023" start="6944" end="6968" title="Brandenburger Gold Coast" label="Brandenburger Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q503623" start="7108" end="7126" title="Gold Coast (British colony)" label="British Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q722071" start="7229" end="7236" title="Ashanti Empire" label="Ashanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q722051" start="7290" end="7308" title="Anglo-Ashanti wars" label="Anglo-Ashanti wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q356920" start="7338" end="7361" title="War of the Golden Stool" label="War of the Golden Stool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495200" start="7431" end="7459" title="United Gold Coast Convention" label="United Gold Coast Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q660543" start="7467" end="7490" title="The Big Six (Ghana)" label="&amp;quot;The Big Six&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5578671" start="7578" end="7614" title="1946 Gold Coast general election" label="1946 Gold Coast legislative election"/>
<link wikidata="Q8620" start="7616" end="7629" title="Kwame Nkrumah" label="Kwame Nkrumah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657870" start="7714" end="7728" title="Prime Minister of Ghana" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672728" start="7733" end="7742" title="President of Ghana" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129392" start="7755" end="7785" title="Convention People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Convention People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410956" start="8094" end="8115" title="1951 Gold Coast general election" label="1951 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q797527" start="8333" end="8349" title="British Togoland" label="British Togoland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="8409" end="8429" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="British Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q96379430" start="8476" end="8503" title="Ghana Independence Act 1957" label="Ghana Independence Act 1957"/>
<link wikidata="Q160676" start="8517" end="8530" title="flag of Ghana" label="flag of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136654" start="8656" end="8690" title="1960 Ghanaian constitutional referendum" label="Ghanaian constitutional referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592531" start="8695" end="8725" title="1960 Ghanaian presidential election" label="Ghanaian presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640009" start="8818" end="8834" title="Independence Day (Ghana)" label="Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q802614" start="8864" end="8876" title="Republic Day" label="Republic Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="8894" end="8907" title="Authoritarianism" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q151684" start="9026" end="9050" title="1964 Ghanaian constitutional referendum" label="constitutional amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="9064" end="9079" title="one-party state" label="one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350808" start="9097" end="9115" title="president for life" label="president for life"/>
<link wikidata="Q282739" start="9220" end="9234" title="Pan-Africanism" label="Pan-Africanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570781" start="9290" end="9308" title="Lincoln University (Pennsylvania)" label="Lincoln University"/>
<link wikidata="Q272504" start="9362" end="9375" title="Marcus Garvey" label="Marcus Garvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="9466" end="9488" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q158060" start="9526" end="9542" title="W. E. B. Du Bois" label="W. E. B. Du Bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="9677" end="9697" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6450085" start="9723" end="9758" title="Kwame Nkrumah Ideological Institute" label="Kwame Nkrumah Ideological Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="9786" end="9795" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="9800" end="9809" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401481" start="9937" end="9960" title="Public holidays in Ghana" label="public holiday in Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733520" start="9962" end="9980" title="Founders&amp;#x27; Day (Ghana)" label="Founders&amp;#x27; Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q260288" start="10096" end="10114" title="Ghana Armed Forces" label="Ghana Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="10203" end="10213" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Zhou Enlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858" start="10270" end="10275" title="Hanoi" label="Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="10302" end="10313" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338320" start="10371" end="10392" title="Emmanuel Kwasi Kotoka" label="Emmanuel Kwasi Kotoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967432" start="10426" end="10453" title="National Liberation Council" label="National Liberation Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q356728" start="10496" end="10512" title="Joseph Arthur Ankrah" label="Joseph A. Ankrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013228" start="10674" end="10691" title="Flight lieutenant" label="Flight Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q51002" start="10692" end="10711" title="Jerry Rawlings" label="Jerry John Rawlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q931968" start="10719" end="10755" title="Provisional National Defence Council" label="Provisional National Defence Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515403" start="10813" end="10825" title="Constitution of Ghana" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q722954" start="10853" end="10870" title="List of political parties in Ghana" label="political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="11061" end="11079" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115164" start="11112" end="11141" title="1992 Ghanaian presidential election" label="presidential election of 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641358" start="11191" end="11215" title="1996 Ghanaian general election" label="general election of 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q25230526" start="11223" end="11233" title="Konkomba–Nanumba conflict" label="tribal war"/>
<link wikidata="Q502215" start="11237" end="11251" title="Northern Region (Ghana)" label="Northern Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678775" start="11273" end="11281" title="Konkomba people" label="Konkomba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669494" start="11321" end="11328" title="Nanumba people" label="Nanumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q592821" start="11330" end="11337" title="Dagomba people" label="Dagomba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477754" start="11342" end="11347" title="Gonja people" label="Gonja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848500" start="11437" end="11458" title="2000 Ghanaian general election" label="2000 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q51005" start="11460" end="11471" title="John Kufuor" label="John Kufuor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148441" start="11479" end="11498" title="New Patriotic Party" label="New Patriotic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115166" start="11551" end="11569" title="2004 Ghanaian general election" label="re-elected in 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q718601" start="11798" end="11813" title="Nana Akufo-Addo" label="Nana Akufo-Addo"/>
<link wikidata="Q388349" start="11872" end="11893" title="2008 Ghanaian general election" label="2008 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q51008" start="11897" end="11912" title="John Atta Mills" label="John Atta Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q200875" start="11920" end="11948" title="National Democratic Congress (Ghana)" label="National Democratic Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q50678" start="12015" end="12026" title="John Mahama" label="John Mahama"/>
<link wikidata="Q404531" start="12058" end="12079" title="2012 Ghanaian general election" label="2012 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q18344384" start="12201" end="12222" title="2016 Ghanaian general election" label="2016 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q718601" start="12224" end="12239" title="Nana Akufo-Addo" label="Nana Akufo-Addo"/>
<link wikidata="Q84031280" start="12320" end="12336" title="2020 Ghanaian general election" label="election in 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q41430" start="12574" end="12588" title="Gulf of Guinea" label="Gulf of Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="12617" end="12624" title="Equator" label="Equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q16269380" start="12749" end="12760" title="Dodi Island" label="Dodi Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q732815" start="12765" end="12780" title="Bobowasi Island" label="Bobowasi Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401774" start="12903" end="12917" title="prime meridian" label="prime meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q726143" start="12961" end="12965" title="Tema" label="Tema"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090194" start="13470" end="13493" title="Eastern Guinean forests" label="Eastern Guinean forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672617" start="13495" end="13524" title="Guinean forest–savanna mosaic" label="Guinean forest–savanna mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474468" start="13526" end="13547" title="West Sudanian savanna" label="West Sudanian savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4504181" start="13549" end="13574" title="Central African mangroves" label="Central African mangroves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091088" start="13580" end="13597" title="Guinean mangroves" label="Guinean mangroves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259188" start="13605" end="13616" title="White Volta" label="White Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256528" start="13641" end="13652" title="Black Volta" label="Black Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q201679" start="13682" end="13692" title="Lake Volta" label="Lake Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569149" start="13711" end="13744" title="List of reservoirs by volume" label="third-largest reservoir by volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282314" start="13802" end="13814" title="Akosombo Dam" label="Akosombo Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q41430" start="13878" end="13892" title="Gulf of Guinea" label="Gulf of Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261417" start="13976" end="13993" title="Cape Three Points" label="Cape Three Points"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733424" start="14000" end="14016" title="climate of Ghana" label="climate of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q135712" start="14020" end="14028" title="tropical climate" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117517" start="14043" end="14053" title="wet season" label="wet season"/>
<link wikidata="Q146575" start="14058" end="14068" title="dry season" label="dry season"/>
<link wikidata="Q21707860" start="14451" end="14474" title="Paris Agreement" label="Paris Climate Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887245" start="14511" end="14518" title="Unitary executive theory" label="unitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="14519" end="14531" title="Presidential system" label="presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="14532" end="14556" title="Liberal democracy" label="constitutional democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="14578" end="14596" title="multi-party system" label="multi-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q200875" start="14634" end="14668" title="National Democratic Congress (Ghana)" label="National Democratic Congress (NDC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148441" start="14677" end="14702" title="New Patriotic Party" label="New Patriotic Party (NPP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115164" start="14859" end="14871" title="1992 Ghanaian presidential election" label="presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638870" start="14876" end="14899" title="1992 Ghanaian parliamentary election" label="parliamentary elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515403" start="14923" end="14944" title="constitution of Ghana" label="constitution of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="14968" end="14986" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q260288" start="14994" end="15012" title="Ghana Armed Forces" label="Ghana Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672728" start="15014" end="15032" title="President of Ghana" label="President of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807513" start="15047" end="15066" title="Parliament of Ghana" label="Parliament of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092681" start="15078" end="15094" title="Cabinet of Ghana" label="Cabinet of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176502" start="15115" end="15140" title="Council of State (Ghana)" label="Ghanaian Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303103" start="15173" end="15191" title="Judiciary of Ghana" label="Judiciary of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="15223" end="15241" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q718601" start="15267" end="15282" title="Nana Akufo-Addo" label="Nana Akufo-Addo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18344384" start="15309" end="15333" title="2016 Ghanaian general election" label="general election in 2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q50678" start="15355" end="15366" title="John Mahama" label="John Mahama"/>
<link wikidata="Q84031280" start="15384" end="15397" title="2020 Ghanaian general election" label="2020 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q14818820" start="15581" end="15601" title="Fragile States Index" label="Fragile States Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q210463" start="16002" end="16056" title="Corruption Perceptions Index" label="Transparency International Corruption Perception Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200721" start="16125" end="16160" title="Ibrahim Index of African Governance" label="Ibrahim Index of African Governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q116916583" start="16367" end="16390" title="V-Dem Democracy indices" label="V-Dem Democracy indices"/>
<link wikidata="Q65072193" start="16451" end="16480" title="democracy in Africa" label="electoral democracy in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="16608" end="16628" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="16739" end="16753" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="16762" end="16775" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="16863" end="16875" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="16877" end="16891" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="16897" end="16909" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853588" start="16931" end="16944" title="Kamala Harris" label="Kamala Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q81066" start="17108" end="17147" title="Secretary-General of the United Nations" label="Secretary-General of the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254" start="17148" end="17158" title="Kofi Annan" label="Kofi Annan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="17160" end="17188" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q423676" start="17195" end="17209" title="Akua Kuenyehia" label="Akua Kuenyehia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51002" start="17239" end="17258" title="Jerry Rawlings" label="Jerry John Rawlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q51005" start="17280" end="17299" title="John Kufuor" label="John Agyekum Kufuor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254" start="17409" end="17419" title="Kofi Annan" label="Kofi Annan"/>
<link wikidata="Q51008" start="17514" end="17529" title="John Atta Mills" label="John Atta Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q15029" start="17606" end="17615" title="Hu Jintao" label="Hu Jintao"/>
<link wikidata="Q72891" start="17695" end="17719" title="Great Hall of the People" label="Great Hall of the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q19214" start="17809" end="17875" title="Standing Committee of the National People&amp;#x27;s Congress" label="Standing Committee of the National People&amp;#x27;s Congress of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q4515491" start="17877" end="17889" title="Zhou Tienong" label="Zhou Tienong"/>
<link wikidata="Q50678" start="17944" end="17955" title="John Mahama" label="John Mahama"/>
<link wikidata="Q34448" start="18417" end="18436" title="Mahmoud Ahmadinejad" label="Mahmoud Ahmadinejad"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="18502" end="18522" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114972" start="18600" end="18619" title="presidential palace" label="presidential palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579594" start="18620" end="18635" title="Jubilee House" label="Flagstaff House"/>
<link wikidata="Q104858255" start="18642" end="18671" title="Sustainable Development Goals and Ghana" label="Sustainable Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q718601" start="19159" end="19174" title="Nana Akufo-Addo" label="Nana Akufo-Addo"/>
<link wikidata="Q81737" start="19300" end="19328" title="Millennium Development Goals" label="Millennium Development Goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q260288" start="19366" end="19384" title="Ghana Armed Forces" label="Ghana Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991472" start="19591" end="19614" title="United States of Africa" label="United States of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q749387" start="19732" end="19741" title="Paratrooper" label="parachute"/>
<link wikidata="Q864306" start="19742" end="19755" title="Airborne forces" label="airborne unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q339834" start="19801" end="19815" title="regional power" label="regional power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039835" start="19820" end="19836" title="Regional hegemony" label="regional hegemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767259" start="19856" end="19882" title="Shake Hands with the Devil (book)" label="Shake Hands with the Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="19890" end="19905" title="Canadian Armed Forces" label="Canadian Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q355188" start="19916" end="19930" title="Roméo Dallaire" label="Roméo Dallaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q645883" start="19990" end="20008" title="military operation" label="military operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140224" start="20014" end="20031" title="military doctrine" label="military doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778357" start="20138" end="20191" title="Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Training Centre" label="Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Training Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294496" start="20307" end="20326" title="Ministry of Defence (Ghana)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555387" start="20617" end="20637" title="Ghana Police Service" label="Ghana Police Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q18197265" start="20646" end="20679" title="Criminal Investigation Department" label="Criminal Investigation Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q20728055" start="20914" end="20932" title="Militarized police" label="Militarized police"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567147" start="20933" end="20955" title="Rapid deployment force" label="Rapid deployment force"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20960" end="20978" title="Ghana Police Service#Marine Police Unit" label="Marine Police Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q726143" start="21129" end="21133" title="Tema" label="Tema"/>
<link wikidata="Q862571" start="21323" end="21343" title="oil and gas industry" label="oil and gas industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555388" start="21350" end="21371" title="Ghana Prisons Service" label="Ghana Prisons Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946698" start="21393" end="21424" title="Borstal Institute for Juveniles" label="Borstal Institute for Juveniles"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="22179" end="22187" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="22192" end="22205" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q50851" start="22382" end="22401" title="black market" label="underground economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965689" start="22640" end="22663" title="Narcotics Control Board (Ghana)" label="Narcotics Control Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678478" start="22727" end="22743" title="Takoradi Harbour" label="Takoradi Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q183530" start="22851" end="22862" title="Ghanaian cedi" label="Ghana cedis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260006" start="22910" end="22921" title="Drug cartel" label="Drug cartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="23327" end="23342" title="Homosexuality" label="Homosexual acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="23409" end="23428" title="Pew Research Center" label="Pew Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031443" start="23527" end="23541" title="women in Ghana" label="women in Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="23557" end="23567" title="witchcraft" label="witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027863" start="23750" end="23760" title="witch camp" label="witch camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662087" start="23946" end="23964" title="industrial mineral" label="industrial mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="23967" end="23978" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q271449" start="23984" end="23998" title="precious metal" label="precious metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q138461" start="24030" end="24045" title="digital economy" label="digital economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191675" start="24051" end="24064" title="mixed economy" label="mixed economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q546395" start="24086" end="24101" title="emerging market" label="emerging market"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="24245" end="24262" title="developed country" label="developed country"/>
<link wikidata="Q376860" start="24291" end="24319" title="Newly industrialized country" label="newly industrialised country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589222" start="24364" end="24375" title="Group of 24" label="Group of 24"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="24387" end="24405" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="Sub-Saharan Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="24415" end="24427" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q39099" start="24508" end="24529" title="Renminbi" label="Chinese yuan renminbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q669484" start="24587" end="24600" title="Bank of Ghana" label="Bank of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421756" start="24697" end="24710" title="hard currency" label="hard currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q183530" start="24735" end="24748" title="Ghanaian cedi" label="Ghanaian cedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532874" start="25095" end="25116" title="Volta River Authority" label="Volta River Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104764" start="25125" end="25161" title="Ghana National Petroleum Corporation" label="Ghana National Petroleum Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282314" start="25226" end="25238" title="Akosombo Dam" label="Akosombo Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986338" start="25289" end="25296" title="Bui Dam" label="Bui Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435738" start="25302" end="25311" title="Kpong Dam" label="Kpong Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="25358" end="25368" title="hydropower" label="hydropower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068071" start="25408" end="25454" title="Nuclear power in Ghana" label="build the second nuclear power plant in Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521374" start="25461" end="25481" title="Ghana Stock Exchange" label="Ghana Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q471719" start="25570" end="25591" title="Market capitalization" label="market capitalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183530" start="25595" end="25598" title="Ghana Cedi" label="GH¢"/>
<link wikidata="Q39099" start="25615" end="25618" title="Renminbi" label="CN¥"/>
<link wikidata="Q627514" start="25662" end="25673" title="JSE Limited" label="JSE Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521374" start="25688" end="25708" title="Ghana Stock Exchange" label="Ghana Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q11691" start="25740" end="25754" title="stock exchange" label="stock exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="25815" end="25820" title="Cocoa bean" label="cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667326" start="25882" end="25886" title="International Cocoa Organization" label="ICCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="25986" end="25994" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="26031" end="26044" title="Secondary sector of the economy" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640" start="26054" end="26075" title="Primary sector of the economy" label="extractive industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662087" start="26290" end="26308" title="industrial mineral" label="industrial mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="26381" end="26391" title="Private industry" label="industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="26400" end="26441" title="information and communications technology" label="information and communications technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339174" start="26506" end="26524" title="Rlg Communications" label="Rlg Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="26544" end="26559" title="tablet computer" label="tablet computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="26566" end="26576" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q581105" start="26590" end="26610" title="consumer electronics" label="consumer electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q13267846" start="26612" end="26617" title="Urban car" label="Urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q193692" start="26618" end="26630" title="electric car" label="electric car"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="27107" end="27112" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="27117" end="27124" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="27354" end="27365" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4405386" start="27375" end="27390" title="sweet crude oil" label="sweet crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="27395" end="27406" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q205495" start="27429" end="27444" title="filling station" label="filling station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555383" start="27454" end="27471" title="Ghana Oil Company" label="Ghana Oil Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104764" start="27567" end="27603" title="Ghana National Petroleum Corporation" label="Ghana National Petroleum Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241434" start="27613" end="27636" title="hydrocarbon exploration" label="hydrocarbon exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187896" start="27775" end="27792" title="Jubilee Oil Field" label="Jubilee Oil Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253007" start="27978" end="28001" title="List of countries by proven oil reserves" label="largest proven reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="28099" end="28110" title="Nationalization" label="nationalise"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="28349" end="28354" title="tonne" label="tonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="28525" end="28531" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="28541" end="28548" title="diamond" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078" start="28551" end="28558" title="bauxite" label="bauxite"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="28564" end="28573" title="manganese" label="manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="28709" end="28720" title="Nationalization" label="nationalize"/>
<link wikidata="Q21072643" start="28831" end="28837" title="dumsor" label="dumsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303103" start="29007" end="29031" title="Judiciary of Ghana" label="judicial system of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q210463" start="29158" end="29186" title="Corruption Perceptions Index" label="Corruption Perceptions Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q4196458" start="29597" end="29620" title="Global Innovation Index" label="Global Innovation Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555408" start="29635" end="29676" title="Ghana Space Science and Technology Centre" label="Ghana Space Science and Technology Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q180046" start="29723" end="29740" title="space exploration" label="space exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q258307" start="29795" end="29812" title="national security" label="national security"/>
<link wikidata="Q854845" start="29813" end="29836" title="Earth observation satellite" label="observational satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152738" start="30027" end="30104" title="Commission on Science and Technology for Sustainable Development in the South" label="Commission on Science and Technology for Sustainable Development in the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q613057" start="30171" end="30206" title="South African National Space Agency" label="South African National Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414333" start="30428" end="30447" title="Kintampo waterfalls" label="Kintampo waterfalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q15560122" start="30490" end="30504" title="Wli waterfalls" label="Wli waterfalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q894613" start="30603" end="30616" title="Lake Bosumtwi" label="Lake Bosumtwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q201679" start="30679" end="30689" title="Lake Volta" label="Lake Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q116770905" start="30701" end="30718" title="List of castles in Ghana" label="forts and castles"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="30720" end="30739" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q15045461" start="30798" end="30815" title="Cape Coast Castle Museum" label="Cape Coast Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q55264655" start="30824" end="30837" title="Elmina Castle" label="Elmina Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="30988" end="31013" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q170418" start="31423" end="31443" title="World Economic Forum" label="World Economic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="31651" end="31657" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q327901" start="32016" end="32042" title="Global Peace Index" label="55th most peaceful country"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832337" start="32259" end="32286" title="Traditional fishing boat" label="traditional fishing vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005149" start="32997" end="33021" title="Immigration to Ghana" label="recent legal immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391083" start="33025" end="33039" title="skilled worker" label="skilled worker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555338" start="33053" end="33063" title="Ghana Card" label="Ghana Card"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555355" start="33177" end="33202" title="Ghana Immigration Service" label="Ghana Immigration Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="33217" end="33233" title="economic migrant" label="economic migrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733659" start="33239" end="33274" title="Illegal immigration to Ghana" label="Illegal immigrants inhabiting Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q51267" start="33510" end="33527" title="Kofi Abrefa Busia" label="Kofi Abrefa Busia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020813" start="33533" end="33550" title="Border Guard Unit" label="Border Guard Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="33813" end="33830" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658486" start="33939" end="33953" title="Akan languages" label="Akan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q19261685" start="33955" end="33965" title="Asante dialect" label="Asante Twi"/>
<link wikidata="Q31150449" start="33967" end="33978" title="Akuapem Twi" label="Akuapem Twi"/>
<link wikidata="Q35570" start="33980" end="33985" title="Fante dialect" label="Fante"/>
<link wikidata="Q34831" start="33987" end="33991" title="Bono language" label="Bono"/>
<link wikidata="Q36337" start="34048" end="34053" title="Nzema language" label="Nzema"/>
<link wikidata="Q35141" start="34099" end="34105" title="Dangme language" label="Dangme"/>
<link wikidata="Q30005" start="34107" end="34110" title="Ewe language" label="Ewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33287" start="34112" end="34114" title="Ga language" label="Ga"/>
<link wikidata="Q35422" start="34116" end="34120" title="Gua language" label="Guan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35552" start="34122" end="34127" title="Kasena language" label="Kasem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157178" start="34129" end="34151" title="Mole–Dagbani languages" label="Mole–Dagbani languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q35159" start="34153" end="34160" title="Dagaare" label="Dagaare"/>
<link wikidata="Q32238" start="34165" end="34173" title="Dagbani language" label="Dagbanli"/>
<link wikidata="Q262618" start="34256" end="34281" title="List of countries and territories where French is an official language" label="French-speaking countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555465" start="34769" end="34792" title="Ghanaian Pidgin English" label="Ghanaian Pidgin English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984262" start="34874" end="34901" title="West African Pidgin English" label="West African Pidgin English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="35278" end="35290" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="35379" end="35401" title="Christian denomination" label="Christian denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="35426" end="35431" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635722" start="35507" end="35519" title="Pew Research" label="Pew Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="35553" end="35564" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q171764" start="35604" end="35613" title="Ahmadiyya" label="Ahmadiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="35651" end="35655" title="Shia" label="Shia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15731064" start="35687" end="35712" title="non-denominational Muslim" label="non-denominational Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="35913" end="35934" title="universal health care" label="universal health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973003" start="35943" end="35975" title="National Health Insurance Scheme (Ghana)" label="National Health Insurance Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q15307583" start="36017" end="36035" title="Ghanaian people" label="Ghanaian nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q757232" start="36313" end="36328" title="medical tourism" label="medical tourism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36682" end="36719" title="National medicines regulatory systems" label="National medicines regulatory systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="36807" end="36823" title="infant mortality" label="infant mortality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="36903" end="36928" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="37236" end="37244" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q15917594" start="37639" end="37678" title="Basic Education Certificate Examination" label="Basic Education Certificate Examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308424" start="38001" end="38051" title="West African Senior School Certificate Examination" label="West African Senior School Certificate Examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303765" start="38505" end="38524" title="University of Ghana" label="University of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654025" start="38526" end="38576" title="Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology" label="Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q746079" start="38582" end="38606" title="University of Cape Coast" label="University of Cape Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500387" start="38801" end="38816" title="foreign student" label="foreign student"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500224" start="38870" end="38884" title="free education" label="free education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072146" start="39742" end="39758" title="Ghanaian cuisine" label="Ghanaian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995732" start="39959" end="39968" title="whitebait" label="whitebait"/>
<link wikidata="Q806839" start="40044" end="40049" title="Banku (dish)" label="Banku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742211" start="40147" end="40153" title="kenkey" label="kenkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q941004" start="40410" end="40414" title="Fufu" label="Fufu"/>
<link wikidata="Q385967" start="40486" end="40502" title="African diaspora" label="African diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q816663" start="40731" end="40742" title="jollof rice" label="jollof rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q357360" start="40851" end="40858" title="Adinkra symbols" label="adinkra"/>
<link wikidata="Q461183" start="41030" end="41036" title="Text corpus" label="corpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155" start="41141" end="41149" title="ethology" label="ethology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355817" start="41151" end="41166" title="plant life-form" label="plant life-form"/>
<link wikidata="Q572741" start="41596" end="41610" title="Kwame Anthony Appiah" label="Anthony Appiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428368" start="41956" end="41967" title="Kente cloth" label="Kente cloth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428368" start="42161" end="42166" title="Kente cloth" label="Kente"/>
<link wikidata="Q173056" start="42270" end="42282" title="Loom" label="treadle loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q15276542" start="43508" end="43528" title="African wax prints" label="African print fabric"/>
<link wikidata="Q635427" start="43707" end="43712" title="batik" label="batik"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="44216" end="44233" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q231228" start="44255" end="44270" title="Solange Knowles" label="Solange Knowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="44286" end="44293" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q390107" start="44496" end="44504" title="Burberry" label="Burberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q483379" start="44568" end="44580" title="Gwen Stefani" label="Gwen Stefani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359235" start="44733" end="44747" title="Ozwald Boateng" label="Ozwald Boateng"/>
<link wikidata="Q3209207" start="44911" end="44920" title="Akan Drum" label="Akan Drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577965" start="44922" end="44926" title="goje" label="goje"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911842" start="44983" end="44991" title="Seperewa" label="Seperewa"/>
<link wikidata="Q165666" start="45043" end="45052" title="xylophone" label="xylophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431797" start="45104" end="45116" title="Guy Warren" label="Kofi Ghanaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q963061" start="45145" end="45153" title="highlife" label="highlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q474027" start="45340" end="45349" title="dancehall" label="dancehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="45354" end="45361" title="Hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619932" start="45386" end="45393" title="hiplife" label="hiplife"/>
<link wikidata="Q18209056" start="45464" end="45469" title="Adowa dance" label="Adowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733731" start="45471" end="45479" title="Kpanlogo" label="Kpanlogo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832826" start="45481" end="45487" title="Azonto" label="Azonto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45489" end="45494" title="Klama" label="Klama"/>
<link wikidata="Q30632442" start="45496" end="45503" title="Agbadza" label="Agbadza"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944382" start="45505" end="45514" title="Borborbor" label="Borborbor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45519" end="45525" title="Bamaya" label="Bamaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q89756027" start="45585" end="45604" title="Dancing Pallbearers" label="Dancing Pallbearers"/>
<link wikidata="Q15045728" start="45636" end="45644" title="Prampram" label="Prampram"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="45779" end="45802" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 world pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="45875" end="45895" title="freedom of the press" label="freedom of the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="46281" end="46286" title="Defamation" label="libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q595448" start="46825" end="46848" title="Postmodern architecture" label="Postmodern architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q845318" start="46853" end="46875" title="high-tech architecture" label="high-tech architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472327" start="47010" end="47022" title="Fort William, Ghana" label="Fort William"/>
<link wikidata="Q478784" start="47027" end="47041" title="Fort Amsterdam, Ghana" label="Fort Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251736" start="47135" end="47150" title="Armed Forces Museum (Ghana)" label="Military Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967472" start="47159" end="47174" title="National Museum of Ghana" label="National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254826" start="47381" end="47398" title="Cape Coast Castle" label="Cape Coast Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q55264655" start="47430" end="47443" title="Elmina Castle" label="Elmina Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654025" start="47476" end="47508" title="Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology" label="Museum of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="47670" end="47690" title="Association football" label="Association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q83145" start="47746" end="47767" title="Africa Cup of Nations" label="Africa Cup of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q201891" start="47784" end="47803" title="FIFA U-20 World Cup" label="FIFA U-20 World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="47839" end="47853" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383" start="47935" end="47994" title="International Federation of Football History &amp;amp; Statistics" label="International Federation of Football History and Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48027" end="48059" title="International Federation of Football History &amp;amp; Statistics#Continental Clubs of the 20th century" label="African club of the 20th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q178340" start="48084" end="48102" title="Commonwealth Games" label="Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q919181" start="48144" end="48148" title="1954 British Empire and Commonwealth Games" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116471" start="48165" end="48175" title="1986 Commonwealth Games" label="1986 games"/>
<link wikidata="Q173873" start="48373" end="48386" title="Azumah Nelson" label="Azumah Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924285" start="48416" end="48431" title="Nana Konadu" label="Nana Yaw Konadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q722436" start="48466" end="48477" title="Ike Quartey" label="Ike Quartey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396183" start="48483" end="48497" title="Joshua Clottey" label="Joshua Clottey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018135" start="48515" end="48546" title="Index of Ghana-related articles" label="Index of Ghana-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112272" start="48548" end="48564" title="Outline of Ghana" label="Outline of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48614" end="48626" title="KwameArhin" label="Arhin, Kwame"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947116" start="48918" end="48939" title="Ohio University Press" label="Ohio University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068364" start="49021" end="49030" title="Zed Books" label="Zed Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q11130954" start="49203" end="49227" title="Indiana University Press" label="Indiana University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q810024" start="49236" end="49251" title="Basil Davidson" label="Davidson, Basil"/>
<link wikidata="Q16270889" start="49324" end="49336" title="James Currey" label="James Currey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830608" start="49345" end="49358" title="Toyin Falola" label="Falola, Toyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q773828" start="49775" end="49788" title="C. L. R. James" label="James, C.L.R."/>
<link wikidata="Q4732723" start="49842" end="49861" title="Allison &amp;amp; Busby" label="Allison &amp;amp; Busby"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808383" start="50084" end="50095" title="June Milne" label="Milne, June"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160945" start="50733" end="50741" title="BBC News" label="BBC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="50761" end="50784" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="50812" end="50818" title="ECOWAS" label="ECOWAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704134" start="50846" end="50856" title="Al Jazeera" label="Al Jazeera"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12069" wikidata="Q1987440" url="?curid=12069" title="Geography of Ghana">
<text>Ghana is a West African country in Africa, along the Gulf of Guinea.

Ghana encompasses plains, low hills, rivers, Lake Volta, the world&#x27;s largest artificial lake, Dodi Island and Bobowasi Island on the south Atlantic Ocean coast of Ghana. Ghana can be divided into four different geographical ecoregions. The coastline is mostly a low, sandy shore backed by plains and scrub and intersected by several rivers and streams. The northern part of Ghana features high plains. South-west and south-central Ghana is made up of a forested plateau region consisting of the Ashanti uplands and the Kwahu Plateau. The hilly Akwapim-Togo ranges are found along Ghana&#x27;s eastern international border.

The Volta Basin takes up most of south-central Ghana and Ghana&#x27;s highest point is Mount Afadja which is and is found in the Akwapim-Togo ranges. The climate is tropical and the eastern coastal belt is warm and comparatively dry, the south-west corner of Ghana is hot and humid, and the north of Ghana is warm and wet. Lake Volta, the world&#x27;s largest artificial lake, extends through small portions of south-eastern Ghana and many tributary rivers such as the Oti and Afram rivers flow into it.

The northernmost part of Ghana is Pulmakom and the southernmost part of Ghana is Cape Three Points near Axim. Ghana lies between latitudes 4° and 12°N. South Ghana contains evergreen and semi-deciduous forests consisting of trees such as mahogany, odum, ebony and it also contains much of Ghana&#x27;s oil palms and mangroves with shea trees, baobabs and acacias found in the northern part of Ghana. Its southernmost coast at Cape Three Points is 4° 30&#x27; north of the equator. From here, the country extends inland for some to about 11° north. The distance across the widest part, between longitude 1° 12&#x27; east and longitude 3° 15&#x27; west, measures about .

The Greenwich Meridian, which passes through London, also traverses the eastern part of Ghana at Tema.
==Area and boundaries==
; Area:
:* Total: 238,537 km²
**&quot;country rank in the world:&quot; 80th
:* Land: 227,533 km²
:* Water: 11,000 km²

; Area comparative
:* Australia comparative: slightly larger than Victoria
:* Canada comparative: slightly less than half the size of the Yukon
:* United Kingdom comparative: slightly smaller than the United Kingdom
:* United States comparative: approximately twice the size of Pennsylvania
:* EU comparative: approximately equal in size to Romania

;Land boundaries

:*total: 2,420 km
:*border countries: Burkina Faso (602 km) to the north, Ivory Coast (720 km) to the west, and Togo (1,098 km) to the east. 

==Terrain of Ghana==
The terrain consists of desert mountains with the Kwahu Plateau in the south-central area. Half of Ghana lies less than above sea level, and the highest point is . The coastline is mostly a low, sandy shore backed by plains and scrub and intersected by several rivers and streams, most of which are navigable only by canoe.

A tropical rain forest belt, broken by heavily forested hills and many streams and rivers, extends northward from the shore, near the Ivory Coast frontier. This area, known as the &quot;Ashanti,&quot; produces most of Ghana&#x27;s cocoa, minerals, and timber. North of this belt, the elevation varies from above sea level and is covered by low bushes, park-like savanna, and grassy plains.

Irrigated land: &lt;br&gt;
 (2003)

Total renewable water resources: &lt;br&gt;
 (2011)

==Geographical regions==
Ghana is characterized in general by low physical relief. The Precambrian rock system that underlies most of the nation has been worn down by erosion almost to a plain. The highest elevation in Ghana, Mount Afadja in the Akwapim-Togo Ranges, rises above sea level.

There are four distinct geographical regions. Low plains stretch across the southern part of Ghana. To their north lie three regions—the Ashanti Uplands, the Akwapim-Togo Ranges, and the Volta Basin. The fourth region, the high plains, occupies the northern and northwestern sector of Ghana. Like most West African countries, Ghana has no natural harbours. Because strong surf pounds the shoreline, two artificial harbours were built at Takoradi and Tema (the latter completed in 1961) to accommodate Ghana&#x27;s shipping needs.

===Low plains===

The low plains comprise the four subregions of the coastal savanna, the Volta Delta, the Accra Plains, and the Akan lowlands or peneplains. A narrow strip of grassy and scrubby coast runs from a point near Takoradi in the west to the Togo border in the east. This coastal savanna, only about in width at its western end, stretches eastward through the Accra Plains, where it widens to more than , and terminates at the southeastern corner of the country at the lower end of the Akwapim-Togo Ranges.

Almost flat and featureless, the Accra Plains descend gradually to the gulf from a height of about . The topography east of the city of Accra is marked by a succession of ridges and spoonshaped valleys. The hills and slopes in this area are the favoured lands for cultivation. Shifting cultivation is the usual agricultural practice because of the swampy nature of the very lowlying areas during the rainy seasons and the periodic blocking of the rivers at the coast by sandbars that form lagoons. A plan to irrigate the Accra Plains was announced in 1984. Should this plan come to reality, much of the area could be opened to large-scale cultivation.

To the west of Accra, the low plains contain wider valleys and rounded low hills, with occasional rocky headlands. In general, however, the land is flat and covered with grass and scrub. Dense groves of coconut palms front the coastline. Several commercial centres, including Winneba, Saltpond, and Cape Coast are located here. Winneba has a small livestock industry and palm tree cultivation is expanding in the area away from the coast, with the predominant occupation of the coastal inhabitants being fishing via dug-out canoe.

The Volta Delta, which forms a distinct subregion of the low plains, extends into the Gulf of Guinea in the extreme southeast. The delta&#x27;s rock formation—consisting of thick layers of sandstone, some limestone, and silt deposits—is flat, featureless, and relatively young. As the delta grew outward over the centuries, sandbars developed across the mouths of the Volta and smaller rivers that empty into the gulf in the same area, forming numerous lagoons, some quite large, making road construction difficult.

To avoid the lowest-lying areas the road between Accra and Keta makes a detour inland just before reaching Ada, and approaches Keta from the east along the narrow spit on which the town stands. Road links with Keta continue to be a problem. By 1989 it was estimated that more than 3,000 houses in the town had been swallowed by flooding from the lagoon. About 1,500 other houses were destroyed by erosion caused by the powerful waves of the sea.

This flat, silt-composed delta region with its abundance of water supports shallot, corn, and cassava cultivation in the region. The sandy soil of the delta gave rise to the copra industry. Salt-making, from the plentiful supply in the dried beds of the lagoons, provides additional employment. The main occupation of the delta people is fishing, an industry that supplies dried and salted fish to other parts of the country.

The largest part of the low plains is the Akan Lowlands. Some experts prefer to classify this region as a subdivision of the Ashanti Uplands because of the many characteristics they share. Unlike the uplands, the height of the Akan Lowlands is generally between sea level and . Some ranges and hills rise to about , but few exceed . The lowlands that lie to the south of the Ashanti Uplands receive the many rivers that make their way to the sea.

The Akan Lowlands contain the basins of the Densu River, the Pra River, the Ankobra River, and the Tano River, all of which play important roles in the economy of Ghana. The Densu River Basin, location of the important urban centres of Koforidua and Nsawam in the eastern lowlands, has an undulating topography. Many of the hills here have craggy summits, which give a striking appearance to the landscape. The upper section of the Pra River Basin, to the west of the Densu, is relatively flat. The topography of its lower reaches resembles that of the Densu Basin and is a rich cocoa and food-producing region. The valley of the Birim River, one of the main tributaries of the Pra, is Ghana&#x27;s most important diamond-producing area.

The Ankobra River Basin and the middle and lower basins of the Tano River to the west of the lowlands form the largest subdivision of the Akan Lowlands. Here annual rainfall between helps assure a dense forest cover. In addition to timber, the area is rich in minerals. The Tarkwa goldfield, the diamond operations of the Bonsa Valley, and high-grade manganese deposits are all found in this area. The middle and lower Tano basins have been intensely explored for oil and natural gas since the mid-1980s. The lower basins of the Pra, Birim, Densu, and Ankobra rivers are also sites for palm tree cultivation.

Comprising the Southern Ashanti Uplands and the Kwahu Plateau, the Ashanti Uplands lie just north of the Akan Lowlands and stretch from the Ivory Coast border in the west to the elevated edge of the Volta Basin in the east. Stretching in a northwest-to-southeast direction, the Kwahu Plateau extends between Koforidua in the east and Wenchi in the northwest. The average elevation of the plateau is about , rising to a maximum of . The relatively cool temperatures of the plateau were attractive to Europeans, particularly missionaries, who founded many well-known schools and colleges in this region.

The plateau forms one of the important physical divides in Ghana. From its northeastern slopes, the Afram and Pru Rivers flow into the Volta River, while from the opposite side, the Pra, Birim, Ofin, Tano, and other rivers flow south toward the sea. The plateau also marks the northernmost limit of the forest zone. Although large areas of the forest cover have been destroyed through farming, enough deciduous forest remains to shade the head waters of the rivers that flow from the plateau.

The Southern Ashanti Uplands, extending from the foot of the Kwahu Plateau in the north to the lowlands in the south, slope gently from an elevation of about in the north to about in the south. The region contains several hills and ranges as well as several towns of historical and economic importance, including Kumasi, Ghana&#x27;s second largest city and former capital of the Asante. Obuasi and Konongo, two of the country&#x27;s gold-mining centres, are also located here. The region is Ghana&#x27;s chief producer of cocoa, and its tropical forests continue to be a vital source of timber for the lumber industry.

===Volta Basin===

Taking the central part of Ghana, the Volta Basin covers about 45 percent of the nation&#x27;s total land surface. Its northern section, which lies above the upper part of Lake Volta, rises to a height of above sea level. Elevations of the Konkori Scarp to the west and the Gambaga Scarp to the north reach from . To the south and the southwest, the basin is less than . The Kwahu Plateau marks the southern end of the basin, and forms a natural part of the Ashanti Uplands.

The basin is characterized by poor soil, generally of Voltaian sandstone. Annual rainfall averages between . The most widespread vegetation type is savanna, the woodlands of which, depending on local soil and climatic conditions, may contain such trees as red ironwood and shea.

The basin&#x27;s population, principally farmers, is low in density, especially in the central and northwestern areas of the basin, where tsetse flies are common. Archeological finds indicate that the region was once more heavily populated. Periodic burning occurred over extensive areas for perhaps more than a millennium, exposing the soil to excessive drying and erosion, rendering the area less attractive to cultivators.

In contrast with the rest of the region are the Afram Plains, located in the southeastern corner of the basin. Here the terrain is low, averaging in elevation, and annual rainfall is between and about . Near the Afram River, much of the surrounding countryside is flooded or swampy during the rainy seasons. With the creation of Lake Volta ( in area) in the mid-1960s, much of the Afram Plains was submerged. Despite the construction of roads to connect communities displaced by the lake, road transportation in the region remains poor. Renewed efforts to improve communications, to enhance agricultural production, and to improve standards of living began in earnest in the mid-1980s.

===High plains===

The general terrain in the northern and northwestern part of Ghana outside the Volta Basin consists of a dissected plateau, which averages between in elevation and, in some places, is even higher. Rainfall averages between annually, although in the northwest it is closer to . Soils in the high plains are more arable than those in the Volta Basin, and the population density is considerably higher. Grain and cattle production are the major economic activities in the high plains of the northern region.

Since the mid-1980s, when former United States President Jimmy Carter&#x27;s Global 2000 program adopted Ghana as one of a select number of African countries whose local farmers were to be educated and financially supported to improve agricultural production, there has been a dramatic increase in grain production in northern Ghana. The virtual absence of tsetse flies in the region has led to increased livestock raising as a major occupation in the north. The region is Ghana&#x27;s largest producer of cattle.

==Rivers and lakes==


Ghana is drained by a large number of streams and rivers. In addition, there are a number of coastal lagoons, the huge man-made Lake Volta, and Lake Bosumtwi, southeast of Kumasi, which has no outlet to the sea. In the wetter south and southwest areas of Ghana, the river and stream pattern is denser, but in the area north of the Kwahu Plateau, the pattern is much more open, making access to water more difficult. Several streams and rivers also dry up or experience reduced flow during the dry seasons of the year, while flooding during the rainy seasons is common.

The major drainage divide runs from the southwest part of the Akwapim-Togo Ranges northwest through the Kwahu Plateau and then irregularly westward to the Ivory Coast border. Almost all the rivers and streams north of this divide form part of the Volta system. Extending about in length and draining an area of about , of which about lie within Ghana, the Volta and its tributaries, such as the Afram River and the Oti River, drain more than two thirds of Ghana. To the south of the divide are several smaller, independent rivers. The most important of these are the Pra River, the Tano River, the Ankobra River, the Birim River, and the Densu River. With the exception of smaller streams that dry up in the dry seasons or rivers that empty into inland lakes, all the major rivers in Ghana flow into the Gulf of Guinea directly or as tributaries to other major rivers. The Ankobra and Tano are navigable for considerable distances in their lower reaches.
Navigation on the Volta River has changed significantly since 1964. Construction of the dam at Akosombo, about upstream from the coast, created the vast Lake Volta and the associated hydroelectric project. Arms of the lake extended into the lower-lying areas, forcing the relocation of 78,000 people to newly created townships on the lake&#x27;s higher banks. The Black Volta River and the White Volta River flow separately into the lake. Before their confluence was submerged, the rivers came together in the middle of Ghana to form the main Volta River.

The Oti River and the Daka River, the principal tributaries of the Volta in the eastern part of Ghana, and the Pru River, the Sene River, and the Afram River, major tributaries to the north of the Kawhu Plateau, also empty into flooded extensions of the lake in their river valleys. Lake Volta is a rich source of fish, and its potential as a source for irrigation is reflected in an agricultural mechanization agreement signed in the late 1980s to irrigate the Afram Plains. The lake is navigable from Akosombo through Yeji in the middle of Ghana. A pontoon was commissioned in 1989 to link the Afram Plains to the west of the lake with the lower Volta region to the east. Hydroelectricity generated from Akosombo supplies Ghana, Togo, and Benin.

On the other side of the Kwahu Plateau from Lake Volta are several river systems, including the Pra, Ankobra, Tano and Densu. The Pra is the easternmost and the largest of the three principal rivers that drain the area south of the Volta divide. Rising south of the Kwahu Plateau and flowing southward, the Pra enters the Gulf of Guinea east of Takoradi. In the early part of the twentieth century, the Pra was used extensively to float timber to the coast for export. This trade is now carried by road and rail transportation.

The Ankobra, which flows to the west of the Pra, has a relatively small drainage basin. It rises in the hilly region of Bibiani and flows in a southerly direction to enter the gulf just west of Axim. Small craft can navigate approximately inland from its mouth. At one time, the Ankobra helped transport machinery to the gold-mining areas in the vicinity of Tarkwa. The Tano, which is the westernmost of the three rivers, rises near Techiman in the centre of the country. It also flows in a southerly direction, and it empties into a lagoon in the southeast corner of Ivory Coast. Navigation by steam launch is possible on the southern sector of the Tano for about .

A number of rivers are found to the east of the Pra. The two most important are the Densu and Ayensu, both of which rise in the Atewa Range, and which are important as sources of water for Accra and Winneba respectively. The country has one large natural lake, Lake Bosumtwi, located about southeast of Kumasi. It occupies the steep-sided meteoric crater and has an area of about . A number of small streams flow into Lake Bosumtwi, but there is no drainage from it. Apart from providing an opportunity for fishing for local inhabitants, the lake serves as a tourist attraction.

== Climate ==

The country&#x27;s warm, humid climate has an annual mean temperature between . Variations in the principal elements of temperature, rainfall, and humidity that govern the climate are influenced by the movement and interaction of the dry tropical continental air mass, or the harmattan, which blows from the northeast across the Sahara, and the opposing tropical maritime or moist equatorial system. The cycle of the seasons follows the apparent movement of the sun back and forth across the equator.

During summer in the northern hemisphere, a warm and moist maritime air mass intensifies and pushes northward across the country. A low-pressure belt, or intertropical front, in the airmass brings warm air, rain, and prevailing winds from the southwest. As the sun returns south across the equator, the dry, dusty, tropical continental front, or harmattan, prevails. Climatic conditions across the country are hardly uniform. The Kwahu Plateau, which marks the northernmost extent of the forest area, also serves as an important climatic divide. To its north, two distinct seasons occur. The harmattan season, with its dry, hot days and relatively cool nights from November to late March or April, is followed by a wet period that reaches its peak in late August or September. To the south and southwest of the Kwahu Plateau, where the annual mean rainfall from north to south ranges from , four separate seasons occur. Heavy rains fall from about April through late June. After a relatively short dry period in August, another rainy season begins in September and lasts through November, before the longer harmattan season sets in to complete the cycle.

The extent of drought and rainfall varies across the country. To the south of the Kwahu Plateau, the heaviest rains occur in the Axim area in the southwest corner of Ghana. Farther to the north, Kumasi receives an average annual rainfall of about , while Tamale in the drier northern savanna receives rainfall of per year. From Takoradi eastward to the Accra Plains, including the lower Volta region, rainfall averages only a year.

Temperatures are usually high at all times of the year throughout the country. At higher elevations, temperatures are more comfortable. In the far north, temperature highs of are common. The southern part of the country is characterized by generally humid conditions. This is particularly so during the night, when 95 to 100 percent humidity is possible. Humid conditions also prevail in the northern section of the country during the rainy season. During the harmattan season, however, humidity drops as low as 25 percent in the north.

== Natural hazards ==
Dry, dusty, harmattan winds occur from January to March. Ghana is also prone to droughts, and was severely affected by floods in 2007 and 2009.

== Environmental issues ==

Environmental issues include recurrent drought in the north, severely affecting agricultural activities, deforestation, overgrazing, soil erosion, poaching and habitat destruction threatens wildlife populations, water pollution, and inadequate supplies of potable water

International agreements (ratified):

Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands.

 International agreements (signed, but not ratified)

Marine Life Conservation.

== Other ==

Volta Lake, the largest artificial lake in the world, extends from the Akosombo Dam in southeastern Ghana to the town of Yapei, to the north. The lake generates electricity, provides inland transportation, and is a potentially valuable resource for irrigation and fish farming.

Ghana has a large and well-preserved national park system that includes Kakum National Park in the Central Region, Mole National Park in the Northern Region, Digya National Park along the western bank of the Volta Lake.

== Extreme points ==

This is a list of the extreme points of Ghana, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.
* Northernmost point – the point at which the border with Burkina Faso enters the Morbira river immediately south of the Burkinabè village of Kanhiré, Upper East Region
* Easternmost point – the southernmost section of the border with Togo, Volta Region*
* Southernmost point – Cape Three Points, Western Region
* Westernmost point - the point where the border with Ivory Coast enters the Manzan river, Western Region
** &quot;Note: Ghana does not have an easternmost point, the border at this section being defined along the line of longitude at 1°12&#x27;05.73&quot;E&quot;

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Geology of Ghana

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="0" end="5" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="11" end="22" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="35" end="41" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q41430" start="53" end="67" title="Gulf of Guinea" label="Gulf of Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q160091" start="88" end="93" title="plain" label="plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q54050" start="100" end="104" title="hill" label="hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q201679" start="115" end="125" title="Lake Volta" label="Lake Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16269380" start="169" end="180" title="Dodi Island" label="Dodi Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q732815" start="185" end="200" title="Bobowasi Island" label="Bobowasi Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="214" end="228" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="299" end="308" title="ecoregion" label="ecoregion"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="315" end="324" title="coastline" label="coastline"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="342" end="346" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="348" end="353" title="shore" label="shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q879641" start="375" end="380" title="Shrubland" label="scrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q47521" start="419" end="425" title="stream" label="stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q160091" start="469" end="474" title="plain" label="plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q75520" start="537" end="544" title="plateau" label="plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q398417" start="570" end="577" title="Ashanti Region" label="Ashanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q878223" start="578" end="585" title="Highland" label="uplands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574947" start="594" end="607" title="Kwahu Plateau" label="Kwahu Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q46831" start="632" end="638" title="Mountain range" label="ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q133346" start="676" end="696" title="international border" label="international border"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987440" start="703" end="714" title="Volta Basin" label="Volta Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q635179" start="786" end="798" title="Mount Afadja" label="Mount Afadja"/>
<link wikidata="Q46831" start="841" end="847" title="Mountain range" label="ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q135712" start="864" end="872" title="tropical climate" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157503" start="881" end="901" title="Dahomey Gap" label="eastern coastal belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="975" end="980" title="Humidity" label="humid"/>
<link wikidata="Q201679" start="1022" end="1032" title="Lake Volta" label="Lake Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="1070" end="1074" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q252472" start="1168" end="1171" title="Oti River" label="Oti"/>
<link wikidata="Q383620" start="1176" end="1181" title="Afram River" label="Afram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261417" start="1285" end="1302" title="Cape Three Points" label="Cape Three Points"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186295" start="1343" end="1345" title="4th parallel north" label="4°"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254902" start="1350" end="1354" title="12th parallel north" label="12°N"/>
<link wikidata="Q190489" start="1377" end="1386" title="evergreen" label="evergreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q738961" start="1391" end="1405" title="semi-deciduous" label="semi-deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="Q239788" start="1442" end="1450" title="mahogany" label="mahogany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018022" start="1452" end="1456" title="Milicia excelsa" label="odum"/>
<link wikidata="Q156005" start="1458" end="1463" title="ebony" label="ebony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609983" start="1506" end="1514" title="oil palm" label="oil palm"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756" start="1520" end="1529" title="mangroves" label="mangroves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348567" start="1535" end="1544" title="shea tree" label="shea tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q158742" start="1547" end="1554" title="Adansonia digitata" label="baobabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q81666" start="1559" end="1566" title="acacias" label="acacias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261417" start="1630" end="1647" title="Cape Three Points" label="Cape Three Points"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256475" start="1741" end="1750" title="11th parallel north" label="11° north"/>
<link wikidata="Q131108" start="1878" end="1896" title="Greenwich Meridian" label="Greenwich Meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q726143" start="1971" end="1975" title="Tema" label="Tema"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="2186" end="2194" title="Victoria (state)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009" start="2258" end="2263" title="Yukon" label="Yukon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="2398" end="2410" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="2414" end="2416" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="2461" end="2468" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="2526" end="2538" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="2562" end="2573" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="2600" end="2604" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574947" start="2702" end="2715" title="Kwahu Plateau" label="Kwahu Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q171529" start="2969" end="2974" title="canoe" label="canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q199403" start="2979" end="2999" title="tropical rain forest" label="tropical rain forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="3111" end="3122" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="3208" end="3213" title="Cocoa bean" label="cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="3215" end="3223" title="minerals" label="minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="3229" end="3235" title="timber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="3339" end="3346" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q186131" start="3532" end="3538" title="Terrain" label="relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q103910" start="3544" end="3555" title="Precambrian" label="Precambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q635179" start="3683" end="3695" title="Mount Afadja" label="Mount Afadja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987440" start="3703" end="3715" title="Akwapim-Togo" label="Akwapim-Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q243293" start="4185" end="4193" title="Takoradi" label="Takoradi"/>
<link wikidata="Q726143" start="4198" end="4202" title="Tema" label="Tema"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4369" end="4380" title="Volta Delta" label="Volta Delta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4386" end="4398" title="Accra Plains" label="Accra Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q243293" start="4503" end="4511" title="Takoradi" label="Takoradi"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="4531" end="4535" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q287854" start="5074" end="5094" title="Shifting cultivation" label="Shifting cultivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="5653" end="5666" title="coconut palms" label="coconut palms"/>
<link wikidata="Q41430" start="6068" end="6082" title="Gulf of Guinea" label="Gulf of Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="6171" end="6180" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="6187" end="6196" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="6202" end="6206" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q193498" start="7021" end="7028" title="shallot" label="shallot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="7030" end="7034" title="maize" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="7040" end="7047" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q193726" start="7120" end="7125" title="copra" label="copra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11254" start="7136" end="7140" title="Salt" label="Salt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7498" end="7513" title="Ashanti Uplands" label="Ashanti Uplands"/>
<link wikidata="Q635220" start="7865" end="7876" title="Densu River" label="Densu River"/>
<link wikidata="Q139115" start="7882" end="7891" title="Pra River (Ghana)" label="Pra River"/>
<link wikidata="Q557411" start="7897" end="7910" title="Ankobra River" label="Ankobra River"/>
<link wikidata="Q472715" start="7920" end="7930" title="Tano River" label="Tano River"/>
<link wikidata="Q406358" start="8057" end="8066" title="Koforidua" label="Koforidua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724141" start="8071" end="8077" title="Nsawam" label="Nsawam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8882" end="8894" title="Bonsa Valley" label="Bonsa Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q182059" start="10580" end="10586" title="Kumasi" label="Kumasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020901" start="10655" end="10661" title="Obuasi" label="Obuasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016732" start="10666" end="10673" title="Konongo, Ghana" label="Konongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q201679" start="11079" end="11089" title="Lake Volta" label="Lake Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="11446" end="11455" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="11531" end="11538" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12138" end="12150" title="Afram Plains" label="Afram Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q201679" start="13968" end="13978" title="Lake Volta" label="Lake Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q894613" start="13984" end="13997" title="Lake Bosumtwi" label="Lake Bosumtwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q182059" start="14012" end="14018" title="Kumasi" label="Kumasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574947" start="14171" end="14184" title="Kwahu Plateau" label="Kwahu Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q383620" start="14805" end="14816" title="Afram River" label="Afram River"/>
<link wikidata="Q865427" start="15027" end="15038" title="Birim River" label="Birim River"/>
<link wikidata="Q635220" start="15048" end="15059" title="Densu River" label="Densu River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103880" start="16473" end="16480" title="Pontoon (boat)" label="pontoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903040" start="17320" end="17327" title="Bibiani" label="Bibiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q792509" start="17394" end="17398" title="Axim" label="Axim"/>
<link wikidata="Q995439" start="17558" end="17564" title="Tarkwa" label="Tarkwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q964069" start="17633" end="17641" title="Techiman" label="Techiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q754580" start="17996" end="18007" title="Atewa Range" label="Atewa Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761" start="18057" end="18062" title="Accra" label="Accra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188560" start="18067" end="18074" title="Winneba" label="Winneba"/>
<link wikidata="Q214152" start="21126" end="21135" title="harmattan" label="harmattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="21194" end="21202" title="droughts" label="droughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="21233" end="21239" title="floods" label="floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="21392" end="21405" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q889503" start="21420" end="21432" title="soil erosion" label="soil erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="21596" end="21608" title="Biodiversity" label="Biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q208645" start="21610" end="21624" title="United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change" label="Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="21626" end="21641" title="Desertification" label="Desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="21643" end="21661" title="Endangered Species" label="Endangered Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q488546" start="21663" end="21689" title="Environmental Modification Convention" label="Environmental Modification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088099" start="21691" end="21705" title="Law of the Sea" label="Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="21707" end="21729" title="Ozone Layer Protection" label="Ozone Layer Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q259130" start="21731" end="21745" title="Ship Pollution" label="Ship Pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q26837533" start="21747" end="21765" title="Tropical Timber 83" label="Tropical Timber 83"/>
<link wikidata="Q26837533" start="21767" end="21785" title="Tropical Timber 94" label="Tropical Timber 94"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="21787" end="21795" title="Wetlands" label="Wetlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166287" start="21852" end="21876" title="Marine Life Conservation" label="Marine Life Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q201679" start="21892" end="21902" title="Volta Lake" label="Volta Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282314" start="21963" end="21975" title="Akosombo Dam" label="Akosombo Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="22053" end="22064" title="electricity" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449749" start="22075" end="22096" title="Transportation in Ghana" label="inland transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="22141" end="22151" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q209894" start="22156" end="22168" title="fish farming" label="fish farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="22171" end="22176" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q568693" start="22243" end="22262" title="Kakum National Park" label="Kakum National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585600" start="22286" end="22304" title="Mole National Park" label="Mole National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q491509" start="22329" end="22348" title="Digya National Park" label="Digya National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q201679" start="22379" end="22389" title="Volta Lake" label="Volta Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="22454" end="22459" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="22599" end="22611" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22623" end="22636" title="Morbira river" label="Morbira river"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22683" end="22690" title="Kanhiré" label="Kanhiré"/>
<link wikidata="Q712828" start="22692" end="22709" title="Upper East Region" label="Upper East Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="22776" end="22780" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q712832" start="22782" end="22794" title="Volta Region" label="Volta Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261417" start="22819" end="22836" title="Cape Three Points" label="Cape Three Points"/>
<link wikidata="Q870155" start="22838" end="22852" title="Western Region (Ghana)" label="Western Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="22907" end="22918" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22930" end="22942" title="Manzan river" label="Manzan river"/>
<link wikidata="Q870155" start="22944" end="22958" title="Western Region (Ghana)" label="Western Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q12094836" start="23145" end="23161" title="Geology of Ghana" label="Geology of Ghana"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12070" wikidata="Q851962" url="?curid=12070" title="Demographics of Ghana">
<text>Demographic features of the population of Ghana include population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, religious affiliations, and other aspects.

Ghana&#x27;s population is 30,832,019 (2021 census).

== Population ==
===Population distribution===

Population density increased steadily from 36 per square kilometer in 1970 to 52 per square kilometer in 1984. In 1990 63 persons per square kilometer was the estimate for Ghana&#x27;s overall population density. These averages did not reflect variations in population distribution. For example, while the Northern Region, one of ten administrative regions, showed a density of seventeen persons per square kilometer in 1984, in the same year Greater Accra Region recorded nine times the national average of 52 per square kilometer.

As was the case in the 1960 and 1970 figures, the greatest concentration of population in 1984 was to the south of the Kwahu Plateau. The highest concentration of habitation continued to be within the Accra-Kumasi-Takoradi triangle, largely because of the economic productivity of the region. All of Ghana&#x27;s mining centres, timber-producing deciduous forests, and cocoa-growing lands lie to the south of the Kwahu Plateau. The Accra-Kumasi-Takoradi triangle is linked to the coast by rail and road systems—making this area an important magnet for investment and labor.

A large part of the Volta Basin is sparsely populated. The far north is heavily populated. The population density of the Upper East Region is well above the national average. This may be explained in part by the better soil found in some areas.

===Urban–rural disparities===
Localities of 5,000 persons and above have been classified as urban since 1960. The 1960 urban population totalled 1,551,174 persons, or 23.1% of total population. By 1970, the urban percentage had increased to 28%. That percentage rose to 32% in 1984 and was estimated at 33% for 1992.

Urban areas in Ghana have customarily been supplied with more amenities than rural locations. Consequently, Kumasi, Accra, and many settlements within the southern economic belt attracted more people than the savanna regions of the north; only Tamale in the north has been an exception. The linkage of the national electricity grid to the northern areas of the country in the late 1980s may help to stabilize the north-to-south flow of internal migration.
Ghana has a hugely rural population that is dependent on subsistence agriculture. 
Ghana has continued to be a nation of rural communities. Rural residency was estimated to be 67% of the population in 1992. In the 1970s, 72% of Ghana&#x27;s population lived in rural areas. The &quot;Rural Manifesto,&quot; which assessed the causes of rural underdevelopment, was introduced in April 1984. Development strategies were evaluated, and some were implemented to make rural residency more attractive. The Bank of Ghana established more than 120 rural banks to support rural entrepreneurs, and the rural electrification program was intensified in the late 1980s. The government presented its plans for district assemblies as a component of its strategy for rural improvement through decentralized administration.

===Demographic trends===

Ghana&#x27;s first post independence population census in 1961 counted about 6.7 million inhabitants. Between 1965 and 1989, a constant 45% of Ghana total female population was of childbearing age.

===Age structure===

Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 26.IX.2010):
Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2015) (Data based on the 2010 Population Census.):
== Vital statistics ==
In July 2022, the United Nations published its 2022 World Population Prospects, a biennially-updated database where key demographic indicators are estimated and projected worldwide down to the country level. They prepared the following estimates of demographic indicators in Ghana for every year from 1950 to 2021, as well as projections for future decades.


===Demographics and Health Surveys===
Total Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR) Demographics Health Survey:

===Fertility and births (Census 2000 and 2010)===


==Ethnic groups==
Ghana has more than seventy native ethnic groups. Major native African ethnic groups in Ghana include the Akan at 45.7% of the population, the Mole-Dagbon at 18.5%, the Ewe at 13.9%, the Ga-Dangme at 7.1%, the Gurma at 6.4%, the Guan at 3.2%, the Grusi at 2.7%, Mande at 2% and others at 1.6%.

== Languages ==
Ghana is a multilingual country in which about 80 languages are spoken. English is the official language and lingua franca. Of the languages indigenous to Ghana, Akan is the most widely spoken.

Ghana has more than seventy ethnic groups, each with its own distinct language. Languages that belong to the same ethnic group are usually mutually intelligible.

Eleven languages have the status of government-sponsored languages: four Akan ethnic languages (Akuapem Twi, Asante Twi, Fante and Nzema) and two Mole–Dagbani ethnic languages (Dagaare and Dagbanli). The rest are Ewe, Dangme, Ga, Gonja, and Kasem, Hausa.

==Religion==

Christian: 71.3% (Pentecostal/Charismatic 31.6%, Protestant 17.4%, Catholic 10%, other 12.3%), Muslim 19.9%, traditionalist 3.2%, 2.1% Hindu, other 1.3%, none 1.1% (2021 est.)
==References==
==Further reading==
* Azunre, Gideon Abagna, Richard Azerigyik, and Pearl Puwurayire. &quot;Deciphering the drivers of informal urbanization by Ghana&#x27;s urban poor through the lens of the push-pull theory.&quot; &quot;InPlaning Forum&quot; Vol. 18. (2021). online

==External links==

* Ghana Statistical Service</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="0" end="11" title="demography" label="Demographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="42" end="47" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="56" end="74" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749294" start="128" end="150" title="Religion in Ghana" label="religious affiliations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574947" start="927" end="940" title="Kwahu Plateau" label="Kwahu Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987440" start="1403" end="1414" title="Volta Basin" label="Volta Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="3652" end="3666" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q415693" start="4315" end="4319" title="Akan people" label="Akan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25039528" start="4352" end="4363" title="Mole-Dagbon people" label="Mole-Dagbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q732317" start="4378" end="4381" title="Ewe people" label="Ewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q627897" start="4396" end="4405" title="Ga-Dangme people" label="Ga-Dangme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294392" start="4419" end="4424" title="Gurma people" label="Gurma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613610" start="4438" end="4442" title="Guang people" label="Guan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407391" start="4471" end="4476" title="Mandé people" label="Mande"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="4607" end="4624" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="4629" end="4642" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658486" start="4682" end="4686" title="Akan languages" label="Akan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658486" start="4951" end="4972" title="Akan languages" label="Akan ethnic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q31150449" start="4974" end="4985" title="Akuapem Twi" label="Akuapem Twi"/>
<link wikidata="Q19261685" start="4987" end="4997" title="Asante dialect" label="Asante Twi"/>
<link wikidata="Q35570" start="4999" end="5004" title="Fante dialect" label="Fante"/>
<link wikidata="Q36337" start="5009" end="5014" title="Nzema language" label="Nzema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157178" start="5024" end="5053" title="Oti–Volta languages" label="Mole–Dagbani ethnic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q35159" start="5055" end="5062" title="Dagaare" label="Dagaare"/>
<link wikidata="Q32238" start="5067" end="5075" title="Dagbani language" label="Dagbanli"/>
<link wikidata="Q30005" start="5091" end="5094" title="Ewe language" label="Ewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35141" start="5096" end="5102" title="Dangme language" label="Dangme"/>
<link wikidata="Q33287" start="5104" end="5106" title="Ga language" label="Ga"/>
<link wikidata="Q35267" start="5108" end="5113" title="Gonja language" label="Gonja"/>
<link wikidata="Q35552" start="5119" end="5124" title="Kasem language" label="Kasem"/>
<link wikidata="Q56475" start="5126" end="5131" title="Hausa language" label="Hausa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12072" wikidata="Q777007" url="?curid=12072" title="Economy of Ghana">
<text>The economy of Ghana has a diverse and rich resource base, including the manufacturing and export of digital technology goods, automotive and ship construction and export, and the export of resources such as hydrocarbons and industrial minerals.

The Ghanaian domestic economy in 2012 revolved around services, which accounted for 50% of GDP and employed 28% of the work force. Besides the industrialization associated with minerals and oil, industrial development in Ghana remains basic, often associated with plastics (such as chairs, plastic bags, razors, and pens). 53.6% of Ghana&#x27;s workforce were employed in agriculture in 2013.

Ghana embarked on a currency re-denomination exercise from the Cedi (₵) to the new currency, Ghana Cedi (GH₵) in July 2007. The transfer rate is 1 Ghana Cedi for every 10,000 Cedis.

Ghana became the largest gold-producing country in Africa after overtaking South Africa in 2019. The country is also the second-largest cocoa producer (after Ivory Coast). Ghana is rich in diamonds, manganese or manganese ore, bauxite, and oil. Most of its debt was cancelled in 2005, but government spending was later allowed to balloon. Coupled with a plunge in oil prices, this led to an economic crisis that forced the government to negotiate a $920 million extended credit facility from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in April 2015.

== Taxation ==
Value-added tax is a consumption tax administered in Ghana. The tax regime that started in 1998 had a single rate but since September 2007 entered into a multiple rate regime. In 1998, the rate of tax was 10% and amended in 2000 to 12.5%. The top income tax and corporate tax rates are 25%. Other taxes included with value-added tax (VAT), are the national health insurance levy, and a capital gains tax. The overall tax burden was 12.1% of Ghana&#x27;s total domestic income in 2013. Ghana&#x27;s national budget was the equivalent of 39.8% of GDP in 2013. Ghana is implementing the rent tax in 2021.

== Manufacturing ==
Ghana&#x27;s industrial base is relatively advanced. Import-substitution industries include electronics manufacturing. Rlg Communications is the first indigenous African company to assemble laptops, desktops, and mobile phones, and is West Africa&#x27;s biggest information and communications technology (ICT) and mobile phone manufacturing company.

Ghana began its automotive industry with the construction of a prototype robust SUV, named the SMATI Turtle 1, intended for use in the rough African terrain. It was designed and manufactured by the Artisans of Suame Magazine Industrial Development Organization. Urban electric cars have been manufactured in Ghana since 2014.

As of 2012 there were four major companies in the textiles sector: Akosombo Textiles Limited, Tex Style Ghana Limited, Printex Ghana, and Ghana Textile Manufacturing Company.

Ghana National Petroleum Corporation and Ghana Oil Company deal with crude oil and gas exploration, exploitation, and refining.

== Telecommunications ==

At the end of January 2022, total number of voice subscription in Ghana stood at 41,380,751.This represents a percentage increase of 1.28% over December 2019 figures of 40,857,007. The total penetration rate stands at 136.79%.
Competition among mobile-phone companies in Ghana is an important part of the telecommunications industry growth, Current market leader MTN with voice subscription of 23,150,485 representing 55.95% of the market is followed by Vodafone with voice subscription of 9,075,795 representing 21.93% market share, AirtelTigo voice subscription stands at 8,428,322 representing 20.69%, Glo&#x27;s current voice subscription stands at 726,149 which represent a market share of 1.75%.

The mass media of Ghana is among the most liberal in Africa, with Ghana ranking as the third-freest in Africa and 30th-most free in the world on the worldwide press freedom index. Chapter 12 of the Constitution of Ghana guarantees freedom of the Ghanaian press and the independence of the mass media, and Chapter 2 prohibits censorship. Ghanaian press freedom was restored in 1992.

Ghana was one of the first countries in Africa to achieve the connection to the World Wide Web. In 2010, there were 165 licensed internet service providers in Ghana and they were running 29 of the fiber optic, and authorized networks VSAT operators were 176, of which 57 functioned, and 99 internet operators were authorized to the public, and private data and packet-switched network operators were 25.

== Data ==
The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2023. Inflation below 5% is in green.
== Imports and Exports ==
Ghana&#x27;s top export products in 2016 were crude petroleum ($2.66B), gold ($2.39B), cocoa beans ($2.27B), cocoa paste ($382M) and cocoa butter ($252M). Ghana&#x27;s top export destinations in 2016 were Switzerland ($1.73B), China ($1.06B), France ($939M), India ($789M) and the Netherlands ($778M).

Ghana&#x27;s top import categories in 2016 were refined petroleum ($2.18B), crude petroleum ($546M), gold ($428M), rice ($328M) and packaged medicaments ($297M). The nations with the highest value of imports to Ghana in 2016 were China ($4.1B), the Netherlands ($1.58B), the United States ($1.1B), Nigeria ($920M) and India ($668M).

===Trade statistics===
== Private banking ==

The financial services in Ghana have seen a lot of reforms in the past years. The Banking (Amendment) Act 2007 included the awarding of a general banking license to qualified banks, which allows only indigenous Ghana offshore banks to operate in country Ghana. Indigenous Ghana private bank Capital Bank was the first to be awarded the general banking license in Ghana as well as indigenous Ghana private banks UniBank, National Investment Bank and Prudential Bank Limited. It has therefore become possible for Ghanaian non-resident individuals or residents and foreign companies or indigenous Ghana companies to open indigenous Ghana offshore bank accounts in Ghana. Indigenous Ghana retail and savings banks include Agricultural Development Bank of Ghana, CAL Bank, GCB Bank Ltd, Home Finance Company and UT Bank as well as indigenous Ghana savings and loan institutions ABii National and Savings and Loans Company.

=== Stock exchange ===

The Stock Exchange of Ghana is one of the largest in Africa, with a market capitalization of GH¢57.2 billion or CN¥180.4 billion in 2012. South Africa&#x27;s JSE Limited is the largest.
== Energy ==
As of 2018, Ghana consumed some 10 MMtoe of primary energy, made mostly of biomass (40%), oil and diesel (40%), followed by hydropower (10%) and natural gas (10%).
=== Oil &amp; Gas ===
Ghana discovered significant reserves of oil and natural gas offshore throughout the 2000s and 2010s. The country officially became an oil &amp; gas producer in 2010 with the commissioning of the Jubilee field by Tullow Oil and currently produces from three major offshore hubs: Jubilee, TEN, and OCTP. In 2021, its production stood at some 150,000 barrels of oil per day (bopd). Since production began in 2010 Ghana has rose to be the 34th largest national producer of oil.

In 2021 Ghana exported more than 71mil barrels of oil. China was the largest importer of Ghana oil, receiving over 41% of exports with South Africa, the second largest importer, taking 13.9%.

=== Solar energy ===
Ghana has aggressively begun the construction of solar plants across its sun-rich land in an aim to become the first country to get 6% of its energy from solar energy generation. Since construction began in the early 2010s electricity generation from solar has gone from zero KWh in 2014 to over 60 GWh in 2020, accounting for .46% of Ghana&#x27;s electricity consumption.

=== Wind energy ===
Ghana has Class 4–6 wind resources and high-wind locations, such as Nkwanta, the Accra Plains, and Kwahu and Gambaga mountains. The maximum energy that could be tapped from Ghana&#x27;s available wind resource for electricity is estimated to be about 500–600 GWh/year. To give perspective: in 2011, per the same Energy Commission, the largest Akosombo hydroelectric dam in Ghana alone produced 6,495 GWh of electric power and, counting all Ghana&#x27;s geothermal energy production in addition, the total energy generated was 11,200 GWh in that year. These assessments do not take into consideration further limiting factors such as land-use restrictions, the existing grid (or how far the wind resource may be from the grid) and accessibility.

=== Bio-energy ===

Ghana has put in place mechanisms to attract investments into its biomass and bio-energy sectors to stimulate rural development, create jobs and save foreign exchange. Main investments in the bio-energy subsector existed in the areas of production, are transportation, storage, distribution, sale, marketing and exportation.

The goal of Ghana regarding bio-energy, as articulated by its energy sector policy, is to modernize and examine the benefits of bio-energy on a sustainable basis. Biomass is Ghana&#x27;s dominant energy resource in terms of endowment and consumption, with the two primary bio-fuels consumed being ethanol and biodiesel. To that effect, the Ghana ministry of Energy in 2010 developed its energy sector strategy and development plan. Highlights of the strategy include sustaining the supply and efficient use of wood fuels while ensuring that their utilization does not lead to deforestation.

The plan would support private sector investments in the cultivation of bio-fuel feedstock, the extraction of bio-oil, and refining it into secondary products, thereby creating financial and tax incentives. The Ghana Renewal Energy Act provides the necessary fiscal incentives for renewable energy development by the private sector, and also details the control and management of bio-fuel and wood fuel projects in Ghana. The Ghana National Petroleum Authority (NPA) was tasked by the Renewable Energy Act 2011 to price Ghana&#x27;s bio-fuel blend in accordance with the prescribed petroleum pricing formula.

The combined effects of climate change and global economic turbulence had triggered a sense of urgency among Ghanaian policymakers, industry and development practitioners to find sustainable and viable solutions in the area of bio-fuels.

Brazil, which makes ethanol from maize and sugarcane, is currently the world&#x27;s largest bio-fuel market.

=== Energy consumption ===
Electricity generation is one of the key factors in achieving the development of the Ghanaian national economy, with aggressive and rapid industrialization; Ghana&#x27;s national electric energy consumption was 265 kilowatts per capita in 2009. Shortages of electricity have led to dumsor (blackouts), increasing the interest in renewables.

== Hydrocarbon and mining ==


Ghana has to of petroleum in reserves. A large oilfield which contains up to of sweet crude oil was discovered in 2007. Since these discoveries Ghana increased production steadily, the nations current peak is 200,000 barrels per day in 2019. Current production in 2021 stands at 179,900 barrels per day.

Ghana has vast natural gas reserves, which is used by many foreign multinational companies operating in Ghana. The hydrocarbon industry has had major implications for regional and urban development in Ghana and these are likely to substantially increase in the years to come

Mining has gained importance in the Ghanaian economy since the turn of the 21st century, with a growth of around 30% in 2007. The main mining extractions are bauxite, gold (Ghana is one of the largest gold producers in the world), and the phosphates.

== Tourism ==

The Ministry of Tourism has placed great emphasis upon further tourism support and development. Tourism contributed to 4.9% of GDP in 2009, attracting around 500,000 visitors. Tourist destinations include Ghana&#x27;s many castles and forts, national parks, beaches, nature reserves, landscapes and World Heritage buildings and sites.

In 2011, &quot;Forbes&quot; magazine ranked Ghana eleventh-friendliest country in the world. The assertion was based on a survey of a cross-section of travelers in 2010. Of all the countries on the African continent that were included in the survey, Ghana ranked highest.

To enter Ghana, it is necessary to have a visa authorized by the Government of Ghana, except for certain entrepreneurs on business trips.
== Agriculture ==
In 2013 agriculture employed 53.6% of Ghana&#x27;s total labor force. Agribusiness accounts for a small fraction of the gross domestic product. The main harvested crops are corn, plantain, rice, millet, sorghum, cassava and yam. Unlike the agricultural livestock, forestry and fishing sectors, the crop sector is key to the Ghanaian agricultural industry.

Ghana produced in 2018:

* 20.8 million tons of cassava (4th largest producer in the world, second only to Nigeria, Thailand and Congo);
* 7.8 million tonnes of yam (2nd largest producer in the world, second only to Nigeria);
* 4.1 million tons of plantain (2nd largest producer in the world, just behind Congo);
* 2.6 million tons of palm oil (8th largest producer in the world);
* 2.3 million tons of maize;
* 1.4 million tons of taro (4th largest producer in the world, second only to Nigeria, China and Cameroon);
* 947 thousand tons of cocoa (2nd largest producer in the world, second only to Ivory Coast);
* 769 thousand tons of rice;
* 753 thousand tons of orange (19th largest producer in the world);
* 713 thousand tons of pineapple (11th largest producer in the world);
* 521 thousand tons of peanut;

In addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products, like sweet potato (151 thousand tons), natural rubber (23 thousand tons) and tobacco (2.3 thousand tons).
== Ghana: Vision 2020 and industrialization ==
With the economic program &quot;Ghana: Vision 2020&quot;, Ghana intends to achieve its goals of accelerated economic growth and improved quality of life for all its citizens, by reducing poverty through private investment, rapid and aggressive industrialization, and direct and aggressive poverty-alleviation efforts. These plans were released in the 1995 government report, Ghana: Vision 2020. Nationalization of state-owned enterprises continues, with about two thirds of 300 parastatal enterprises owned by the government of Ghana. Other reforms adopted under the government&#x27;s structural adjustment program include increasing exchange rate controls and increasing autarky and increasing restrictions on imports.

The Ghana: Vision 2020 forecast assumes political stability; successful economic stabilization; the implementation of Ghana: Vision 2020 policy agenda on private sector growth; and aggressive public spending on social services, infrastructure and industrialization. It projection states that Ghana&#x27;s goals of reaching high-income economy status and newly industrialized country status will be easily realized between 2020 and 2039.


== Economic transparency ==

The judicial system of Ghana deals with corruption, economic malpractice and lack of economic transparency. Despite significant economic progress, obstacles do remain. Particular institutions need reform, and property rights need improvement. The overall investment regime lacks market transparency. Tackling these issues will be necessary if Ghana&#x27;s rapid economic growth is to be maintained.

According to Transparency International&#x27;s 2022 Corruption Perception Index, Ghana was ranked 72nd out of 180 countries, with a score of 43 on a scale where a 0–9 score means highly corrupt, and a 90–100 score means very clean. This was based on perceived levels of public sector corruption. John Addo Kufuor, son of former President John Agyekum Kufuor and Kojo Annan, son of former Secretary-General of the United Nations Kofi Annan, have been named in association with the Panama Papers.

=== Health and biotechnology ===
The Centre for Scientific Research into Plant Medicine is an agency of the Ministry of Health that was set up in the 1970s for research and development and as a practical resource (product production &amp; distribution/provision) primarily in areas of biotechnology related to medicinal plants. This includes both herbal medicine and work on more advanced applications. It also has a secondary role as an educational resource for foreign students in health, biotechnology and related fields.

=== Cybernetics and cyberwarfare ===
The use of computer technology for teaching and learning began to receive government of Ghana&#x27;s attention from the late 1990s. The information and communications technology in education policy of Ghana requires the use of information and communications technology for teaching and learning at all levels of education. The Ministry of Education supports institutions in teaching of information and communications technology literacy. The majority of secondary, and some basic schools of Ghana have computer laboratories.

Ghana&#x27;s intention to become the information technology hub of West Africa has led the government of Ghana to enact cyber crime legislation and enhance cyber security practices. Acting on that goal, in 2008 Ghana passed the &quot;Electronic Communications Act&quot; and the &quot;Electronic Transactions Act&quot;, which established the legal framework for governing information technology. In November 2011, the Deputy Minister for Communications and Technology announced the development of a national cyber security strategy, aimed at combating cyber crime and securing critical infrastructure.

In June 2012, the National Information Technology Agency announced a national computer emergency response team &quot;strategy&quot; designed to co-ordinate government response to cyber-attacks, both internal and external. The agency also established computer emergency response teams for each municipal, metropolitan, and district assembly to improve co-ordination and information-sharing on cyberspace threats. Ghana is ranked 2nd in Africa and 7th globally in cyber warfare, cyber-terrorism, cyber crime, and internet crime. In 2018, the National Cyber Security Centre was founded. It is the national agency responsible for cybersecurity. In November 2020, Parliament passed the Cybersecurity Act 2020. The Minister for Communications, Ursula Owusu-Ekuful, indicated that, &quot;a successful economy is hinged on a secured, safe and resilient national digital ecosystem. Cyber-security is, therefore, very critical to the economic development of the country and essential to the protection of the rights of individuals within the national digital ecosystem&quot;.

=== Real estate ===

The real estate and housing market has become an important and strategic economic sector, particularly in the urban centres of south Ghana such as Accra, Kumasi, Sekondi-Takoradi and Tema. However, many of its citizens particularly those in Accra cannot afford the housing prices which is a trait of most major cities globally particularly in the West. Kumasi is growing at a faster rate than Accra, and there is less competition in its real estate market. The gross rental income tax of Ghana is withheld at 10%, capital gains are taxed at 15% with a 5% gift tax imposed on the transfer of properties and Ghana&#x27;s real estate market is divided into 3 areas: public sector real estate development, emerging private sector real estate development, and private individuals. The activities of these 3 groups are facilitated by the Ghanaian banks and the primary mortgage market which has demonstrated enormous growth potential. Recent developments have given birth to a boom in the construction sector, including the housing and public housing sector generating and injecting billions of dollars annually into the Ghanaian economy. The real estate market investment perspective and attraction comes from Ghana&#x27;s tropical location and robust political stability. An increasing number of the Ghanaian populace are investing in properties, and the Ghana government is empowering the private sector in the real estate direction.

=== Trade and exports ===
In July 2013, International Enterprise Singapore a global office in Accra to develop trade and investment on logistics, oil and gas, aviation, transportation and consumer sectors. Singapore and Ghana also signed four bilateral agreements to promote public sector and private sector collaboration, as Ghana aims to predominantly shift its economic trade partnership to East Asia and Southeast Asia. The economic centre is IE Singapore&#x27;s second office in Africa. Ghana&#x27;s labour force in 2008 totalled 11.5 million Ghanaian citizens. Tema Harbour is Africa&#x27;s largest manmade harbour, and Takoradi Harbour along with Tema harbour handle goods and exports. They are also traffic junctions where goods are transhipped; the Tema harbour handles the majority of the nation&#x27;s export cargo and most of the country&#x27;s chief exports is shipped from Takoradi harbour. The Takoradi harbour and Tema harbour are operated by the state-owned Ghana Ports and Harbours Authority.

== Challenges ==

Over the years, the country has encountered various economic challenges especially in its bid to become financially sustainable. One of the most prominent has been high public debt. In January 2023, the Bank of Ghana reported that the country&#x27;s level of debt was up to the tune of GH¢575.7 billion at the end of November 2022.

== Child labor ==
== See also ==
* Economic history of Ghana
* United Nations Economic Commission for Africa
* List of countries by gold production

== References ==
== Notes ==
== External links ==
* Google Earth Map of the oil and gas infrastructure in Ghana
* World Bank Trade Summary Statistics Ghana</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q777007" start="4" end="20" title="Economy of Ghana" label="economy of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="73" end="86" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q182722" start="91" end="97" title="export" label="export"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662087" start="225" end="243" title="industrial mineral" label="industrial mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="468" end="473" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="641" end="646" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q13167710" start="670" end="685" title="re-denomination" label="re-denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q183530" start="704" end="708" title="Cedi" label="Cedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="734" end="739" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="788" end="793" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="899" end="911" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="982" end="993" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="1013" end="1020" title="diamond" label="diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="1023" end="1049" title="manganese" label="manganese or manganese ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078" start="1051" end="1058" title="bauxite" label="bauxite"/>
<link wikidata="Q42962" start="1064" end="1067" title="oil" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="1320" end="1347" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q128635" start="1385" end="1400" title="Value-added tax" label="Value-added tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351853" start="1406" end="1421" title="consumption tax" label="consumption tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="1438" end="1443" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q687591" start="1771" end="1788" title="capital gains tax" label="capital gains tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660379" start="2061" end="2091" title="Import substitution industrialization" label="Import-substitution industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="2100" end="2111" title="electronics" label="electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339174" start="2127" end="2145" title="Rlg Communications" label="Rlg Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="2170" end="2176" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3962" start="2198" end="2205" title="laptops" label="laptops"/>
<link wikidata="Q56155" start="2207" end="2215" title="desktop computer" label="desktops"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="2221" end="2227" title="Mobile phone" label="mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="2228" end="2234" title="Telephone" label="phones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="2243" end="2254" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="2270" end="2311" title="information and communications technology" label="information and communications technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="2322" end="2334" title="mobile phone" label="mobile phone"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="2359" end="2364" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q207977" start="2422" end="2431" title="prototype" label="prototype"/>
<link wikidata="Q192152" start="2439" end="2442" title="sport utility vehicle" label="SUV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2454" end="2468" title="Suame Magazine, Kumasi#SMATI Turtle 1" label="SMATI Turtle 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q186131" start="2508" end="2515" title="terrain" label="terrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7630464" start="2557" end="2583" title="Suame Magazine, Kumasi" label="Artisans of Suame Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q13267846" start="2621" end="2626" title="Urban car" label="Urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q193692" start="2627" end="2639" title="electric car" label="electric car"/>
<link wikidata="Q97595974" start="2753" end="2778" title="Akosombo Textile Limited" label="Akosombo Textiles Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245305" start="2805" end="2812" title="Printex" label="Printex"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104764" start="2862" end="2898" title="Ghana National Petroleum Corporation" label="Ghana National Petroleum Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555383" start="2903" end="2920" title="Ghana Oil Company" label="Ghana Oil Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="3738" end="3743" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="3786" end="3791" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067271" start="3869" end="3898" title="Press Freedom Index" label="worldwide press freedom index"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515403" start="3918" end="3939" title="Constitution of Ghana" label="Constitution of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193236" start="3975" end="3980" title="News media" label="press"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="4066" end="4079" title="Freedom of the press" label="press freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="4103" end="4108" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q466" start="4183" end="4197" title="World Wide Web" label="World Wide Web"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="4300" end="4311" title="Optical fiber" label="fiber optic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434308" start="4337" end="4341" title="VSAT" label="VSAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q456632" start="4447" end="4459" title="private data" label="private data"/>
<link wikidata="Q193446" start="4464" end="4487" title="packet-switched network" label="packet-switched network"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="4718" end="4722" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="4851" end="4862" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="4873" end="4878" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="4889" end="4895" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="4905" end="4910" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="4927" end="4938" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5224" end="5237" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q837171" start="5333" end="5350" title="financial service" label="financial service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593736" start="5546" end="5559" title="offshore bank" label="offshore bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733516" start="5620" end="5632" title="Capital Bank (Ghana)" label="Capital Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884628" start="5740" end="5747" title="UniBank" label="UniBank"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973844" start="5749" end="5773" title="National Investment Bank" label="National Investment Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252979" start="5778" end="5801" title="Prudential Bank Limited" label="Prudential Bank Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q473741" start="5849" end="5861" title="Non-resident alien" label="non-resident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548025" start="6014" end="6020" title="Retail banking" label="retail"/>
<link wikidata="Q157963" start="6025" end="6032" title="Savings bank" label="savings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693885" start="6047" end="6085" title="Agricultural Development Bank of Ghana" label="Agricultural Development Bank of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035559" start="6087" end="6095" title="CAL Bank" label="CAL Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521346" start="6097" end="6109" title="GCB Bank Ltd" label="GCB Bank Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039966" start="6111" end="6131" title="Home Finance Company" label="Home Finance Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876063" start="6136" end="6143" title="UT Bank" label="UT Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091703" start="6172" end="6188" title="Savings and loan association" label="savings and loan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19599982" start="6202" end="6215" title="ABii National" label="ABii National"/>
<link wikidata="Q16734072" start="6220" end="6245" title="Savings and Loans Company" label="Savings and Loans Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q11691" start="6276" end="6290" title="Stock exchange" label="Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q471719" start="6340" end="6361" title="market capitalization" label="market capitalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q183530" start="6365" end="6368" title="Ghana Cedi" label="GH¢"/>
<link wikidata="Q39099" start="6384" end="6387" title="Renminbi" label="CN¥"/>
<link wikidata="Q627514" start="6430" end="6441" title="JSE Limited" label="JSE Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457678" start="6686" end="6701" title="Oil reserves in Ghana" label="reserves of oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541981" start="6870" end="6880" title="Tullow Oil" label="Tullow Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="7420" end="7423" title="sun" label="sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q15045830" start="7809" end="7816" title="Nkwanta" label="Nkwanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q182098" start="8000" end="8003" title="Kilowatt hour" label="GWh"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="8093" end="8110" title="hydroelectric dam" label="hydroelectric dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q127993" start="8194" end="8211" title="geothermal energy" label="geothermal energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18537" start="8573" end="8580" title="biomass" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q18556" start="8585" end="8595" title="bio-energy" label="bio-energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045473" start="8617" end="8634" title="rural development" label="rural development"/>
<link wikidata="Q317617" start="8657" end="8673" title="Foreign-exchange reserves" label="foreign exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q18556" start="8699" end="8709" title="bio-energy" label="bio-energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18537" start="8996" end="9003" title="Biomass" label="Biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="9130" end="9137" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q167947" start="9142" end="9151" title="biodiesel" label="biodiesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642788" start="9343" end="9352" title="wood fuel" label="wood fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="9409" end="9422" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="9448" end="9462" title="private sector" label="private sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q898694" start="9535" end="9542" title="bio-oil" label="bio-oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="9706" end="9722" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="9910" end="9926" title="Renewable Energy" label="Renewable Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29954" start="10590" end="10617" title="electric energy consumption" label="electric energy consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q21072643" start="10693" end="10699" title="dumsor" label="dumsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="10800" end="10809" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4405386" start="10864" end="10879" title="sweet crude oil" label="sweet crude oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q634382" start="11365" end="11371" title="Mining in Ghana" label="Mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078" start="11523" end="11530" title="bauxite" label="bauxite"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="11604" end="11613" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294771" start="11636" end="11655" title="Ministry of Tourism (Ghana)" label="Ministry of Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="11899" end="11913" title="nature reserve" label="nature reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="11931" end="11945" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="11983" end="11989" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q396622" start="12467" end="12479" title="Agribusiness" label="Agribusiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="12570" end="12574" title="Maize" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q165449" start="12576" end="12584" title="Plantain (cooking)" label="plantain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="12586" end="12590" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="12592" end="12598" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="12600" end="12607" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="12609" end="12616" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047551" start="12621" end="12624" title="Yam (vegetable)" label="yam"/>
<link wikidata="Q38112" start="12661" end="12669" title="forestry" label="forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="12802" end="12809" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047551" start="12915" end="12918" title="Yam (vegetable)" label="yam"/>
<link wikidata="Q165449" start="13002" end="13010" title="Cooking banana" label="plantain"/>
<link wikidata="Q231458" start="13089" end="13097" title="palm oil" label="palm oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="13157" end="13162" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q227997" start="13186" end="13190" title="taro" label="taro"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="13295" end="13300" title="Cocoa bean" label="cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="13389" end="13393" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q13191" start="13418" end="13424" title="Orange (fruit)" label="orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493" start="13486" end="13495" title="pineapple" label="pineapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q37383" start="13557" end="13563" title="peanut" label="peanut"/>
<link wikidata="Q37937" start="13638" end="13650" title="sweet potato" label="sweet potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q131877" start="13672" end="13686" title="natural rubber" label="natural rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="13710" end="13717" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="14200" end="14211" title="state-owned" label="state-owned"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="14264" end="14274" title="parastatal" label="parastatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141807" start="14371" end="14392" title="structural adjustment" label="structural adjustment"/>
<link wikidata="Q634339" start="14420" end="14442" title="Foreign exchange controls" label="exchange rate controls"/>
<link wikidata="Q309070" start="14458" end="14465" title="autarky" label="autarky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994367" start="14830" end="14849" title="World Bank high-income economy" label="high-income economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q376860" start="14861" end="14889" title="newly industrialized country" label="newly industrialized country"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303103" start="14979" end="15003" title="Judiciary of Ghana" label="judicial system of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8799101" start="15184" end="15199" title="Property rights (economics)" label="property rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="15230" end="15240" title="Foreign direct investment" label="investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q568753" start="15254" end="15273" title="Transparency (market)" label="market transparency"/>
<link wikidata="Q174240" start="15388" end="15414" title="Transparency International" label="Transparency International"/>
<link wikidata="Q210463" start="15427" end="15454" title="Corruption Perception Index" label="Corruption Perception Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q23718894" start="15671" end="15687" title="John Addo Kufuor" label="John Addo Kufuor"/>
<link wikidata="Q51005" start="15713" end="15732" title="John Agyekum Kufuor" label="John Agyekum Kufuor"/>
<link wikidata="Q720665" start="15737" end="15747" title="Kojo Annan" label="Kojo Annan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254" start="15803" end="15813" title="Kofi Annan" label="Kofi Annan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23702848" start="15855" end="15868" title="Panama Papers" label="Panama Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062571" start="15908" end="15958" title="Centre for Scientific Research into Plant Medicine" label="Centre for Scientific Research into Plant Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867086" start="15979" end="15997" title="Ministry of Health (Ghana)" label="Ministry of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q188840" start="16181" end="16197" title="medicinal plants" label="medicinal plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q861699" start="16218" end="16233" title="herbal medicine" label="herbal medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="16570" end="16611" title="information and communications technology" label="information and communications technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866842" start="16761" end="16782" title="Ministry of Education (Ghana)" label="Ministry of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6637503" start="16914" end="16930" title="List of schools in Ghana" label="schools of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q15378819" start="17384" end="17411" title="Minister for Communications (Ghana)" label="Minister for Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733909" start="17580" end="17618" title="National Information Technology Agency" label="National Information Technology Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122253" start="17640" end="17672" title="computer emergency response team" label="computer emergency response team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660132" start="18670" end="18684" title="Real estate economics" label="housing market"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="19124" end="19134" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850816" start="19164" end="19176" title="capital gain" label="capital gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118234" start="19205" end="19213" title="gift tax" label="gift tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050305" start="20122" end="20156" title="International Enterprise Singapore" label="International Enterprise Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050305" start="20529" end="20541" title="International Enterprise Singapore" label="IE Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697958" start="20649" end="20661" title="Tema Harbour" label="Tema Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678478" start="20708" end="20724" title="Takoradi Harbour" label="Takoradi Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555386" start="21057" end="21091" title="Ghana Ports and Harbours Authority" label="Ghana Ports and Harbours Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q669484" start="21315" end="21328" title="Bank of Ghana" label="Bank of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q108577904" start="21480" end="21505" title="Economic history of Ghana" label="Economic history of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144508" start="21508" end="21553" title="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa" label="United Nations Economic Commission for Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534566" start="21556" end="21592" title="List of countries by gold production" label="List of countries by gold production"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12073" wikidata="Q5761637" url="?curid=12073" title="Telecommunications in Ghana">
<text>Telecommunications in Ghana include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.

Telecommunications is the main economic sector of Ghana according to the statistics of the World Bank due to the Ghana liberal policy around Information and communications technology (ICT). Among the main sectors of investments, 65% is for ICT, 8% for communications and 27% is divided for public administration.

==Freedom of the press==

After the overthrow of the elected government by Jerry Rawlings in December 1981 the Provisional National Defence Council repealed the liberal media reforms of previous governments, abolished the Third Constitution and the Press Commission, and passed laws that prevented criticism of the government or its policies, dismissed editors critical of Rawlings or the provisional council, the Preventive Custody and Newspaper Licensing Law which allowed indefinite detention of journalists without trial, and the Newspaper Licensing Law which stifled private media development. Ghanaian press freedom was restored with the promulgation of a new constitution in 1992, presidential and parliamentary elections in November and December 1992, and a return to multiparty democratic rule on 7 January 1993.

The mass media of Ghana is &quot;among the most liberal in Africa&quot;, with Ghana ranking as the third freest in Africa and 30th in the world on the &quot;2013 World Press Freedom Index&quot; from Reporters Without Borders. Article 21 of the Constitution of Ghana guarantees freedom of the press and other media, freedom of speech and expression, thought, and information.

==Internet==

The top-level domain of Ghana is .gh.

Ghana was one of the first countries in Africa to connect to the Internet. With an average household download speed of 5.8 Mbit/s Ghana had the third fastest speed on the African continent and the 110th fastest out of 188 countries worldwide in February 2014.

In 2009 the number of Internet users stood at 1.3 million, 93rd in the world. In 2012 the number of Internet users reached 4.2 million (69th in the world) or 17.1% of the population (149th in the world).

In 2012 there were 62,124 fixed (109th in the world; 0.3% of the population, 156th in the world) and 8.2 million wireless (27th in the world; 33.3% of the population, 49th in the world) broadband subscriptions.

In 2012 there were 59,086 Internet hosts operating in Ghana, 93rd in the world, and Ghana had been allocated 332,544 IPv4 addresses, 102nd in the world, with less than 0.05% of the world total, and 13.2 addresses per 1000 people.

In 2010 there were 165 authorised Internet service providers of which 30 were operating.

===Internet censorship and surveillance===

There are no government restrictions on access to the Internet or reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without judicial oversight. Individuals and groups engage in the peaceful expression of views via the Internet, including by e-mail.

While the constitution and law provide for freedom of speech and press, the government sometimes restricts those rights. The police arbitrarily arrest and detain journalists. Some journalists practice self-censorship. The constitution prohibits arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, and the government respects these prohibitions in practice.

In 2002 the government of Ghana censored Internet media coverage of tribal violence in Northern Ghana.

==Radio and television==

In 2007 Ghana was served by one state-owned TV station, two state-owned radio networks; privately owned TV stations and a number of privately owned radio stations. International broadcasters and cable and satellite TV subscription services were available. In 2010, there were 140 authorised radio stations with 84 in operation and 32 authorised television stations with approximately 26 in operation. Television broadcasters include First Digital TV (ATV, BTA, FAITH TV, CHANNEL D, STAR TV, FTV, SPORTS 24, CINIMAX, PLANET KIDZ) TV Africa, Metro TV, TV3, GTV, GH One TV and Viasat 1.

The Ghana Broadcasting Corporation (GBC) founded by decree in 1968 is the state agency that provides civilian radio and television services. It was created for the development of the education and entertainment sectors and to enhance the knowledge of the people of Ghana.

The television industry has increased over this period in the country. There have been a lot of television stations established within the country and whether we like it or not, it has shaped the societies in many ways. The Top 5 TV stations in Ghana according to Green Views Residential Projects are GTV (Ghana Television), Citi TV, UTV (United Television), TV3, and GH One TV(Ghana One Television).

==Telephones==

The prefix code of Ghana for international calls is +233.

As of 2012 there were 285,000 fixed telephone lines in use, 120th in the world, and 25.6 million mobile cellular lines, 42nd in the world.

The telephone system has a fixed-line infrastructure concentrated in Accra and some wireless local loop installed, domestic trunks primarily use microwave radio relay. There are 4 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean) satellite earth stations. Microwave radio relay links Ghana to its neighbours (2009).

The SAT-3/WASC, Main One, GLO-1, and ACE international optical fibre submarine cables provide links to countries along the west coast of Africa and on to Europe and Asia.

In 2010 two fixed line and six mobile phone companies were authorised to operate in Ghana of which 5 were operating, 13 satellite providers were authorised of which 8 were operating, 176 VSAT providers were authorised of which 57 were operating, and 99 public and private network operators were authorised of which 25 were operating. Authorized telecommunications companies include Mobile Telecommunications Networks (MTN), Vodafone Ghana which purchased Telecom Ghana, Tigo which replaced Mobitel (Millicom International Cellular), Bharti Airtel and Zain which acquired Western Telesystems Ltd (Westel), Glo Mobile Ghana Limited, and Expresso Telecom which acquired Kasapa Telecom. In 2017, Tigo Ghana and Airtel Ghana merged to form AirtelTigo.

Competition among mobile-cellular providers has spurred growth, with a mobile phone teledensity in 2009 of more than 80 per 100 persons and rising. The cost of mobile phones is increased by taxes of around 38%.

The Ghana&#x27;s telecom market has undergone several changes in recent years, following the privatisation of the incumbent telco Ghana Telecom and its rebranding as Vodafone Ghana. Two of the key players merged to form AirtelTigo in 2017, though in mid-2020 the parent companies of the operator decided to exit the market. The sale and transfer of AirtelTigo to the state was completed in November 2021.

According to the Ghana Telecom Services Market Reports, the telecom services market size in Ghana was valued at $1.9 billion in 2022. The market is expected to grow at a CAGR of 3.1% during the forecast period, 2022–2027. Initiatives such as Rural Telephony and Digital Inclusion Projects and Smart City Project will be driving the telecom sector in the country. The reports shows the leading telecom Companies in Ghana; MTN Ghana, Vodafone Ghana, AirtelTigo Ghana and Glo Ghana.

As the telecommunication giant in the county, MTN Ghana is on course to expand and improve its network by 2025 with $1 billion investment. This will go a long way to improve the telecommunication services in the country.

== Covid-19 impact ==
COVID-19 pandemic had a negligible impact on the Ghana telecom industry that brought about change in the industry. In March 2020, business hours broadband consumption has increased, as the country adjusted to life with COVID-19. The telecom sector witnessed growth in weekday viewership, movie rentals and purchases. Live viewing is increased by 15% and free video-on-demand is increased by 25% during the week as more people were in lock-down staying at home.

Ghana Telecom Market has witnessed strong growth in recent years and is expected to have continued growth over the forecast period to 2025. The growth in the industry is mainly due to increasing urban population with rising adoption of the mobile phones that supports 3G, 4G and 5G services across the country. Telecom sector is further expected to have strong growth over the forecast period with rising adoption of Internet of Things (IoT) in the sector that connects with wired and wireless broadband.

==See also==

* Ghana Internet Exchange (GIX)
* New media in Ghana
* Media in Ghana
* Internet in Ghana
* Africa Digital Awards

==Further reading==

==References==
* 
==External links==
* Ghana Internet Exchange (GIX), website.
* Ghana Internet Service Providers Association (GISPA), website.
* National Communications Authority (NCA), website.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5761637" start="0" end="27" title="Telecommunications in Ghana" label="Telecommunications in Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3958441" start="134" end="149" title="economic sector" label="economic sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="153" end="158" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="194" end="204" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="244" end="285" title="Information and communications technology" label="Information and communications technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q51002" start="492" end="506" title="Jerry Rawlings" label="Jerry Rawlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q931968" start="528" end="564" title="Provisional National Defence Council" label="Provisional National Defence Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067271" start="1391" end="1433" title="Press Freedom Index" label="&amp;quot;2013 World Press Freedom Index&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q154330" start="1439" end="1464" title="Reporters Without Borders" label="Reporters Without Borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515403" start="1484" end="1505" title="Constitution of Ghana" label="Constitution of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="1517" end="1553" title="freedom of the press" label="freedom of the press and other media"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="1555" end="1587" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech and expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q277569" start="1589" end="1596" title="freedom of thought" label="thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q26084" start="1602" end="1613" title="freedom of information" label="information"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="1634" end="1650" title="top-level domain" label="top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q41634" start="1663" end="1666" title=".gh" label=".gh"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="1840" end="1857" title="African continent" label="African continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622451" start="1952" end="1966" title="List of countries by number of Internet users" label="Internet users"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992993" start="2321" end="2344" title="List of countries by number of broadband Internet subscriptions" label="broadband subscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q8215105" start="2373" end="2387" title="List of countries by number of Internet hosts" label="Internet hosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q13211867" start="2464" end="2478" title="List of countries by IPv4 address allocation" label="IPv4 addresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="2612" end="2637" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q574577" start="2834" end="2844" title="chat rooms" label="chat rooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="3022" end="3039" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="3044" end="3049" title="freedom of the press" label="press"/>
<link wikidata="Q862207" start="3180" end="3195" title="self-censorship" label="self-censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q502215" start="3442" end="3456" title="Northern Ghana" label="Northern Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254874" start="3886" end="3909" title="Television broadcasting" label="Television broadcasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672292" start="4014" end="4023" title="TV Africa" label="TV Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824724" start="4025" end="4033" title="Metro TV (Ghana)" label="Metro TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672104" start="4035" end="4038" title="TV3 Ghana" label="TV3"/>
<link wikidata="Q389754" start="4040" end="4043" title="GTV (Ghana)" label="GTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7924518" start="4059" end="4067" title="Viasat 1" label="Viasat 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104763" start="4074" end="4104" title="Ghana Broadcasting Corporation" label="Ghana Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q327333" start="4144" end="4156" title="state agency" label="state agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q861546" start="4253" end="4262" title="Education in Ghana" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257889" start="4267" end="4280" title="Media in Ghana" label="entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733539" start="4711" end="4720" title="GHOne TV" label="GH One TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q34768" start="4765" end="4776" title="List of country calling codes" label="prefix code"/>
<link wikidata="Q868422" start="4790" end="4808" title="international call" label="international call"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373572" start="4856" end="4870" title="telephone line" label="telephone line"/>
<link wikidata="Q535695" start="4917" end="4932" title="Cellular network" label="mobile cellular"/>
<link wikidata="Q747066" start="5105" end="5126" title="microwave radio relay" label="microwave radio relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="5140" end="5148" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q747066" start="5192" end="5213" title="Microwave radio relay" label="Microwave radio relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492221" start="5257" end="5267" title="SAT-3/WASC" label="SAT-3/WASC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6736028" start="5269" end="5277" title="Main One (cable system)" label="Main One"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513631" start="5279" end="5284" title="GLO-1 (cable system)" label="GLO-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650617" start="5290" end="5293" title="ACE (cable system)" label="ACE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248959" start="5294" end="5338" title="List of international submarine communications cables" label="international optical fibre submarine cables"/>
<link wikidata="Q738621" start="5437" end="5447" title="fixed phone" label="fixed line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434308" start="5612" end="5616" title="VSAT" label="VSAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813361" start="5807" end="5841" title="MTN Group" label="Mobile Telecommunications Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352110" start="5849" end="5863" title="Vodafone Ghana" label="Vodafone Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q276345" start="5895" end="5899" title="Tigo" label="Tigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q854867" start="5958" end="5971" title="Bharti Airtel" label="Bharti Airtel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570033" start="6030" end="6054" title="Globacom" label="Glo Mobile Ghana Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941618" start="6191" end="6216" title="Mobile network operator" label="mobile-cellular providers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574343" start="8500" end="8523" title="Ghana Internet Exchange" label="Ghana Internet Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q13512377" start="8532" end="8550" title="New media in Ghana" label="New media in Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16257889" start="8553" end="8567" title="Media in Ghana" label="Media in Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612597" start="8570" end="8587" title="Ghana Internet Policy" label="Internet in Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q65041649" start="8590" end="8611" title="Africa Digital Awards" label="Africa Digital Awards"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12074" wikidata="Q2449749" url="?curid=12074" title="Transport in Ghana">
<text>Transport in Ghana is accomplished by road, rail, air and water. Ghana&#x27;s transportation and communications networks are centered in the southern regions, especially the areas in which gold, cocoa, and timber are produced. The northern and central areas are connected through a major road system.

Increased transport investment helped to increase the number of new vehicle registrations and transportation alternatives include rail, road, ferry, marine and air.

== Railways ==

The railway system in Ghana has historically been confined to the plains south of the barrier range on mountains north of the city of Kumasi. However, the narrow-gauge railway, totalling , is presently undergoing major rehabilitation and inroads to the interior are now being made. In Ghana, most of the lines are single tracked, and in 1997, it was estimated that were double tracked.

=== Rail expansion ===
In 2005, the Minister of Ports, Harbours and Railways announced plans to extend the railway system to facilitate economic development. To begin, $5 million was invested for feasibility studies. Possible projects at the time included extending a line from Ejisu to Nkoranza and Techiman; a line from Tamale to Bolgatanga and Paga to Burkina Faso; a line from Wenchi, Bole to Wa and Hamile and also to Burkina Faso, and a line to Yendi where there are iron ore deposits.

Over the next two years, there were various studies and in 2007, work began.
In March 2007, a Private Public Partnership was proposed to rehabilitate the Eastern Railway from Accra to Ejisu and Kumasi, with an extension from Ejisu via Mampong, Nkoranza, Tamale, Bolgatanga and Paga, with a branch from Tamale to Yendi and Sheini. The extension starts at Kumasi and will cost $1.6b.

There was another proposal in September 2007 to extend the Western Railway from Awaso via Techiman, Bole, Sawla, Wa to Hamile.

In February 2008, the &quot;Ghana General News&quot; reported that the Ministry of Harbours and Railways and the Ghana Railway Corporation (GRC) expected to complete a new commuter line linking Accra and Tema by June 2008. The formation was complete from Sakumono to the SSNIT flats near Tema. Diesel multiple-unit trainsets will be imported for use on the line. Construction of sleeper plant for the far north line was also initiated in 2008.

===Rail transport===
The Ghana railway network occupies a total rail route length and rail track length of 947 km and 1300 km, comprising national rail lines that do not go outside of Ghana and the Ghana national border. Ghana railway network is limited to south Ghana and the southern part of Ghana within the Greater Accra region, Central region, Western region, Eastern region and Ashanti region of south Ghana.

There are plans underway that revamp the operations of the Ghana Railway Corporation and Ghana Railway Company to make it more viable, and to attract private sector participation. Concession agreements have been signed by the Ghana Railway Corporation for the development and extension of the Ghana Eastern Rail Line and the rehabilitation of the Ghana Western Rail Line.

* The major rail routes in Ghana are the Ghana Eastern Rail Line that connects Kumasi to Koforidua, and the Ghana Western Rail Line that connects Kumasi to Sekondi-Takoradi, Sunyani and Cape Coast. In 2010, Ghana Railway Corporation began a GH₵12.9 billion (US$6 billion) rail project at the construction of the Ghana rail infrastructure to Ghana High-Speed Rail (&quot;abbreviated&quot; GHSR or HSR) and to upgrade all of Ghana&#x27;s railway line network has been planned and to be completed at the end of 2014 with construction managed by the China Railway High-Speed (CHR) and the Chinese National Machinery Import and Export Corporation (CMC).
=== Service pending ===
These towns are proposed to be served by rail:
* Ejisu
* Kintampo
* Paga - near Burkina Faso and Ivory Coast borders.

* Hamile - far northwest corner (Contracts were made for railway extensions in July 2007.)
*Boankra Inland Port (under construction)

=== Gauge conversion ===

Korean engineers studying the building of new lines in February 2007 were also to consider conversion to .

==Highways==

Road transport is by far the dominant carrier of freight and passengers in Ghana&#x27;s land transport system. It carries over 95% of all passenger and freight traffic and reaches most communities, and is classified under three categories of trunk roads, urban roads, and feeder roads. The Ghana Highway Authority, established in 1974 is tasked with developing and maintaining the country&#x27;s trunk road network totaling 13,367 km, which makes up 33% of Ghana&#x27;s total road network of 40,186 km.

Trunk roads in Ghana are classified as National roads, Regional roads, and Inter-regional roads, all of which form the Ghana road network. National roads, designated with the letter N, link all the major population centers in Ghana. Regional roads, designated with the letter R, are a mix of primary and secondary routes, which serve as feeder roads to National roads; while Inter-Regional roads, designated with the prefix IR, connect major settlements across regional borders.

With respect to this mode of transport, many people prefer to use the public means. Many of the town and cities in the country can be reached by the use of urban buses known as &quot;trotro&quot; or taxis. For inter-regional transport bigger buses are normally used.

The Ghana road network is 64,323 km and road transportation is the most dominant choice of transportation in Ghana. Road transport infrastructure in Ghana can be used throughout to facilitate the exchange of commodities and enable regular school attendance and fast access to health facilities in Ghana. There has been an increased investment and expansion in the road transportation of Ghana, GH₵1 billion (US$500 million) in 2012.

There is a Ghanaian Bus Rapid Transit, known as Metro mass Transit L.T.D, and a Taxicab system connecting the Ghanaian big cities among themselves, and a Minibuses system, known as Tro Tros, connecting big cities with the country&#x27;s rural areas and small towns. The Ghana Police Service&#x27;s Motor Transport and Traffic Unit (MTTU) and the Ghana Highways Authority is responsible for the maintenance of the Road Traffic Control of Ghana and the Ghana Road Network (Ghana national highways and motorways).

===International highways===
The Trans–West African Coastal Highway, part of the Trans-African Highway network crosses Ghana along the N1, connecting it to Abidjan, (Ivory Coast), Lomé, (Togo) and to Benin and Nigeria. Eventually the highway will connect to another seven Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) nations to the west. The N2, which connects Tema in the Greater Accra Region to Kulungugu in the Upper East Region; the N10, which connects Yamoransa in the Central Region to Paga in the Upper East Region; and the N12, which connects Elubo in the Western Region to Hamile in the Upper West Region; all connect Ghana to landlocked Burkina Faso, where it joins another highway in the Trans-African network, the Trans-Sahelian Highway.

== Ferries and waterways ==

The Volta, Ankobra, and Tano rivers provide 168 km of perennial navigation for launches and lighters; Lake Volta provides 1,125 kilometres of arterial and feeder waterway.

There are ferries on Lake Volta at Yeji and Kwadjokrom.

==Marine transport==

=== Seaports and harbours ===
There are ports on the Atlantic Ocean at Takoradi and Tema. Tema Port in South Ghana, officially opened in 1962, is the bigger of the two seaports in Ghana, and is Africa&#x27;s largest harbour. It has a water-enclosed area of and a total land area of . Apart from handling goods for Ghana, it is also a traffic junction, where goods are transhipped, and transit cargo destined for the landlocked countries to the north of Ghana.

The port of Tema handles the majority of the nation&#x27;s import and export cargo and most of the country&#x27;s chief exports is shipped from Sekondi-Takoradi and Tema. The port of Tema has of breakwaters, 12 deepwater berths, an outsize oil tanker berth, a dockyard, warehouses, and transit sheds. The port has open and covered areas for the storage of cargo, including a 77,200-m2 (7.72-hectare) paved area for the storage of containers, steel products and other conventional cargo. The port&#x27;s container yard is capable of holding over 8,000 TEUs at any given time. The closed storage area, which is about 25,049 m2 (2.51 hectares) in area, consists of six sheds with a total storage capacity of 50,000 tonnes of cargo. The port also includes a 100,000 dwt dry dock and slipway facility. The Tema and Takoradi harbours in South Ghana are operated by the Ghana Ports and Harbours Authority.
=== Merchant marine ===

There are six ships (with a volume of or over) totaling /. This includes two petroleum tankers and four refrigerated cargo vessels (1999 estimates).
Ghana&#x27;s Volta River, Ankobra River, and Tano River provide 168 km of perennial navigation for launches and lighters, and Volta Lake provides 1,125 kilometres of arterial and feeder waterway. There are two main seaports in Ghana which are located in the southern coastal cities of Sekondi-Takoradi and Tema (Takoradi Harbour and Tema Harbour). The strategic geographical location of Ghana to the Volta Lake and the many rivers of Ghana that provide inland transport make Ghana a very transited sovereign state for freighters.

Inland water transport in Ghana includes the movement of passengers by ferry or water taxis and cargo on rivers, lakes and other water bodies in Ghana and Ghana has a ferry transportation system on Volta Lake at Yeji and Kwadjokrom. The Volta Lake is the major inland water transport facility that is efficiently regulated to transport passengers and cargo. The main transport service provider on the Volta Lake is the Volta Lake Transport Company Limited (VLTC). The Ghana Ports and Harbours Authority and Ghana Railway Corporation and the Volta River Authority collectively have oversight responsibility over the Volta Lake and the Volta Lake Transport Company Limited (VLTC).

== Aviation ==

On July 4, 1958, the Ghanaian government established Ghana Airways connecting Ghana with other countries. By the mid-1990s, Ghana Airways operated international scheduled passenger and cargo service to numerous European, Middle Eastern, and African destinations, including London, Düsseldorf, Rome, Abidjan, Dakar, Lagos, Lomé, and Johannesburg. As a result of persistent management and financial problems, Ghana Airways ceased all operations and entered into liquidation in 2004.

Ghana has twelve airports, six with hard surfaced runways. The most important are Kotoka International Airport at Accra and airports at Sekondi-Takoradi, Kumasi, and Tamale that serve domestic air traffic. In 1990, the government spent US$12 million to improve Accra&#x27;s facilities. Workmen resurfaced the runway, upgraded the lighting system and built a new freight terminal. Construction crews also extended and upgraded the terminal building at Kumasi. In early 1991, the government announced further plans to improve Accra&#x27;s international airport. The main runway was upgraded, improvements were made in freight landing and infrastructure, and the terminal building and the airport&#x27;s navigational aids were upgraded.
The first Ghanaian flag carrier was the Ghana Airways which commenced operations in 1958; then ceased operations in 2005 and was succeeded by the Ghana International Airlines in 2005. Ghana has a vibrant airline industry and there are five main airports in Ghana: Kotoka International Airport in Greater Accra, Kumasi Airport in Kumasi, Sekondi-Takoradi Airport in Western Ghana, Sunyani Airport in Sunyani, and Tamale Airport in Tamale. In addition, Ghana has a total of 8 airports, of which the most transited is the Kotoka International Airport located in Accra, with a transit in 2009 of 1.2 million passengers.

In 2005, Ghana International Airlines (GIA) began services as the new national airline of Ghana. GIA operated Boeing 757 and Boeing 767 aircraft under wet lease arrangements with other airlines, and connected Kotoka International Airport in Accra with London Gatwick and Düsseldorf. After several years GIA also ceased operations. After the cessation of operations of Ghana International Airlines in 2010, major airlines of Ghana are Africa World Airlines, Antrak Air, CTK – CiTylinK and Starbow Airlines which fly to domestic destinations in Ghana, around the world and to main flight points of the Africa continent. There are also some commercial airlines running domestic flights between the major cities in Ghana. In 2010, Ghana planned for the revival of Ghana Airways to commence commercial aviation. At present there exists no Ghanaian airline providing long-haul international services.

Between 2009 and 2013, the number of air passengers in Ghana more than quadrupled.

=== Airports - with paved runways ===
Kotoka International Airport
&lt;br&gt;&quot;total:&quot;
6
&lt;br&gt;&quot;2,438 to 3,047 m:&quot;
1
&lt;br&gt;&quot;1,524 to 2,437 m:&quot;
3
&lt;br&gt;&quot;914 to 1,523 m:&quot;
2 (1999 est.)

=== Airports - with unpaved runways ===
&quot;total:&quot;
6
&lt;br&gt;&quot;1,524 to 2,437 m:&quot;not true

1
&lt;br&gt;&quot;914 to 1,523 m:&quot;
3
&lt;br&gt;&quot;under 914 m:&quot;
2

== See also ==
* Ghana
* List of airports in Ghana

== References ==
== External links ==

* Railway News - Ghana</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2449749" start="0" end="18" title="Transport in Ghana" label="Transport in Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="65" end="70" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q182059" start="618" end="624" title="Kumasi" label="Kumasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="639" end="659" title="narrow-gauge railway" label="narrow-gauge railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350143" start="1149" end="1154" title="Ejisu" label="Ejisu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994359" start="1158" end="1166" title="Nkoranza" label="Nkoranza"/>
<link wikidata="Q964069" start="1171" end="1179" title="Techiman" label="Techiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q217040" start="1193" end="1199" title="Tamale, Ghana" label="Tamale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4939409" start="1203" end="1213" title="Bolgatanga" label="Bolgatanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124132" start="1218" end="1222" title="Paga" label="Paga"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="1226" end="1238" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236059" start="1252" end="1258" title="Wenchi" label="Wenchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q891295" start="1260" end="1264" title="Bole, Ghana" label="Bole"/>
<link wikidata="Q250733" start="1268" end="1270" title="Wa, Ghana" label="Wa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644740" start="1275" end="1281" title="Hamile" label="Hamile"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="1294" end="1306" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q639066" start="1322" end="1327" title="Yendi" label="Yendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350143" start="1548" end="1553" title="Ejisu" label="Ejisu"/>
<link wikidata="Q182059" start="1558" end="1564" title="Kumasi" label="Kumasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q992747" start="1599" end="1606" title="Mampong" label="Mampong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994359" start="1608" end="1616" title="Nkoranza" label="Nkoranza"/>
<link wikidata="Q217040" start="1618" end="1624" title="Tamale, Ghana" label="Tamale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4939409" start="1626" end="1636" title="Bolgatanga" label="Bolgatanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124132" start="1641" end="1645" title="Paga" label="Paga"/>
<link wikidata="Q217040" start="1666" end="1672" title="Tamale, Ghana" label="Tamale"/>
<link wikidata="Q639066" start="1676" end="1681" title="Yendi" label="Yendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493192" start="1686" end="1692" title="Sheini" label="Sheini"/>
<link wikidata="Q182059" start="1718" end="1724" title="Kumasi" label="Kumasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4829935" start="1827" end="1832" title="Awaso (Town)" label="Awaso"/>
<link wikidata="Q964069" start="1837" end="1845" title="Techiman" label="Techiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q891295" start="1847" end="1851" title="Bole, Ghana" label="Bole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474658" start="1853" end="1858" title="Sawla" label="Sawla"/>
<link wikidata="Q250733" start="1860" end="1862" title="Wa, Ghana" label="Wa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644740" start="1866" end="1872" title="Hamile" label="Hamile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761" start="2069" end="2074" title="Accra" label="Accra"/>
<link wikidata="Q726143" start="2079" end="2083" title="Tema" label="Tema"/>
<link wikidata="Q15045730" start="2130" end="2138" title="Sakumono" label="Sakumono"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="2384" end="2388" title="Rail transport" label="rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q160342" start="2406" end="2416" title="Track (rail transport)" label="rail track"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341962" start="2467" end="2476" title="rail line" label="rail line"/>
<link wikidata="Q133346" start="2524" end="2539" title="national border" label="national border"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555390" start="2795" end="2820" title="Ghana Railway Corporation" label="Ghana Railway Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555390" start="2825" end="2846" title="Ghana Railway Company" label="Ghana Railway Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="2886" end="2900" title="private sector" label="private sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q327209" start="2916" end="2926" title="Concession (contract)" label="Concession"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3029" end="3052" title="Railway stations in Ghana#East" label="Ghana Eastern Rail Line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3083" end="3106" title="Railway stations in Ghana#West" label="Ghana Western Rail Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="3121" end="3132" title="Rail transport" label="rail routes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3150" end="3173" title="Railway stations in Ghana#East" label="Ghana Eastern Rail Line"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3217" end="3240" title="Railway stations in Ghana#West" label="Ghana Western Rail Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q183530" start="3350" end="3353" title="Ghana cedi" label="GH₵"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="3367" end="3370" title="United States dollar" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q211382" start="3456" end="3471" title="High-speed rail" label="High-Speed Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="3627" end="3639" title="construction" label="construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q765855" start="3655" end="3679" title="China Railway High-speed" label="China Railway High-Speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350143" start="3831" end="3836" title="Ejisu" label="Ejisu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742284" start="3839" end="3847" title="Kintampo (Ghana)" label="Kintampo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124132" start="3850" end="3854" title="Paga" label="Paga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644740" start="3903" end="3909" title="Hamile" label="Hamile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931254" start="3993" end="4012" title="Boankra Inland Port" label="Boankra Inland Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478751" start="4152" end="4162" title="Track gauge conversion" label="conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q152217" start="4806" end="4824" title="Ghana road network" label="Ghana road network"/>
<link wikidata="Q516739" start="5475" end="5494" title="road transportation" label="road transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183530" start="5829" end="5832" title="Ghana cedi" label="GH₵"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="5843" end="5846" title="United States dollar" label="US$"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878855" start="5889" end="5906" title="Bus rapid transit" label="Bus Rapid Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824784" start="5917" end="5941" title="Metro mass Transit L.T.D" label="Metro mass Transit L.T.D"/>
<link wikidata="Q82650" start="5949" end="5956" title="Taxicab" label="Taxicab"/>
<link wikidata="Q946479" start="6023" end="6030" title="Minibus" label="Minibus"/>
<link wikidata="Q842389" start="6050" end="6058" title="Tro tro" label="Tro Tros"/>
<link wikidata="Q175185" start="6106" end="6116" title="rural area" label="rural area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555387" start="6139" end="6159" title="Ghana Police Service" label="Ghana Police Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918170" start="6167" end="6199" title="Motor Transport and Traffic Unit" label="Motor Transport and Traffic Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555353" start="6215" end="6239" title="Ghana Highways Authority" label="Ghana Highways Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132995" start="6282" end="6302" title="Road traffic control" label="Road Traffic Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q152217" start="6320" end="6338" title="Ghana Road Network" label="Ghana Road Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q269949" start="6355" end="6362" title="highway" label="highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="6368" end="6376" title="motorway" label="motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157731" start="6414" end="6448" title="Trans–West African Coastal Highway" label="Trans–West African Coastal Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583618" start="6462" end="6491" title="Trans-African Highway network" label="Trans-African Highway network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515" start="6537" end="6544" title="Abidjan" label="Abidjan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008" start="6547" end="6558" title="Ivory Coast" label="Ivory Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792" start="6561" end="6565" title="Lomé" label="Lomé"/>
<link wikidata="Q945" start="6568" end="6572" title="Togo" label="Togo"/>
<link wikidata="Q962" start="6581" end="6586" title="Benin" label="Benin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033" start="6591" end="6598" title="Nigeria" label="Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="6653" end="6694" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q726143" start="6748" end="6752" title="Tema" label="Tema"/>
<link wikidata="Q20536978" start="6844" end="6853" title="Yamoransa" label="Yamoransa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367909" start="6938" end="6943" title="Elubo" label="Elubo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644740" start="6969" end="6975" title="Hamile" label="Hamile"/>
<link wikidata="Q965" start="7034" end="7046" title="Burkina Faso" label="Burkina Faso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157732" start="7113" end="7135" title="Trans-Sahelian Highway" label="Trans-Sahelian Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q192415" start="7171" end="7176" title="Volta River" label="Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q557411" start="7178" end="7185" title="Ankobra River" label="Ankobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q472715" start="7191" end="7195" title="Tano River" label="Tano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599988" start="7375" end="7379" title="Yeji" label="Yeji"/>
<link wikidata="Q6449949" start="7384" end="7394" title="Kwadjokrom" label="Kwadjokrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q243293" start="7490" end="7498" title="Takoradi" label="Takoradi"/>
<link wikidata="Q726143" start="7503" end="7507" title="Tema" label="Tema"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697958" start="7509" end="7518" title="Tema Harbour" label="Tema Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q215635" start="8075" end="8086" title="breakwaters" label="breakwaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q14928" start="8120" end="8130" title="oil tanker" label="oil tanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q488021" start="8431" end="8434" title="Twenty-foot equivalent unit" label="TEU"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332978" start="8642" end="8645" title="Deadweight tonnage" label="dwt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678478" start="8690" end="8707" title="Takoradi Harbour" label="Takoradi harbours"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555386" start="8743" end="8777" title="Ghana Ports and Harbours Authority" label="Ghana Ports and Harbours Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q14928" start="8881" end="8897" title="oil tanker" label="petroleum tanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q192415" start="8966" end="8977" title="Volta River" label="Volta River"/>
<link wikidata="Q557411" start="8979" end="8992" title="Ankobra River" label="Ankobra River"/>
<link wikidata="Q472715" start="8998" end="9008" title="Tano River" label="Tano River"/>
<link wikidata="Q596643" start="9052" end="9060" title="Ship naming and launching" label="launches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2694199" start="9065" end="9073" title="Lighter (barge)" label="lighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="9119" end="9147" title="Canal" label="arterial and feeder waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2221906" start="9315" end="9336" title="Location (geography)" label="geographical location"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636632" start="9377" end="9392" title="List of rivers of Ghana" label="rivers of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q863915" start="9406" end="9422" title="Inland port" label="inland transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="9451" end="9466" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q105999" start="9471" end="9481" title="Cargo ship" label="freighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q499814" start="9484" end="9490" title="Inland navigation" label="Inland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17138804" start="9497" end="9506" title="Water transportation" label="transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q319604" start="9541" end="9550" title="passenger" label="passenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q25653" start="9555" end="9560" title="ferry" label="ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643" start="9564" end="9574" title="water taxi" label="water taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q319224" start="9580" end="9585" title="cargo" label="cargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q25653" start="9651" end="9656" title="ferry" label="ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599988" start="9696" end="9700" title="Yeji" label="Yeji"/>
<link wikidata="Q6449949" start="9705" end="9715" title="Kwadjokrom" label="Kwadjokrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555386" start="9952" end="9986" title="Ghana Ports and Harbours Authority" label="Ghana Ports and Harbours Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555390" start="9991" end="10016" title="Ghana Railway Corporation" label="Ghana Railway Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2532874" start="10025" end="10046" title="Volta River Authority" label="Volta River Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q201679" start="10099" end="10109" title="Volta Lake" label="Volta Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521343" start="10233" end="10246" title="Ghana Airways" label="Ghana Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q177689" start="10744" end="10772" title="Kotoka International Airport" label="Kotoka International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q721639" start="11415" end="11427" title="flag carrier" label="flag carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521343" start="11436" end="11449" title="Ghana Airways" label="Ghana Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248784" start="11641" end="11648" title="airport" label="airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248784" start="11870" end="11878" title="airports" label="airports"/>
<link wikidata="Q936500" start="12022" end="12050" title="Ghana International Airlines" label="Ghana International Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418" start="12123" end="12133" title="Boeing 757" label="Boeing 757"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423" start="12138" end="12148" title="Boeing 767" label="Boeing 767"/>
<link wikidata="Q153476" start="12164" end="12173" title="wet lease" label="wet lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q177689" start="12222" end="12250" title="Kotoka International Airport" label="Kotoka International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8703" start="12265" end="12279" title="Gatwick Airport" label="London Gatwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="12284" end="12294" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q936500" start="12381" end="12409" title="Ghana International Airlines" label="Ghana International Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689607" start="12447" end="12468" title="Africa World Airlines" label="Africa World Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q608961" start="12470" end="12480" title="Antrak Air" label="Antrak Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484252" start="12482" end="12496" title="CTK – CiTylinK" label="CTK – CiTylinK"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601481" start="12501" end="12517" title="Starbow Airlines" label="Starbow Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290183" start="12531" end="12552" title="Domestic flight" label="domestic destinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521343" start="12773" end="12786" title="Ghana Airways" label="Ghana Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640723" start="12799" end="12818" title="commercial aviation" label="commercial aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q177689" start="13031" end="13059" title="Kotoka International Airport" label="Kotoka International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="13435" end="13440" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q662132" start="13443" end="13468" title="List of airports in Ghana" label="List of airports in Ghana"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12075" wikidata="Q260288" url="?curid=12075" title="Ghana Armed Forces">
<text>The Ghana Armed Forces (GAF) is the state military organisation of Ghana, consisting of the Army (GA), Navy (GN), and Ghana Air Force.

The Commander-in-Chief of the Ghana Armed Forces is the president of Ghana, who is also the supreme military commander of the Border Guard Unit (BGU). The armed forces are managed by the Minister of Defence and the Chief of Defence Staff.

==History==
In 1879, the Gold Coast Constabulary was established by personnel of the Hausa Constabulary of Southern Nigeria, to perform internal security and police duties in the British colony of the Gold Coast. In this guise, the regiment earned its first battle honour as part of the Ashanti campaign.

The Gold Coast Constabulary was renamed in 1901 as the Gold Coast Regiment, following the foundation of the West African Frontier Force, under the direction of the Colonial Office of the British Government. The regiment raised a total of five battalions for service during the First World War, all of which served during the East Africa campaign. During the Second World War, the regiment raised nine battalions, and saw action in Kenya&#x27;s Northern Frontier District, Italian Somaliland, Abyssinia and Burma as part of the 2nd (West Africa) Infantry Brigade. Gold Coast soldiers returning from the Far East carried different perspectives from when they had departed.

===Internal operations===

The Ghana Armed Forces were formed in 1957. Major General Stephen Otu was appointed Chief of Defence Staff in September 1961. From 1966, the Armed Forces were extensively involved in politics, mounting several coups. Kwame Nkrumah had become Ghana&#x27;s first prime minister when the country became independent in 1957. As Nkrumah&#x27;s rule wore on, he began to take actions which disquieted the leadership of the armed forces, including the creation and expansion of the President&#x27;s Own Guard Regiment (POGR).

As a result, on February 24, 1966, a small number of Army personnel and senior police officials, led by Colonel Emmanuel Kotoka, commander of the Second Brigade at Kumasi, Major Akwasi Afrifa, (staff officer in charge of army training and operations), Lieutenant General (retired) Joseph Ankrah, and J.W.K. Harlley, (the police inspector general), successfully launched &quot;Operation Cold Chop&quot;, the 1966 Ghanaian coup d&#x27;état, against the Nkrumah regime. The group formed the National Liberation Council, which ruled Ghana from 1966 to 1969.

The Armed Forces seized power again in January 1972, after the reinstated civilian government cut military privileges and started changing the leadership of the army&#x27;s combat units. Lieutenant Colonel Ignatius Kutu Acheampong (temporary commander of the First Brigade around Accra) led the bloodless 1972 Ghanaian coup d&#x27;état that ended the Second Republic. Thus the National Redemption Council was formed. Acheampong became head of state, and the NRC ruled from 1972 to 1975.

On October 9, 1975, the NRC was replaced by the Supreme Military Council (SMC). Council members were Colonel Acheampong, (chairman, who was also promoted straight from Colonel to General), Lt. Gen. Fred Akuffo, (the Chief of Defence Staff), and the army, navy, air force and Border Guard Unit commanders.

In July 1978, in a sudden move, the other SMC officers forced Acheampong to resign, replacing him with Lt. Gen. Akuffo. The SMC apparently acted in response to continuing pressure to find a solution to the country&#x27;s economic dilemma; inflation was estimated to be as high as 300% that year. The council was also motivated by Acheampong&#x27;s failure to dampen rising political pressure for changes. Akuffo, the new SMC chairman, promised publicly to hand over political power to a new government to be elected by July 1, 1979.

The decree lifting the ban on party politics went into effect on January 1, 1979, as planned. However, in June, just before the scheduled resumption of civilian rule, a group of young armed forces officers, led by Flight Lieutenant Jerry Rawlings, mounted the 1979 Ghanaian coup d&#x27;état. They put in place the Armed Forces Revolutionary Council, which governed until September 1979. However, in 1981, Rawlings deposed the new civilian government again, in the 1981 Ghanaian coup d&#x27;état. This time Rawlings established the Provisional National Defence Council (PNDC). The PNDC remained in government until January 7, 1993. In the last years of the PNDC, Jerry Rawlings assumed civilian status; he was elected as a civilian President in 1993 and continued as president until 2001.

===External operations===

The Armed Forces&#x27; first external operation was the United Nations Operation in the Congo in the early 1960s. The GAF operated in the Balkans, including with UNMIK. Ghanaian operations within Africa included the UNAMIR deployment which became entangled in the Rwandan genocide. In his book &quot;Shake Hands with the Devil&quot;, Canadian Forces commander Romeo Dallaire gave the Ghanaian soldiers high praise for their work during that deployment. During the Liberian Civil War, Ghanaian activities helped pave the way for the Accra Comprehensive Peace Agreement, among others. Additional operations in Asia have included Iran and Iraq in the Iran–Iraq War, Kuwait and Lebanon civil war among others.

A total of 3,359 Ghana Army soldiers and 283 Ghana Military Police operated as part of UNTAC in Cambodia. The UNTAC operation lasted two years, 1992−1993. After the long running Cambodia civil war ignited by external interventions, a resolution was accepted by the four warring factional parties. Operation UNTAC was the largest Ghanaian external operation since Ghana&#x27;s first external military operation, ONUC in the Congo in the 1960s. Operation UNTAC and its contingent UNAMIC had a combined budget of more than $1.6 billion.

In 2012, closer military cooperation was agreed with the Armed Forces of the Russian Federation. In 2013, the Armed Forces agreed closer military cooperation with the China People&#x27;s Liberation Army, and with the Armed Forces of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
==Ghana Army==
The Ghana Army is structured as follows:

* The Northern Command with headquarters in Tamale, Central Command with headquarters in Kumasi and the Southern Command with headquarters in Accra. In March 2000 Northern and Southern Commands were formed after the two infantry brigades were upgraded in status. Previously there were three brigades: 1st Infantry Brigade (HQ in Teshie), 2nd Infantry Brigade (HQ in Kumasi) and Support Services Brigade (HQ in Burma Camp).
* 6 Infantry Battalions of the Ghana Regiment. 3rd Battalion of Infantry, 4th Battalion of Infantry and 6th Battalion of Infantry in the Northern Command, 1st Battalion of Infantry, 2nd Battalion of Infantry and 5th Battalion of Infantry in the Southern Command.
* two Airborne companies attached to Northern Command; Airborne Force
* 64 Infantry Regiment, a presidential guard force (formerly known as President&#x27;s Own Guard Regiment)
* 1 Training Battalion
* One Staff College
* Reconnaissance Armoured Regiment (two armoured reconnaissance squadrons)
* Defence Signal Regiment (Ghana)
* Two Engineer Regiments (48 Engineer Regiment and 49 Engineer Regiment)
* 66 Artillery Regiment

In 1996, the Support Services Brigade was reorganized and transferred from the Army to be responsible to the Armed Forces GHQ. 
From that point its units included 49 Engineer Regiment, the Ghana Military Police, Defence Signal Regiment (Ghana), FRO, Forces Pay Office, 37 Military Hospital, Defence Mechanical Transport Battalion (Def MT Bn), Base Ordnance Depot, Base Ammunition Depot, Base Supply Depot, Base Workshop, Armed Forces Printing Press (AFPP), Armed Forces Fire Service (AFFS), the Ghana Armed Forces Central Band, Ghana Armed Forces Institution (GAFI), 1 Forces Movement Unit (Tema Port), 5 Forces Movement Unit, Base Engineer Technical Services (BETS), 5 Garrison Education Centre (5 GEC), the Armed Forces Museum, Army Signals Training School, and the Armed Forces Secondary Technical School (AFSTS). By 2016 the Forces Pay Office had been upgraded to the Forces Pay Regiment.

The Armed Forces uses imported weaponry and locally manufactured secondary equipment. M16 rifles, AK-47s, Type 56 assault rifles, ballistic vests and personal armor are standard issue, while much of the secondary equipment used by the Army and Air Force are manufactured internally by the Defence Industries Holding Company (DIHOC). External suppliers include Russia, Iran, and China.

===Peacekeeping Operations===

The Armed Forces are heavily committed to international peacekeeping operations. Ghana prefers to send its troops to operations in Africa. However the United Nations has used Ghanaian forces in countries as diverse as Afghanistan, Iraq, Kosovo, Georgia, Nepal, Cambodia and Lebanon. Currently, Ghanaian armed forces are posted to United Nations peacekeeping missions in:
* MONUC (Democratic Republic of Congo) − 464
* UNMIL (Liberia) − 852 (disestablished 2018)
* UNAMSIL (Sierra Leone) − 782
* UNIFIL (Lebanon) − 651

Ghana armed forces provided the first Force Commander of the Economic Community of West African States Monitoring Group (ECOMOG), Lieutenant General Arnold Quainoo. Quainoo led the force from July 1990 to September 1990.

Ghana Armed Forces peacekeepers have many roles: patrolling, as military police, electoral observers, de-miners (bomb disposal units and clearance divers), ceasefire monitors, humanitarian aid workers, and even special forces or frogmen against insurgents.

=== Niger Coup ===
A group of opposition political parties and civil society organizations, comprising the National Democratic Congress (NDC) and Ghana Union Movement (GUM), has jointly urged the Akufo-Addo administration to refrain from deploying the Ghana Armed Forces to restore the democratically elected president of Niger, Mohamed Bazoum, who was ousted from power by General Abdourahamane Tchiani.

However, Hon. Kennedy Ohene Agyapong, the Chairperson of the Interior and Defense Committee in Parliament, has expressed his endorsement of the nation&#x27;s deployment of troops to Niger.

==Ghana Air Force==

The Ghana Air Force is headquartered in Burma Camp in Accra, and operates from bases in Accra (main transport base), Tamale (combat and training base)and Sekondi-Takoradi (training base). The GHF military doctrine and stated mission is to perform counterinsurgency operations within Ghana or externally and to provide logistical support to the Ghana Army.

==Ghana Navy==

The Ghana Navy&#x27;s mission is to provide defence of Ghana and its territorial waters, fishery protection, exclusive economic zone, and internal security on Lake Volta. It is also tasked with resupplying GA (Ghana Army) peacekeepers in Africa, fighting maritime criminal activities such as Piracy, disaster and humanitarian relief operations, and evacuation of Ghanaian citizens and other nationals from troubled spots. In 1994 the Navy was re-organized into an Eastern command, with headquarters at Tema, and a Western command, with headquarters at Sekondi-Takoradi.

==GAF Business==

===GAF Military private bank===

The Ghana Armed Forces, in addition to owning its own arms industry weapons and military technology and equipment manufacturer (DIHOC − Defence Industries Holding Company), operates its own private bank. The military private bank is sited at Burma Camp and serves Ghanaian military personnel and their civilian counterparts.

===Military hospitals===
The GAF has two hospitals, the 37 Military Hospital in Accra and the Kumasi Military Hospital in the north. The 37 Military Hospital has recently undergone expansion and its facilities include a twenty-four-hour Emergency Department (ED).

The GAF main military hospital has been organized into departments and divisions, which created structure within the establishment. The Divisions and Departments (the units) are developed and joined according to medical, paramedical and administrative lines and each of these units has its own departmental head. The GAF military hospital is staffed by GAF military personnel and also houses a medical education training facility. 37 Military Hospital is also accredited for post-graduate medical education teaching. Vyacheslav Lebedev, Chairman of the Supreme Court of Russia, expressed gratitude following his emergency treatment at the hospital.

==Cadets and schools==
The Ghana Army operates a Cadet Corps for GAF Cadets whom go on to Military Education and Training and Recruit Training graduation from the GAF Military Academy for Army Recruit and Seaman Recruit prior to enlistment into the Army, Navy or Air Force.

Training institutions include the Ghana Military Academy and the Ghana Army-sponsored Cadet Corps. Also located in Accra is the internationally funded Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Training Centre, which is not part of the Armed Forces but provides a wide-ranging of peace operations training, including to GAF personnel.

=== Ghana Armed Forces Command and Staff College ===
The Ghana Armed Forces Command and Staff College (GAFCSC) dates back to 1963. It was to provide training for Ghana Armed Forces (GAF) officers and affiliated officers from Africa, focusing on command and staff duties. Throughout its history, it has hosted and educated individuals from neighboring African states. It focuses on military and defense courses, culminating in the issuance of the Pass Staff College (PSC) certificate.

The range of programs expanded, driven by the demands of the global environment. The Ghana Armed Forces have been engaged in peacekeeping operations since 1960. This meant broadening the array of courses provided by GAFCSC. Consequently, the college aimed to establish partnerships with the University of Ghana and GIMPA to offer diverse peacekeeping and other courses. With the attainment of Institutional Accreditation, the college is now prepared to conduct its own courses, while still maintaining its collaborative association with the University of Ghana and GIMPA.

==Defence budget==
=== Salary Structure ===
The Single Spine Salary Structure (SSSS) is the payment made to the Ghana Arm Forces. The salary structure started in 2010 has increased the income of the military. Payment structure with the Single Spine differs from each officer depending on their ranking.

==Military clothing and prohibition of photography==
Ghanaian statutory law officially prohibits civilians and foreign nationals from wearing military apparel such as camouflage clothing, or clothing which resembles military dress. Officially, fines and/or short prison sentences can be passed against civilians seen in military dress in public. In addition, Ghanaian law prohibits the photographing of Ghana Armed Forces (GAF) Ghana Military Police (GMP) police or GAF military personnel and vehicles while on duty, strategic sites such as Kotoka International Airport when in use, and the seat of the Ghanaian government, Jubilee House.

== See also ==
* List of wars involving Ghana

==References==
==Further reading==
* General History of the Ghana Armed Forces – a Reference Volume, (Professor) Stephen Addae, Ministry of Defence of Ghana Armed Forces, Accra, 2005, . Nearly 700 pages but quite readable. Very poor bibliography.

==External links==
* Ghana Armed Forces, Ghana armed forces official website 
* How to join the Ghana Armed Forces . </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q260288" start="4" end="22" title="Ghana Armed Forces" label="Ghana Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q260288" start="24" end="27" title="Ghana Armed Forces" label="GAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="67" end="72" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555333" start="92" end="96" title="Ghana Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q8501879" start="103" end="107" title="Ghana Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137368" start="118" end="133" title="Ghana Air Force" label="Ghana Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672728" start="192" end="210" title="president of Ghana" label="president of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020813" start="262" end="279" title="Border Guard Unit" label="Border Guard Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865779" start="323" end="342" title="Minister for Defence (Ghana)" label="Minister of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097052" start="351" end="373" title="Chief of the Defence Staff (Ghana)" label="Chief of Defence Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q503623" start="401" end="411" title="Gold Coast (British colony)" label="Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q503623" start="577" end="587" title="Gold Coast (British colony)" label="Gold Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375006" start="790" end="817" title="Royal West African Frontier Force" label="West African Frontier Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110907" start="846" end="861" title="Colonial Office" label="Colonial Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="869" end="887" title="British Government" label="British Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="925" end="934" title="battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="959" end="974" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1040" end="1056" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="1174" end="1183" title="Ethiopia" label="Abyssinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="1188" end="1193" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633499" start="1209" end="1243" title="2nd (West Africa) Infantry Brigade" label="2nd (West Africa) Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610157" start="1439" end="1450" title="Stephen Otu" label="Stephen Otu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8620" start="1598" end="1611" title="Kwame Nkrumah" label="Kwame Nkrumah"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="1642" end="1656" title="prime minister" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241178" start="1856" end="1891" title="President&amp;#x27;s Own Guard Regiment" label="President&amp;#x27;s Own Guard Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338320" start="2013" end="2028" title="Emmanuel Kwasi Kotoka" label="Emmanuel Kotoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q182059" start="2065" end="2071" title="Kumasi" label="Kumasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q424377" start="2079" end="2092" title="Akwasi Afrifa" label="Akwasi Afrifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q356728" start="2182" end="2195" title="Joseph Arthur Ankrah" label="Joseph Ankrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234869" start="2201" end="2215" title="J.W.K. Harlley" label="J.W.K. Harlley"/>
<link wikidata="Q52705852" start="2308" end="2338" title="1966 Ghanaian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1966 Ghanaian coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967432" start="2389" end="2416" title="National Liberation Council" label="National Liberation Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q472593" start="2662" end="2686" title="Ignatius Kutu Acheampong" label="Ignatius Kutu Acheampong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309031" start="2761" end="2791" title="1972 Ghanaian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1972 Ghanaian coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309031" start="2833" end="2860" title="National Redemption Council" label="National Redemption Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368318" start="2992" end="3016" title="Supreme Military Council, Ghana" label="Supreme Military Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="3112" end="3119" title="Colonel" label="Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q83460" start="3123" end="3130" title="General" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q718234" start="3142" end="3153" title="Fred Akuffo" label="Fred Akuffo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097052" start="3160" end="3182" title="Chief of the Defence Staff (Ghana)" label="Chief of Defence Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020813" start="3219" end="3236" title="Border Guard Unit" label="Border Guard Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013228" start="3998" end="4015" title="Flight Lieutenant" label="Flight Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q51002" start="4016" end="4030" title="Jerry Rawlings" label="Jerry Rawlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312181" start="4044" end="4074" title="1979 Ghanaian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1979 Ghanaian coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q680819" start="4098" end="4132" title="Armed Forces Revolutionary Council, Ghana" label="Armed Forces Revolutionary Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q102421173" start="4248" end="4278" title="1981 Ghanaian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1981 Ghanaian coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q931968" start="4315" end="4351" title="Provisional National Defence Council" label="Provisional National Defence Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q699009" start="4656" end="4693" title="United Nations Operation in the Congo" label="United Nations Operation in the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="4738" end="4745" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q504557" start="4762" end="4767" title="UNMIK" label="UNMIK"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="4796" end="4802" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q262779" start="4816" end="4822" title="UNAMIR" label="UNAMIR"/>
<link wikidata="Q131297" start="4864" end="4880" title="Rwandan genocide" label="Rwandan genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767259" start="4900" end="4926" title="Shake Hands with the Devil (book)" label="Shake Hands with the Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q644943" start="4934" end="4949" title="Canadian Forces" label="Canadian Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q355188" start="4960" end="4974" title="Romeo Dallaire" label="Romeo Dallaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960733" start="5064" end="5082" title="Second Liberian Civil War" label="Liberian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991254" start="5132" end="5167" title="Accra Comprehensive Peace Agreement" label="Accra Comprehensive Peace Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="5248" end="5261" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="5263" end="5269" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q208484" start="5274" end="5291" title="Lebanese Civil War" label="Lebanon civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="5403" end="5411" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q699009" start="5718" end="5722" title="ONUC" label="ONUC"/>
<link wikidata="Q593662" start="5760" end="5765" title="UNTAC" label="UNTAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q193159" start="5899" end="5937" title="Armed Forces of the Russian Federation" label="Armed Forces of the Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="6015" end="6044" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609135" start="6059" end="6103" title="Armed Forces of the Islamic Republic of Iran" label="Armed Forces of the Islamic Republic of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555333" start="6124" end="6134" title="Ghana Army" label="Ghana Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q217040" start="6206" end="6212" title="Tamale, Ghana" label="Tamale"/>
<link wikidata="Q182059" start="6251" end="6257" title="Kumasi" label="Kumasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761" start="6304" end="6309" title="Accra" label="Accra"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="6589" end="6597" title="Infantry" label="Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="6598" end="6607" title="Battalion" label="Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555395" start="6616" end="6630" title="Ghana Regiment" label="Ghana Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q102538" start="6863" end="6872" title="company (military unit)" label="companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241178" start="6988" end="7023" title="President&amp;#x27;s Own Guard Regiment" label="President&amp;#x27;s Own Guard Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7145" end="7176" title="Defence Signal Regiment (Ghana)" label="Defence Signal Regiment (Ghana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q120210240" start="7288" end="7312" title="Support Services Brigade" label="Support Services Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7438" end="7458" title="49 Engineer Regiment" label="49 Engineer Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7464" end="7485" title="Ghana Military Police" label="Ghana Military Police"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7487" end="7518" title="Defence Signal Regiment (Ghana)" label="Defence Signal Regiment (Ghana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733301" start="7544" end="7564" title="37 Military Hospital" label="37 Military Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612593" start="7770" end="7801" title="Ghana Armed Forces Central Band" label="Ghana Armed Forces Central Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q726143" start="7866" end="7870" title="Tema" label="Tema"/>
<link wikidata="Q170318" start="8255" end="8264" title="M16 rifle" label="M16 rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q37116" start="8267" end="8272" title="AK-47" label="AK-47"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142312" start="8275" end="8296" title="Type 56 assault rifle" label="Type 56 assault rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q391752" start="8299" end="8313" title="ballistic vest" label="ballistic vest"/>
<link wikidata="Q485027" start="8319" end="8333" title="personal armor" label="personal armor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8458" end="8492" title="Defence Industries Holding Company" label="Defence Industries Holding Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="8642" end="8654" title="peacekeeping" label="peacekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="8737" end="8751" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="8804" end="8815" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="8817" end="8821" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="8823" end="8829" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="8831" end="8838" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="8840" end="8845" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="8847" end="8855" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="8860" end="8867" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501987" start="8959" end="8964" title="MONUC" label="MONUC"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="8966" end="8994" title="Democratic Republic of Congo" label="Democratic Republic of Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278645" start="9004" end="9009" title="UNMIL" label="UNMIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="9011" end="9018" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q643988" start="9050" end="9057" title="UNAMSIL" label="UNAMSIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="9059" end="9071" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q160805" start="9081" end="9087" title="UNIFIL" label="UNIFIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="9089" end="9096" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="9166" end="9207" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274219" start="9226" end="9232" title="ECOMOG" label="ECOMOG"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199889" start="9254" end="9268" title="Arnold Quainoo" label="Arnold Quainoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q651389" start="9376" end="9386" title="patrolling" label="patrolling"/>
<link wikidata="Q210815" start="9391" end="9406" title="military police" label="military police"/>
<link wikidata="Q933054" start="9408" end="9427" title="Election observers" label="electoral observers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345044" start="9429" end="9438" title="Demining" label="de-miners"/>
<link wikidata="Q649416" start="9440" end="9459" title="Bomb disposal" label="bomb disposal units"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392545" start="9464" end="9479" title="clearance diver" label="clearance diver"/>
<link wikidata="Q208383" start="9483" end="9492" title="ceasefire" label="ceasefire"/>
<link wikidata="Q826745" start="9503" end="9519" title="humanitarian aid" label="humanitarian aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q234497" start="9538" end="9552" title="special forces" label="special forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137295" start="9556" end="9563" title="frogmen" label="frogmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323212" start="9572" end="9581" title="insurgent" label="insurgent"/>
<link wikidata="Q200875" start="9692" end="9726" title="National Democratic Congress (Ghana)" label="National Democratic Congress (NDC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104865047" start="9731" end="9757" title="Ghana Union Movement" label="Ghana Union Movement (GUM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032" start="9907" end="9912" title="Niger" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3318398" start="9914" end="9928" title="Mohamed Bazoum" label="Mohamed Bazoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q120965176" start="9967" end="9988" title="Abdourahamane Tchiani" label="Abdourahamane Tchiani"/>
<link wikidata="Q28223333" start="10000" end="10027" title="Kennedy Agyapong" label="Hon. Kennedy Ohene Agyapong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999329" start="10242" end="10252" title="Burma Camp" label="Burma Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761" start="10256" end="10261" title="Accra" label="Accra"/>
<link wikidata="Q217040" start="10319" end="10325" title="Tamale, Ghana" label="Tamale"/>
<link wikidata="Q243293" start="10356" end="10372" title="Sekondi-Takoradi" label="Sekondi-Takoradi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140224" start="10398" end="10415" title="military doctrine" label="military doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q760037" start="10449" end="10466" title="counterinsurgency" label="counterinsurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q177777" start="10520" end="10530" title="logistics" label="logistical"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="10684" end="10707" title="exclusive economic zone" label="exclusive economic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q201679" start="10734" end="10744" title="Lake Volta" label="Lake Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q45393" start="10867" end="10873" title="Piracy" label="Piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q726143" start="11077" end="11081" title="Tema, Ghana" label="Tema"/>
<link wikidata="Q243293" start="11127" end="11143" title="Sekondi-Takoradi" label="Sekondi-Takoradi"/>
<link wikidata="Q392933" start="11251" end="11264" title="arms industry" label="arms industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q728" start="11265" end="11272" title="weapons" label="weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q329864" start="11277" end="11310" title="military technology and equipment" label="military technology and equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="11311" end="11323" title="manufacturer" label="manufacturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111088" start="11387" end="11399" title="private bank" label="private bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111088" start="11414" end="11426" title="private bank" label="private bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q47064" start="11470" end="11488" title="military personnel" label="military personnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733301" start="11579" end="11599" title="37 Military Hospital" label="37 Military Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q30688554" start="11617" end="11641" title="Kumasi Military Hospital" label="Kumasi Military Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733301" start="11660" end="11680" title="37 Military Hospital" label="37 Military Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295316" start="11760" end="11780" title="Emergency department" label="Emergency Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q330204" start="12009" end="12018" title="paramedic" label="paramedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47064" start="12145" end="12163" title="military personnel" label="military personnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q126945" start="12182" end="12199" title="medical education" label="medical education"/>
<link wikidata="Q126945" start="12277" end="12294" title="medical education" label="medical education"/>
<link wikidata="Q13632114" start="12305" end="12323" title="Vyacheslav Mikhailovich Lebedev" label="Vyacheslav Lebedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622450" start="12341" end="12364" title="Supreme Court of Russia" label="Supreme Court of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54552" start="12487" end="12498" title="Cadet Corps" label="Cadet Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q316498" start="12507" end="12512" title="Cadet" label="Cadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351849" start="12528" end="12559" title="Military education and training" label="Military Education and Training"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550460" start="12564" end="12580" title="Recruit training" label="Recruit Training"/>
<link wikidata="Q917182" start="12605" end="12621" title="Military academy" label="Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q451987" start="12626" end="12638" title="Army recruit" label="Army Recruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q99438637" start="12643" end="12657" title="Seaman recruit" label="Seaman Recruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733575" start="12747" end="12769" title="Ghana Military Academy" label="Ghana Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q54552" start="12799" end="12810" title="Cadet Corps" label="Cadet Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778357" start="12864" end="12917" title="Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Training Centre" label="Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Training Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q526719" start="14396" end="14403" title="ranking" label="ranking"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="14468" end="14481" title="statutory law" label="statutory law"/>
<link wikidata="Q206887" start="14503" end="14512" title="Civilian" label="civilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q196113" start="14573" end="14583" title="camouflage" label="camouflage"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633" start="14792" end="14805" title="photography" label="photographing"/>
<link wikidata="Q210815" start="14840" end="14855" title="Military police" label="Military Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q47064" start="14876" end="14894" title="military personnel" label="military personnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q177689" start="14947" end="14975" title="Kotoka International Airport" label="Kotoka International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579594" start="15030" end="15043" title="Jubilee House" label="Jubilee House"/>
<link wikidata="Q104871635" start="15063" end="15091" title="List of wars involving Ghana" label="List of wars involving Ghana"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12076" wikidata="Q3395210" url="?curid=12076" title="Foreign relations of Ghana">
<text>The foreign relations of Ghana are controlled by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ghana. Ghana is active in the United Nations and many of its specialised agencies, the World Trade Organization, the Non-Aligned Movement, the Organisation of African Unity (OAU), the African Union (AU) and the Economic Community of West African States. Ghana generally follows the consensus of the Non-aligned Movement and the OAU on economic and political issues not directly affecting its own interests. Ghana has been extremely active in international peacekeeping activities under UN auspices in Lebanon, Afghanistan, Rwanda, and the Balkans, in addition to an eight-year sub-regional initiative with its ECOWAS partners to develop and then enforce a cease-fire in Liberia. Ghana is also a member of the International Criminal Court.

==Guiding principles and objectives==
Ghana&#x27;s foreign policy since independence has been characterised by a commitment to the principles and ideals of non-alignment and Pan-Africanism as first enunciated by Kwame Nkrumah in the early 1960s. For Nkrumah, non-alignment meant complete independence from the policies and alliances of both East and West and support for a worldwide union of so-called non-aligned nations as a counter to both East and West power blocs. Pan-Africanism, by contrast, was a specifically African policy that envisioned the independence of Africa from Western colonialism and the eventual economic and political unity of the African continent.[1]

The PNDC, like most of its predecessors, made serious and consistent attempts at the practical application of these ideals and principles, and its successor, the NDC government, promises to follow in the PNDC&#x27;s footsteps. Under the NDC, Ghana remains committed to the principle of non-alignment in world politics. Ghana is also opposed to interference in the internal affairs of both small and large countries. This is a departure from Nkrumah&#x27;s foreign policy approach; Nkrumah was frequently accused of subverting African regimes, such as Togo and Ivory Coast, which he considered ideologically conservative. The NDC government, like the PNDC before it, believes in the principle of self-determination, including the right to political independence and the right of people to pursue their economic and social development free from external interference. Another feature of NDC rule carried over from the PNDC era is faithfulness to what a leading scholar of Africa has called &quot;one of the most successful neoclassical economic reform efforts supported by the IMF and the World Bank.&quot;
The broad objectives of Ghana&#x27;s foreign policy thus include maintaining friendly relations and cooperation with all countries that desire such cooperation, irrespective of ideological considerations, on the basis of mutual respect and non-interference in each other&#x27;s internal affairs. Africa and its liberation and unity are naturally the cornerstones of Ghana&#x27;s foreign policy. As a founding member of the Organisation of African Unity (OAU), NDC policy is to adhere faithfully to the OAU Charter.

Another important principle of Ghana&#x27;s foreign policy involves the closest possible cooperation with neighbouring countries with which the people of Ghana share cultural history, ties of blood, and economics. The results have included various bilateral trade and economic agreements and permanent joint commissions involving Ghana and its immediate neighbours, sometimes in the face of latent ideological and political differences and mutual suspicion, as well as numerous reciprocal state visits by high-ranking officials. These measures have contributed significantly to subregional cooperation, development, and the reduction of tension.

As an example of Ghana&#x27;s interest in regional cooperation, the country enthusiastically endorsed formation of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in 1975. This organisation was created specifically to foster inter-regional economic and political cooperation. It has served as a useful vehicle for contacts with neighbouring West African governments and for channelling increased Ghanaian exports to regional markets. Since 1990 ECOWAS has been engaged in a peacekeeping mission in Liberia to which Ghana has contributed a large contingent of troops. Ghana has participated in other international peacekeeping efforts as well, sending soldiers to operations of the United Nations (UN) in Cambodia in 1992-93 and Rwanda in 1993–94.

In August 1994, Rawlings became ECOWAS chairman, a post that had eluded him since the PNDC came to power. He immediately undertook several initiatives to reduce tensions and conflict in West Africa. Notable among them was the Akosombo Accord of September 12, designed to end civil war in Liberia.

==Diplomatic relations==
List of Countries which Ghana maintains diplomatic relations with:
==Bilateral relations==

===Africa===
===Americas===
===Asia===
===Europe===
===Oceania===
==Ghana and the Commonwealth of Nations==

Ghana has been a member state of the Commonwealth since independence in 1957, firstly as a Dominion, then as a republic in the Commonwealth of Nations.

==See also==

* Visa policy of Ghana
* Minister for Foreign Affairs (Ghana)
* List of diplomatic missions in Ghana
* List of diplomatic missions of Ghana
* List of ambassadors and high commissioners of Ghana
* Ghana and the Non-Aligned Movement

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3395210" start="4" end="30" title="Foreign relations of Ghana" label="foreign relations of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829500" start="53" end="89" title="Minister for Foreign Affairs (Ghana)" label="Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="114" end="128" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="171" end="195" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q83201" start="201" end="221" title="Non-Aligned Movement" label="Non-Aligned Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="227" end="256" title="Organisation of African Unity" label="Organisation of African Unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="268" end="281" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="295" end="336" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354958" start="540" end="552" title="peacekeeping" label="peacekeeping"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="585" end="592" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="594" end="605" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037" start="607" end="613" title="Rwanda" label="Rwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="623" end="630" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="754" end="761" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488" start="793" end="821" title="International Criminal Court" label="International Criminal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="3888" end="3929" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="5021" end="5044" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="5139" end="5147" title="Dominion" label="Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216856" start="5159" end="5198" title="republic in the Commonwealth of Nations" label="republic in the Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q16734241" start="5217" end="5237" title="Visa policy of Ghana" label="Visa policy of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829500" start="5240" end="5276" title="Minister for Foreign Affairs (Ghana)" label="Minister for Foreign Affairs (Ghana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861911" start="5279" end="5315" title="List of diplomatic missions in Ghana" label="List of diplomatic missions in Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227241" start="5318" end="5354" title="List of diplomatic missions of Ghana" label="List of diplomatic missions of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q85777036" start="5357" end="5408" title="List of ambassadors and high commissioners of Ghana" label="List of ambassadors and high commissioners of Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q123982811" start="5411" end="5445" title="Ghana and the Non-Aligned Movement" label="Ghana and the Non-Aligned Movement"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12078" wikidata="Q7806439" url="?curid=12078" title="Timeline of the history of Gibraltar">
<text>==Prehistoric==
Evidence of hominid habitation of Gibraltar dates back to the Neanderthals. A Neanderthal skull was discovered in Forbes&#x27; Quarry in 1848, predating the credited discovery in the Neander Valley. In 1926, the skull of a Neanderthal child was found inside of Devil&#x27;s Tower.

Mousterian deposits found at Gorham&#x27;s Cave, which are associated with Neanderthals in Europe, have been dated to as recently as ~26,000 to ~22,000 BCE. This has led to suggestions that Gibraltar was among the last Neanderthal habitats.

Gibraltar&#x27;s prehistoric ecology played host to a varied set of flora and fauna, including many rare species. According to evolutionary biologist Clive Finlayson of the Gibraltar Museum, &quot;This natural richness of wildlife and plants in the nearby sandy plains, woodlands, shrub lands, wetlands, cliffs, and coastline, probably helped the Neanderthals to persist.&quot; 

Archaeological evidence from Gorham&#x27;s Cave shows the Neanderthals of Gibraltar likely used it as a shelter for ~100,000 years. The discovery challenges conventional assumptions about the timeline of Neanderthal extinction, traditionally held to coincide with the arrival of early modern humans in Western Europe.

==Ancient==

The Phoenicians who visited Gibraltar around 950 BCE, named the Rock &quot;Calpe&quot;. The Carthaginians also visited. However, neither group appears to have settled permanently. The Greek Philosopher Plato referred to Gibraltar as one of the Pillars of Hercules along with Jebel Musa or Monte Hacho on the other side of the Strait.

The Romans visited Gibraltar, but no permanent settlement was known to be established. Following the fall of the Western Roman Empire, Gibraltar was settled by the Vandals and later the Goths. Although the Visigoths remained, the Vandals did not remain for long. The Visigoths remained on the Iberian peninsula, from 414 to 711. The Gibraltar area and the rest of the South Iberian Peninsula was part of the Byzantine Empire during the second part of the 6th century, later reverting to the Visigothic Kingdom.

==Muslim rule==

* 711 30 April – The Umayyad general Tariq ibn Ziyad, leading a Berber-dominated army, sailed across the Strait from Ceuta in his quest for Spain. He first attempted to land on Algeciras but failed, but in a later attempt from present-day Morocco, he landed undetected at the southern point of the Rock. It was in Morocco that Gibraltar was named, coming from the Arabian words Gabal-Al-Tariq (the mountain of Tariq). Little was built during the first four centuries of Moorish control (see Reconquista).
* 1160 – The Almohad Sultan Abd al-Mu&#x27;min ordered that a permanent settlement, including a castle, be built. It received the name of &quot;Medinat al-Fath&quot; (City of the Victory). On completion of the works in the town, the Sultan crossed the Strait to inspect the works and stayed in Gibraltar for two months. The Tower of Homage of the castle remains standing today (Moorish Castle).
* 1231 – After the collapse of the Almohad Empire, Gibraltar was taken by Ibn Hud, Taifa emir of Murcia.
* 1237 – Following the death of Ibn Hud,Gibraltar changed hands again as his domains were handed over to Muhammad ibn al-Ahmar, the founder of the Nasrid Emirate of Granada.
* 1274 – The second Nasrid king, Muhammed II al-Faqih, gave Gibraltar over to the Marinids, as payment for their help against the Christian kingdoms.
* 1309 – While the King Ferdinand IV of Castile laid siege to Algeciras, Alonso Pérez de Guzmán (known to the Spanish records as &quot;Guzmán el Bueno&quot;) was sent to capture Gibraltar, resulting in the First Siege of Gibraltar. The Castilians first seized the Upper Rock, from which the town itself was bombarded. The garrison surrendered one month later. At this point in time, Gibraltar had about 1,500 inhabitants.
* 1310 31 January – Gibraltar was granted its first Charter by the king Ferdinand IV of Castile. This charter included various incentives to settle in the city, such as the offer of clemency for (some) past crimes to anyone who lived in Gibraltar for one year and one day.
:This event marked the establishment of the Gibraltar council.
* 1316 – Gibraltar was unsuccessfully besieged by the Azafid caid Yahya ibn Abi Talib (Second Siege of Gibraltar), an ally of the Emirate of Granada.
* 1333 June – A Marinid army, led by Abd al-Malik, the son of Abul Hassan, the Marinid sultan, recovered Gibraltar, after a five-month siege (Third Siege of Gibraltar).
:King Alfonso XI of Castile attempted to retake Gibraltar aided by the fleet of the Castilian Admiral Alonso Jofre Tenorio. Even a ditch was dug across the isthmus. While laying the siege, the king was attacked by a Nasrid army from Granada. Therefore, the siege ended in a truce, allowing the Marinids to keep Gibraltar (Fourth Siege of Gibraltar).
* 1344 March – After the two-year Siege of Algeciras (1342-1344), Algeciras was taken over by the Castilian forces. Because of this, Gibraltar became the main Marinid port in the Iberian Peninsula. During the siege, Gibraltar played a key role as the supply base of the besieged.
* 1349 – Gibraltar was unsuccessfully besieged by the Castilian forces led by the king Alfonso XI.
* 1350 – The siege was resumed by Alfonso XI. It was again unsuccessful, mainly due to the arrival of the Black Death, decimated the besiegers, and resulting in the death of the king (Fifth Siege of Gibraltar).
* In 1369 – the Civil War in Castile ended, with the murder of king Peter I by the pretender Henry (to be known as Henry II), the Nasrid king of Granada, Muhammad V, former ally of Peter, took over Algeciras after the 3-day Siege of Algeciras (1369). A decade later the city was razed to the ground, and its harbour was rendered unusable. This fact increased again the importance of Gibraltar, yet in Marinid hands, in the strait trade. A subsequent truce was signed between Muhammad and Henry, barring Christian kings from attempting to reclaim the city. 
* 1369 - The Civil War in Castile was brought to an end by the murder of king Peter 1 by the pretender Henry (to be known as Henry XI). A former ally of Peter, Muhammad V, the Nasrid king of Granada, took over Algeciras after the 3-day Siege of Algeciras.
* In 1374, amid internal instability in the Marinid Sultanate of Fez, Abu al-Abbas Ahmad of Fez, sought Muhammad V of Granada’s assistance. Either as a condition of the alliance or as reward for Muhammad&#x27;s successful Africa expedition, Gibraltar was ceded to the Nasrids of Granada.
* 1379 - Algeciras was razed to the ground and its harbour made unusable. This fact further increased the importance of Gibraltar, still in Marinid hands, in trade around the strait. Muhammad and Henry subsequently signed a truce, preventing the Christian Kings from attempting to recover the city.
* In 1410 – The garrison in Gibraltar mutinied against the king of Granada and pledged allegiance to the king of Fez, Fayd. Fayd sent his brother Abu Said over to Gibraltar to take possession of the city. Fayd also seized control of other Nasrid ports, including Marbella and Estepona.
* 1411 – The son of Yusuf III of Granada, Ahmad, recovered Marbella and Estepona. He then laid siege to Gibraltar (Sixth Siege of Gibraltar) and recovered the city for the kingdom of Granada.
* In 1436 – Enrique de Guzmán, the second Count of Niebla, and owner of vast estates in Southern Andalusia, launched an assault on Gibraltar. However, his attack was repelled and Castilian forces suffer heavy losses (Seventh Siege of Gibraltar).

==Castilian/Spanish rule==
* 1462 20 August – Castilian forces again captured Gibraltar following the Eighth Siege of Gibraltar. (See Reconquista). An immediate dispute broke out between the House of Medina Sidonia (the Guzmán family) and the House of Arcos (the Ponce de León family) about the possession of the town. Finally, the initiative of Juan Alonso de Guzmán, 1st Duke of Medina Sidonia, succeeded and he took possession of the town as personal property. However, the King of Castile, Henry IV, declared Gibraltar to be Crown property and not the personal property of the Guzman family. Henry IV restored the charter granted to Gibraltar in 1310 and took two additional measures: the lands previously belonging to Algeciras (destroyed in 1369) were granted to Gibraltar; and the status of collegiate church was solicited from the pope Pius II and granted to the parish church of Saint Mary the Crowned (), now the Cathedral of St. Mary the Crowned, on the site of the old main Moorish Mosque. St. Bernard of Clairvaux, whose feast falls on 20 August, became the patron saint of Gibraltar.
* 1463 – In a tour through Andalusia, Henry IV was the first Christian monarch to visit Gibraltar.
* 1467 July – In the midst of a nobility revolt against the King, the forces of the Duke of Medina Sidonia, after a 16-month siege, took Gibraltar. Alfonso of Castile, half-brother of Henry IV and puppet pretender handled by the nobility, granted him the Lordship of Gibraltar (Ninth Siege of Gibraltar).
* 1469 3 June – After the death of Alfonso de Castilla and the 1st Duke of Medina Sidonia, his son and heir Enrique de Guzman, 2nd Duke of Medina Sidonia changed side and in reward, saw the status of Gibraltar, as part of the domains of the Duke, confirmed by the Queen Isabella I of Castile.
* 1470 20 December – A new charter was granted to the town of Gibraltar, now a nobiliary town, based in the Antequera charter.
* 1478 30 September – The Catholic Monarchs granted the title of Marquis of Gibraltar to the Duke of Medina Sidonia.
* 1479 20 January – Queen Isabella I of Castile and King Ferdinand II of Aragon – the Catholic Monarchs, jointly rule the kingdoms of Castile and Aragon, including Gibraltar.
* 1492 31 March – After conquering Granada, the Catholic Monarchs sign the Alhambra Decree ordering the expulsion of the Jews from Spain, to take effect from 31 July 1492. Many passed through Gibraltar on their way into exile in North Africa.
* 1492 Summer – After the death of the former Duke, his son and heir, Juan Alfonso Perez de Guzman, 3rd Duke of Medina Sidonia saw his lordship over Gibraltar reluctantly renewed by the Catholic Monarchs.
* 1497 – Gibraltar became the main base in the conquest of Melilla by the troops of the Duke of Medina Sidonia.
* 1501 2 December – Acknowledging the importance of the town, the Catholic Monarchs asked the Duke of Medina Sidonia for the return of Gibraltar to the domains of the crown. The Duke accepted the Royal request and ceded the town to the monarchs.
* 1502 2 January – Garcilaso de la Vega took possession of the town on behalf of the Queen Isabella I of Castile.

* 1502 10 July – By a Royal Warrant passed in Toledo by Isabella I of Castile, Gibraltar was granted its coat of arms: &quot;An escutcheon on which the upper two thirds shall be a white field and on the said field set a red castle, and below the said castle, on the other third of the escutcheon, which must be a red field in which there must be a white line between the castle and the said red field, there shall be a golden key which hangs by a chain from the said castle, as are here figured&quot;. The Castle and Key remain the Arms of Gibraltar to this day.
* 1506 – Alleging a false donation by the king Philip I of Castile, the Duke of Medina Sidonia attempted to recover Gibraltar by besieging the town. The siege was unsuccessful and the Duke was admonished by the Regency and forced to pay a fee to the town. The town received the title of &quot;Most Loyal City&quot; (Tenth Siege of Gibraltar). The Duke died in 1507.
* 1516 14 March – Spain becomes a united kingdom under Charles I.
* 1540 8 September – Corsairs from the Barbary Coast (ruled by Barbarossa) landed at Gibraltar in sixteen galleys, looting the town and taking away many captives.
* 1552 – After the requests from the inhabitants of the town, Charles I of Spain (the Emperor Charles V) sent the Italian engineer Giovanni Battista Calvi to strengthen the defenses of the town. A wall was built (nowadays known as Charles V Wall); also a ditch by the wall of the town and a drawbridge at the Landport (&quot;Puerta de Tierra&quot;).

* 1567 – Juan Mateos turned his large house in the Upper Town into a hospital. It was Gibraltar&#x27;s first hospital, and remained on the same site serving the people of Gibraltar for almost four and a half centuries.
* 1606 – The Moriscos (the descendants of the Muslim inhabitants in Spain) were expelled from Spain by King Philip III. Many passed through Gibraltar on their way into exile in North Africa.
* 1607 25 April – During the Eighty Years&#x27; War between the United Provinces and the King of Spain, a Dutch fleet surprised and engaged a Spanish fleet anchored at the Bay of Gibraltar (Battle of Gibraltar).
* 1621 – Second battle of Gibraltar on which a Spanish squadron crushed the VOC at the strait of Gibraltar – Battle of Gibraltar (1621)
* 1649 – Typhoid epidemic in the town.
* 1656 – In a letter to Councillor General Montagu (afterwards Earl of Sandwich), General-at-sea and one of the Protector&#x27;s personal friends, Cromwell mentioned the necessity of securing a permanent base at the entry of the Mediterranean, preferably Gibraltar (the first suggestion for the occupation of Gibraltar as a naval base had been made at an English Council of War held at sea on 20 October 1625).

==The War of the Spanish Succession==
* 1700 1 November – King Charles II of Spain died leaving no descendants. In the autumn he had made a will bequeathing the whole of the Spanish possessions to Prince Philip of Bourbon, a grandson of Louis XIV backed by France. The other pretender, an Austrian Habsburg, Archduke Charles, supported by the Holy Roman Empire, England and the Netherlands did not accept Charles II&#x27;s testament.
* 1701 September – England, the Netherlands and Austria signed the Treaty of The Hague. By this treaty, they accepted Philippe of Anjou as King of Spain, but allotted Austria the Spanish territories in Italy and the Spanish Netherlands. England and the Netherlands, meanwhile, were to retain their commercial rights in Spain. Later (in 1703), Portugal, Savoy and some German states joined the alliance.
* 1702 May – Formal beginning of the War of the Spanish Succession.
* 1703 12 February – The Archduke Charles was proclaimed king of Castile and Aragon in Vienna. He took the name of Charles III

===The Gibraltar capture===
&quot;(A discrepancy exists between Spanish and British sources due to differences in calendar systems. England was still using the Julian calendar in 1704, which lagged 11 days behind the Gregorian calendar used by Spain. Thus, the siege began on 21 July in the Julian calendar (1 August in the Gregorian).&quot;

* 1704 1 August(NS): (21 July(OS)) – During the War of the Spanish Succession, and when returning from a failed expedition to Barcelona, an Anglo-Dutch fleet, under the command of Sir George Rooke, chief commander of the Alliance Navy, began a new siege (the eleventh siege of the town). They demanded its unconditional surrender and an oath of loyalty to the Habsburg pretender to the Spanish throne, the Archduke Charles. The Governor of Gibraltar, Diego de Salinas, refused the ultimatum. A force of 1,800 Dutch Royal Marines and British Royal Marines, led by Prince George of Hesse-Darmstadt, the Alliance Army commander in Spain, began the siege of Gibraltar in the name of Archduke Charles. A small contingent of Spaniards, primarily Catalans, also joined the Prince’s forces.
* 1704 3–4 August – Heavy shelling targeted the castle and the town overnight.
* 1704 4 August – The Governor Diego de Salinas surrendered the town to Prince George of Hesse, who took it in the name of Archduke, as Charles III, king of Castile and Aragon. This was the end of the Eleventh Siege of Gibraltar (a map on the situation of attacking forces can be seen in)
: The exact beginning of the English/British control of Gibraltar is hard to determine. From the eighteenth century, Spanish sources reported that immediately after the takeover of the city, Sir George Rooke, the British admiral, on his own initiative caused the British flag to be hoisted, and took possession of the Rock in the name of Anne, Queen of Great Britain, whose government ratified the occupation. On the other hand, even the British or the Gibraltarians sometimes date the beginning of British sovereignty in 1704 (for instance, in its speech at the United Nations in 1994, the Gibraltar Chief Minister at the time, Joe Bossano, stated that &quot;Gibraltar has been a British colony ever since it was taken by Britain in 1704&quot;). Also, some British sources have accounted the flag story (&quot;He [Rooke] had the Spanish flag hauled down and the English flag hoisted in its stead&quot;; &quot;Rooke&#x27;s men quickly raised the British flag ... and Rooke claimed the Rock in the name of Queen Anne&quot;; or &quot;Sir George Rooke, the British admiral, on his own responsibility caused the British flag to be hoisted, and took possession in name of Queen Anne, whose government ratified the occupation&quot;).

: However, it is claimed by present-day historians, both Spanish and British, that this version is apocryphal since no contemporary source accounts it. Isidro Sepúlveda, William Jackson and George Hills explicitly refute it (Sepúlveda points out that if this had actually happened, it would have caused a big crisis in the Alliance supporting the Archduke Charles; George Hills explains that the story was first accounted by the Marquis of San Felipe, who wrote his book &quot;Comentarios de la guerra de España e historia de su rey Felipe V el animoso&quot; in 1725, more than twenty years after the fact; the marquis was not an eye-witness and cannot be considered as a reliable source for the events that took place in Gibraltar in 1704. As Hills concludes: &quot;The flag myth ... may perhaps be allowed now to disappear from Anglo-Spanish polemics. On the one side it has been used to support a claim to the Rock &#x27;by right of conquest&#x27;; on the other to ... pour on Britain obloquy for perfidy&quot;).
:What does seem nowadays proved is that the British troops who had landed on the South Mole area raised their flag to signal their presence to the ships, and avoid being fired upon by their own side. Regardless of the exact events, Gibraltar officially passed out of the rule of Philip V of Spain in 1704. In 2004, a statue of Sir George Rooke was unveiled to mark the 300th anniversary of this historic event.
* 1704 4–7 August. Although the Grand Alliance initially ordered respect for civilians to win local support, discipline quickly broke down, as it had during the 1702 raid on Cádiz. This led to widespread chaos: numerous reports of sexual violence, the desecration or conversion of all but one Catholic church (St. Mary the Crowned, now the Cathedral) into military storehouses, and the destruction of religious symbols like the statue of Our Lady of Europe. Angry Spanish inhabitants took violent reprisals against the occupiers. English and Dutch soldiers and sailors were attacked and killed, and their bodies were thrown into wells and cesspits. After order was restored, despite the surrender agreement promising property and religious rights, most of the population left with the garrison on 7 August citing loyalty to Philip. Several factors influenced the decision including the expectation of a counterattack and the violence during the capture, which ultimately proved disastrous for the Habsburg cause. The subsequent siege failed to dislodge the Habsburg forces and the refugees settled around Algeciras and the hermitage of San Roque. The Alliance&#x27;s conduct aroused anger in Spain against the &#x27;heretics&#x27;, and once again the chance of winning over Andalusians to the Imperial cause was lost. Prince George was the first to complain, which was resented by Byng who had led the fighting and who in turn blamed the Prince and his few Spanish or Catalan supporters. Rooke complained in a letter home that the Spaniards were so exasperated against the Alliance that &#x27;they use the prisoners they take as barbarously as the Moors&#x27;. Spain attempted to retake Gibraltar in 1727 and most notably in 1779, when it entered the American Revolutionary War on the American side as an ally of France.
* 1704 7 August. A dejected procession, numbering some 4,000 according to most of the sources, such as Hills or Jackson filed out of the Land Port with Queen Isabella&#x27;s banner at their head, and led by the Spanish Governor, Diego de Salinas, the Spanish garrison, with their three brass cannon, the religious orders, the city council and all those inhabitants who did not wish to take the oath of allegiance to Charles III as asked by the terms of surrender. They took with them the symbols and objects of Spanish Gibraltar&#x27;s history: the council and ecclesiastical records, including the historical documents signed by the Spanish Catholic Monarchs in 1502, granting Gibraltar&#x27;s coat of arms, and the statue of the Saint Mary the Crowned. Most of them took refuge in the proximity of the nearby Chapel of San Roque, possibly hoping for a rapid reconquest of Gibraltar, which never materialized. There, a new settlement was formed, being granted a council two years later (1706), with the name of San Roque, and being considered by the Spanish Crown as the heir to the lost town of Gibraltar (historical objects and records predating 1704 were subsequently taken to San Roque where they remain to this day.) King Philip V of Spain dubbed San Roque as &quot;My city of Gibraltar resident in its Campo&quot;. Others settled down in what today is Los Barrios or even further away, in the ruins of the abandoned city of Algeciras. Only about seventy people remained in the town, most of them religious, people without family or belonging to the Genoese trader colony (see list in).
* 1704 24 August – The Alliance fleet, under the command of Rooke, set sail from Gibraltar and intercepted a joint Spanish-French fleet that attempted to recover Gibraltar by the coast of Málaga (Battle of Vélez-Málaga). The result was uncertain, with heavy losses on both sides, but the Spanish-French fleet was stopped and prevented from arriving at Gibraltar.

===The first Spanish siege (Twelfth Siege of Gibraltar)===
* 1704 5 September – Troops of France and Spain under the marquis of Villadarias, General Captain of Andalusia, started to besiege Gibraltar to try to recover it (this one would be the Twelfth Siege of Gibraltar). In the town, the Marine brigade, still under the command of the British admiral Sir John Leake, and the governor, Prince George of Hesse-Darmstadt (who had commanded the land forces in August), and reinforced shortly before by a further 400 Royal Marines, held the fortress against repeated attacks.
* 1704 11 November – A notable incident during the siege: 500 Spanish volunteer grenadiers tried to surprise the garrison after being led up a concealed path to the top of The Rock by a Spanish goatherd from Gibraltar, Simón Susarte. Captain Fisher of the Marines with 17 of his men successfully defended the Round Tower against their assault. A contemporary report of this noted defence says, &quot;Encouraged by the Prince of Hesse, the garrison did more than could humanly be expected, and the English Marines gained an immortal glory&quot;.
* 1705 January – Philip V replaced Villadarias with the Marshal of France de Tessé.
* 1705 7 February – The last assault before the arrival of de Tessé was executed. The Gibraltar wall was damaged, but French troops refused to go on until the arrival of de Tessé (who arrived the day after). The assault becomes unsuccessful.
* 1705 31 March – The Count de Tessé gave up the siege and retired.

===During the rest of the war===

Although nominally in the hands of the Archduke Charles, and garrisoned with both English and Dutch regiments, Britain began to monopolize the rule of the town. Even if the formal transfer of sovereignty would not take place until the signature of the Treaty of Utrecht, the British Governor and garrison become the &quot;de facto&quot; rulers of the town.
* 1705 2 August – The Archduke Charles stopped over in Gibraltar on his way to the territories of the Crown of Aragon. The Prince of Hesse joined him, thus leaving the town (he would die one month later in the siege of Barcelona). The English Major General John Shrimpton was left as governor (appointed by the Archduke Charles on the recommendation of Queen Anne).
* 1706 17 February – Queen Anne though not yet the legal ruler of the territory, declared Gibraltar a free port (upon request of the Sultan of Morocco, who wanted Gibraltar being given this status in return for supplying the town)
* 1707 24 December – The first British Governor directly appointed by Queen Anne, Roger Elliott, took up residence in the Convent of the Franciscan friars.
* 1711 – The British government, then in the hands of the Tories, covertly ordered the British Gibraltar governor, Thomas Stanwix, to expel any foreign (not British) troops (to foster Great Britain&#x27;s sole right to Gibraltar in the negotiations running up between Britain and France). Although he answered positively, he allowed a Dutch regiment to stay. It remained there until March 1713.

==British rule==

===Treaty of Utrecht===

* 1713 11 April – The territory was subsequently ceded to the Crown of Great Britain in perpetuity by Spain under article X of the Treaties of Utrecht. Despite some military attempts by the Spanish to retake it in the 18th century, most notably in the Great Siege of 1779–1783, the Rock has remained under British control ever since.
:In that treaty, Spain ceded Great Britain &quot;&quot;the full and entire propriety of the town and castle of Gibraltar, together with the port, fortifications, and forts thereunto belonging ... for ever, without any exception or impediment whatsoever.&quot;
:The Treaty stipulated that no overland trade between Gibraltar and Spain was to take place, except for emergency provisions in the case that Gibraltar is unable to be supplied by sea. Another condition of the cession was that &quot;no leave shall be given under any pretence whatsoever, either to Jews or Moors, to reside or have their dwellings in the said town of Gibraltar.&quot; This was not respected for long and Gibraltar has had for many years an established Jewish community, along with Muslims from North Africa.
:Finally, under the Treaty, should the British crown wish to dispose of Gibraltar, that of Spain should be offered the territory first.

===Until the Peninsular Wars===

Between 1713 and 1728, there were seven occasions when British ministers were prepared to bargain Gibraltar away as part of his foreign policy. However, Parliament always frustrated such attempts, echoing public opinion in Britain.
* 1721 March – Philip V of Spain requested the restitution of Gibraltar to proceed with the renewal of the trade licences of Great Britain with the Spanish possessions in America.
* 1721 1 June – George I sent a letter to Philip V promising &quot;to make use of the first favourable Opportunity to regulate this Article (the Demand touching the Restitution of Gibraltar), with the Consent of my Parliament&quot;&quot;. However, the British Parliament never endorsed such promise.
* 1727 February–June – Second of the sieges by Spain tried to recapture Gibraltar (Thirteenth Siege of Gibraltar). Depending on the sources, Spanish troops were between 12,000 and 25,000. British defenders were 1,500 at the beginning of the siege, increasing up to about 5,000. After a five-month siege with several unsuccessful and costly attempts, Spanish troops gave up and retired.
* 1729 – At the end of the Anglo-Spanish War of 1727–1729, the Treaty of Seville confirming all previous treaties (including the Treaty of Utrecht) allowed Great Britain to keep Menorca and Gibraltar.
* 1730 – A Belgian Engineer, the Marquis of Verboom, Chief Engineer of the Spanish Royal Engineer Corps, who had taken part in the 1727 siege, arrived in San Roque commissioned by the Spanish government to design a line of fortifications across the isthmus. Fort San Felipe and Fort Santa Barbara were built. The fortifications, known to the British as the Spanish Lines, and to Spain as &quot;La Línea de Contravalación&quot; were the origin of the modern-day town of La Línea de la Concepción.
* 1749–1754 – Lieutenant General Humphrey Bland is the Governor of Gibraltar. He compiles the twelve &quot;Articles&quot; or regulations that ruled the administration of Gibraltar for over sixty years. First article, dealing with property, establishes that only Protestants may own property. In 1754 the population settled at around 6,000 people, with the garrison and their dependents constituting about three-quarters of it. The civilian population comprised mainly Genoese and Jews.
* 1776 23 February – One of the heaviest storms ever recorded in Gibraltar. The lower part of the town was flooded. Linewall was breached along 100 m.
* 1779 June – In the midst of the American Revolutionary War, Spain declared war against Great Britain (as France had done the year before)
* 1779 July – Start of the Great Siege of Gibraltar (fourteenth and most recent military siege). This was an action by French and Spanish forces to wrest control of Gibraltar from the established British Garrison. The garrison, led by George Augustus Eliott, later 1st Baron Heathfield of Gibraltar, survived all attacks and a blockade of supplies.
* 1782 13 September – Start of an assault involving 100,000 men, 48 ships and 450 cannon. The British garrison survived.
* 1782 – Work on the Great Siege Tunnels started. The tunnels became a great and complex system of underground fortifications which nowadays criss-crosses the inside of the Rock. Once the Siege was over, the fortifications were rebuilt and, in the following century, the walls were lined with Portland limestone. Such stone gave the walls their present white appearance. The successful resistance in the Great Siege is attributed to several factors: the improvement in fortifications by Colonel (later General Sir) William Green in 1769; the British naval supremacy, which translated into support of the Navy; the competent command by General George Augustus Elliot; and an appropriately sized garrison. As in the early years of the British period, during the Siege the British Government considered to exchange Gibraltar for some Spanish possession. However, by the end of the Siege &quot;the fortress and its heroic response to the siege was now acquiring a sort of cult status amongst the population in Britain and no exchange however attractive, was likely to be acceptable&quot;.
* 1783 February – By now the siege was over, and George Augustus Eliott was awarded the Knight of the Bath and was created 1st Baron Heathfield of Gibraltar. The Treaties of Versailles which ceded Menorca and Florida to Spain, reaffirmed previous treaties in the rest of issues, thus not affecting to Gibraltar.
* 1800 – Malta is taken over by Great Britain. The possession of Malta (confirmed by the Treaty of Paris) in 1814, increased the attractiveness of Gibraltar since controlling both Gibraltar and Malta meant the effective mastery of the Mediterranean Sea by the Royal Navy.
* 1802 – Several mutinies among some regiments garrisoned in Gibraltar.
* 1802 – The first merchant token to bear the name Gibraltar (albeit spelt Gibralter) was issued by Robert Keeling in order to alleviate a shortage of copper.
* 1803 June – Admiral Nelson arrived in Gibraltar as Commander-in-Chief Mediterranean.
* 1804 – Great epidemic of &quot;Malignant Fever&quot; broke out. Although traditionally labelled as &quot;Yellow Fever&quot; now it is thought to have been typhus. Nearly 5,000 people died.
* 1805 January – The great epidemic ended. Over a third of the civilian population (5,946 people) died.
* 1805 21 October – Battle of Trafalgar.
* 1805 28 October – was towed into Gibraltar bringing Nelson&#x27;s body aboard. The Trafalgar Cemetery still exists today in Gibraltar.
* 1806 – Gibraltar was made a Catholic Apostolic Vicariate (until then Gibraltar belonged to the See of Cadiz). Since 1840 the vicar has always been the Bishop of Gibraltar.
* 1810 – Britain and Spain became allies against Napoleon.
* 1810 February – The Governor of Gibraltar removed the Spanish forts of San Felipe and Santa Barbara, located on the northern boundary of the neutral ground. Fearing that the forts might fall into French hands, Lieutenant General Sir Colin Campbell instructed Royal Engineers to blow the forts up. Such a task was carried out on 14 February together with the demolition of the rest of the fortifications of the Spanish Lines.
:(According to George Hills, there are no primary sources that could explain whether such a demolition was requested or authorized by any Spanish or British authority. According to him, over time, three different theories have emerged: (a) Campbell ordered the demolition on his own authority (b) under instructions from the British Government (c) upon request of Spanish General Castaños, who was at the time in Cádiz. Spanish authors from 1840 have usually favoured theory (b) while British ones have supported (c). As long as there is no contemporary source or dispatch on the topic, Hills does not personally discard (a) considering it the most likely possibility).
* During the Peninsular War, contingents from the Gibraltar Garrison were sent to aid Spanish resistance to the French at Cádiz and Tarifa. As William Jackson describes, &quot;Gradually Gibraltar changed from being the objective of the San Roque garrison into the supply base and refuge in time of trouble for the Spanish forces operating in Southern Andalusia&quot;.

===Until the Second World War===

* 1814 – Outbreak of malignant fever.
* 1815 – The civilian population of Gibraltar was about 10,000 people (two and a half times the size of the garrison). Genoese constituted about one-third of the civilian population (a large number of immigrants had arrived from Genoa at the beginning of the century). The rest were mainly Spaniards and Portuguese fled from the war, and Jews from Morocco.
* 1817 – The first civil judge was established.
* 1830 – The British government changes the status of Gibraltar from &quot;The town and garrison of Gibraltar&quot; to the &quot;Crown Colony of Gibraltar&quot;. Thus, the responsibility for its administration is transferred from the War Office to the new Colonial Office.
:Legal institutions and the Gibraltar Police Force were established.
* 1832 – The Church of the Holy Trinity, built for the needs of Anglican worshipers among Gibraltar&#x27;s civil population, is completed. (Ten years later it will become the Cathedral of the Holy Trinity).
* 1842 21 August – The Church of England Diocese of Gibraltar was founded by Letters Patent and took over the pastoral care of the chaplaincies and congregations from Portugal to the Caspian Sea. George Tomlinson is enthroned as the first Bishop of Gibraltar. The Church of the Holy Trinity, Gibraltar becomes Cathedral for the Diocese.
* 1842 – Official Coins of the Realm were struck for Gibraltar by the Royal Mint. Coins were issued in ½, 1 and 2 Quart denominations. 
* 1869 – The Suez Canal was opened. It heavily increased the strategic value of the Rock in the route from the United Kingdom to India. Gibraltar economy, mainly based on commercial shipping and import-export trade, takes a new income source with the opening of a coaling station for the new steam ships.
* 1891 17 March – America-bound steamer &quot;Utopia&quot; slammed in heavy weather into the iron-plated British battleship HMS &quot;Anson&quot; and sank in the Bay of Gibraltar; 576 people died.
* 1894 – The construction of the dockyards started.
* 1908 5 August – The British Ambassador in Madrid informed the Spanish Minister of State &#x27;as an act of courtesy&#x27;, of the British Government&#x27;s intention to build a fence along the line of British sentries on the isthmus &quot;to prevent smuggling and reduce sentry duty&quot;. According to the British government, the fence was erected 1 metre inside British territory. Spain currently does not recognize the fence as the valid border, since it claims the fence was built on Spanish soil. Even though Spain, the United Kingdom and Gibraltar are all part of the European Union, the border fence is still relevant today since Gibraltar is outside the customs union. The border crossing is open 24 hours a day as required by EU law.
* 1921 – Gibraltar was granted a City Council status in recognition for its contribution to the British war efforts in World War I. The council had a small minority of elected persons. First elections held in Gibraltar.
* 1936–1939 – After the United Kingdom recognized the Franco&#x27;s regime in 1938, Gibraltar had two Spanish Consulates, a Republican one and a Nationalistic one. Several incidents took place during the Spanish Civil War which affected Gibraltar. In May 1937, HMS &quot;Arethusa&quot; had to tow HMS &quot;Hunter&quot; into port after &quot;Hunter&quot; hit a mine off Almeria that killed and wounded several British sailors. In June 1937, the German pocket battleship &quot;Deutschland&quot; arrived in Gibraltar with dead and wounded after Republican planes bombed it in Ibiza in retaliation for the Condor Legion&#x27;s bombing of Guernica. In August 1938, the Republican destroyer &quot;Jose Luis Diez&quot; took refuge in Gibraltar after taking casualties from the guns of the National cruiser &quot;Canarias&quot;. The one incident that resulted in the death of Gibraltarians occurred on 31 January 1938 when the insurgent submarine &quot;General Sanjurjo&quot; sank the SS &quot;Endymion&quot;, a small Gibraltar-registered freighter taking a cargo of coal to Cartagena, which was chartered by the Republican government. Eleven members of her crew were killed.

===Second World War and after===

The history of Gibraltar from the Second World War is characterized by two main elements: the increasing autonomy and self-government achieved by Gibraltarians and the re-emergence of the Spanish claim, especially during the years of the Francoist dictatorship.

During World War II (1939–1945) the Rock was again turned into a fortress and the civilian residents of Gibraltar were evacuated. Initially, in May 1940, 16,700 people went to French Morocco. However, after the French-German Armistice and the subsequent destruction of the French fleet at Mers-el-Kebir, Algeria by the British Navy in July 1940, the French-Moroccan authorities asked all Gibraltarian evacuees to be removed. 12,000 went to Britain, while about 3,000 went to Madeira or Jamaica, with the rest moving to Spain or Tanger. Control of Gibraltar gave the Allied Powers control of the entry to the Mediterranean Sea (the other side of the Strait being Spanish territory, and thus non-belligerent). The Rock was a key part of the Allied supply lines to Malta and North Africa and base of the British Navy Force H, and prior to the war the racecourse on the isthmus was converted into an airbase and a concrete runway constructed (1938). The repatriation of the civilians started in 1944 and proceeded until 1951, causing considerable suffering and frustration. However, most of the population had returned by 1946.
* 1940 4 July – French bombers, based in French Morocco, carried out a retaliatory air raid over Gibraltar as a reprisal for the destruction of the French fleet at Mers-el-Kebir, Algeria, by the Force H (about 1,300 French sailors were killed and about 350 were wounded in the action against the French fleet).
* 1941 – Germany planned to occupy Gibraltar (and presumably hand it over to Spain) in &quot;Operation Felix&quot; which was due to start on 10 January 1941. It was cancelled because the Spanish government were reluctant to let the Wehrmacht enter Spain and then attack against the Rock, its civilians or the British Army from Spanish soil, because Franco feared that it may have been impossible to remove the Wehrmacht afterwards. In any case, Hitler was too busy elsewhere in Europe to give this much priority.
* 1940–1943 – Gibraltar harbour was attacked many times by Italian commando frogmen operating from Algeciras. Underwater warfare and countermeasures were developed by Lionel Crabb.
* 1942 September – A small group of Gibraltarians, who remained in the town serving in the British Army, joined a mechanic official, Albert Risso, to create &#x27;The Gibraltarians Association&#x27;, the starting point of what became the Association for the Advancement of Civil Rights (officially established in December that year), the first political party in Gibraltar. Joshua Hassan (a young lawyer then, later Sir and Chief Minister) was among the leading members of the association. The AACR was the dominant party in Gibraltar politics for the last third of the 20th century.
* 1942 8 November – Operation Torch launched with support from Gibraltar.
* 1944 April – The situation in Gibraltar is considered safe and the first of the evacuees return to Gibraltar.
* 1946 – The United Kingdom inscribed Gibraltar in the list of non-self-governing territories kept by the UN Special Committee on Decolonization.
* 1950 – Gibraltar&#x27;s first Legislative Council was opened.
* 1951 – The return process of the evacuees finishes. It was delayed due to an initial shortage of shipping and then of housing. The evacuation was a key element in the creation of the national conscience of Gibraltarians. The experience of evacuation &quot;had bonded the Gibraltarian together as a nation&quot;.
* 1951 27 April – The RFA Bedenham explodes while docked in Gibraltar, killing 13, damaging many buildings in the town and delaying the housing program essential for repatriation.
* 1954 – This was the 250th anniversary of its capture. Queen Elizabeth II visited Gibraltar, which angered General Franco, who renewed its claim to sovereignty, which had not been actively pursued for over 150 years. This led to the closure of the Spanish consulate and to the imposition of restrictions on freedom of movement between Gibraltar and Spain. By the 1960s, motor vehicles were being restricted or banned from crossing the border, while only Spanish nationals employed on the Rock being allowed to enter Gibraltar.
* 1955 – At the United Nations, Spain, which had just been admitted to membership, initiated a claim to the territory, arguing that the principle of territorial integrity, not self-determination, applied in the case of the decolonization of Gibraltar, and that the United Kingdom should cede sovereignty of the Rock to Spain. Madrid gained diplomatic support from countries in Latin America, with the UN General Assembly passing resolutions (2231 (XXI), &quot;Question of Gibraltar&quot; and 2353 (XXII), &quot;Question of Gibraltar&quot;).
* 1965 April – The British Government published a White Paper dealing with the question of Gibraltar and the Treaty of Utrecht.
* 1966 – In response, the Spanish Foreign Office Minister Fernando Castiella, published and presented to the Spanish Courts the &quot;Spanish Red Book&quot; (named so because of its cover; its reference is &quot;Negociaciones sobre Gibraltar. Documentos presentados a las Cortes Españolas por el Ministro de Asuntos Exteriores&quot;, Madrid, 1967)
* 1967 – The first sovereignty referendum was held on 10 September, in which Gibraltar&#x27;s voters were asked whether they wished to either pass under Spanish sovereignty, or remain under British sovereignty, with institutions of self-government. Over 99% voted in favour of remaining British.
* 1968 A group of six Gibraltarian lawyers and businessmen, calling themselves the &quot;palomos&quot; or &#x27;doves&#x27;, advocated a political settlement with Spain in a letter published in the &quot;Gibraltar Chronicle&quot;, and met with Spanish Foreign Office officials (a meeting was even held with the Spanish Foreign Office Minister) to try to bring this about. This provoked widespread public hostility in Gibraltar (with attacks on their homes and properties and civil unrest). Things quickly calmed down, although today the term retains a negative meaning in Gibraltar politics.
* 1969 30 May – A new constitution for Gibraltar was introduced by the United Kingdom Parliament, under the initiative of the British Government (Gibraltar Constitution Order 1969). Under it, Gibraltar attained full internal self-government, with an elected House of Assembly. The City Council and the Legislative Council disappeared. The preamble to the Constitution stated that:

::&quot;Her Majesty&#x27;s Government will never enter into arrangements under which the people of Gibraltar would pass under the sovereignty of another state against their freely and democratically expressed wishes.&quot;
* 1969 8 June – In response, Spain closed the border with Gibraltar, and severed all communication links. For about 13 years, the land border was closed from the Spanish side, to try to isolate the territory. The closure affected both sides of the border. Gibraltarians with families in Spain had to go by ferry to Tangier, Morocco, and from there to the Spanish port of Algeciras, while many Spanish workers (by then about 4,800; sixteen years before, about 12,500 Spanish workmen entered Gibraltar every day) lost their jobs in Gibraltar.
* 1969 – Major Robert (later Sir Robert) Peliza of the Integration with Britain Party (IWBP) was elected Chief Minister in alliance with the independent group led by Peter Isola.
* 1971 – The United Kingdom Government led by Heath considered the possibility of exchanging sovereignty for a 999-year lease on Gibraltar, as it was felt it had ceased to be of any military or economic value. The proposals remained secret until 2002.
* 1972 – Joshua Hassan of the Association for the Advancement of Civil Rights (AACR) was returned to power. AACR rebrands as GLP/AACR (Gibraltar Labour Party / AACR) in an attempt to develop a more clearly working-class image.
* 1972 – Gibraltar TGWU hold a 6-day General Strike, pressing the Ministry of Defence, Gibraltar&#x27;s largest employer, for better pay and conditions for workers. The strike ends successfully with a £1.85 increase in basic pay rates, and is seen as a catalyst for increased working class solidarity in the pursuit of social, economic and political change. TGWU claims a rise of overall union density within the labour market to around 55% following the strike.
* 1973 – Gibraltar joined the European Economic Community alongside the United Kingdom.
* 1975 – The British Foreign Office Minister Roy Hattersley ruled out integration with the UK, and stated that any constitutional change would have to involve a &#x27;Spanish dimension&#x27;. This position was reaffirmed the following year when the British government rejected the House of Assembly&#x27;s proposals for constitutional reform (Hattersley Memorandum). The IWBP broke up and was succeeded by the Democratic Party of British Gibraltar (DPBG), led first by Maurice Xiberras, formerly of the IWBP, and subsequently by Peter Isola.
* 1975 – Spanish dictator General Francisco Franco died, but nothing changed in relation to Gibraltar.
* 1980 10 April – The British and Spanish ministers of Foreign Affairs, Lord Carrington and Marcelino Oreja, signs the Lisbon Agreement regarding &#x27;The Gibraltar Problem&#x27; stating that the communications between Gibraltar and Spain would be re-established, and restating both Governments positions. The measures agreed were not implemented.
* 1980 July – The Anglican Diocese of Gibraltar is amalgamated with the Jurisdiction of North and Central Europe to become the Diocese of Gibraltar in Europe. The Cathedral of the Holy Trinity, Gibraltar remains Anglican Cathedral for the Diocese.
* 1981 – The British Nationality Act 1981 effectively made Gibraltar a &quot;Dependent Territory&quot; and removed the right of entry into the UK of British Dependent Territory Citizens. After a short campaign, Gibraltarians were offered full British citizenship (History of nationality in Gibraltar). The act was ratified in 1983.

* 1982 15 December – The re-opening of the border was initially delayed due to the war between the United Kingdom and Argentina over the Falkland Islands. Upon the change in the Spanish government, with the Socialist Party in power, the border was partially re-opened (only pedestrians, resident in Gibraltar or Spanish nationals were allowed to cross the border by Spain; only one crossing each way per day was allowed). Restrictions on the land border continued until 2006, although there are still occasionally issues related to the crossing.
* 1984 – Spain applied to join the European Community, succeeding in 1986. Under the Brussels Agreement (27 November 1984) signed between the governments of the United Kingdom and Spain, the former agreed to enter into discussions with Spain over Gibraltar, including by first time the &quot;issues&quot; of sovereignty. The border was fully reopened.
* 1987 2 December – A proposal for joint control of Gibraltar Airport with Spain met with widespread local opposition which was expressed in a protest march to The Convent. Chief Minister Sir Joshua Hassan resigned at the end of the year and was succeeded by Adolfo Canepa.
* 1988 – Gibraltar Socialist Labour Party (GSLP) leader Joe Bossano was elected as Chief Minister, and firmly ruled out any discussions with Spain over sovereignty and shared use of the airport.
* 1988 7 March – The Special Air Service of the British Army shot dead three unarmed members of the Provisional IRA walking towards the frontier, claiming they were making &quot;suspicious movements&quot; (Operation Flavius). A subsequent search led to the discovery of a car containing a large amount of Semtex explosive in Spain, which they had planned to use to bomb the Changing of the Guard ceremony a few days later .
* 1991 – The British Army effectively withdrew from Gibraltar, leaving only the locally recruited Royal Gibraltar Regiment, although the Royal Air Force and Royal Navy remain. Spain made various proposals involving the sovereignty of Gibraltar, which were rejected by all parties in the Gibraltar House of Assembly.
* 1991 – The Spanish Spanish Socialist Workers&#x27; Party (PSOE) government of Felipe González proposed joint sovereignty over Gibraltar with the United Kingdom. A similar proposal was advocated by Peter Cumming, formerly of the Gibraltar Social-Democrats (GSD), in which the Rock would become a self-governing condominium (or &quot;Royal City&quot;), with the British and Spanish monarchs as joint heads of state.
* 1995 – GSLP government lost popular support as a result of tobacco smuggling activity. To prevent this activity the fast launches were made illegal and confiscated. This resulted in a riot in July 1995.
* 1996 – In a general election, Joe Bossano was replaced by Peter Caruana of the GSD, who while favouring dialogue with Spain, also ruled out any deals on sovereignty.
* 1997 – The Partido Popular Spanish Foreign Minister, Abel Matutes made proposals under which Gibraltar would be under joint sovereignty for fifty years, before being fully incorporated into Spain, as an autonomous region, similar to Catalonia or the Basque Country, but these were rejected by the British Government.
* 2000 — An agreement was reached between the UK and Spain over recognition of &#x27;competent authorities&#x27; in Gibraltar. Spain had a policy of non-recognition of the Government of Gibraltar as a &#x27;competent authority&#x27;, therefore refusing to recognise Gibraltar&#x27;s courts, police and government departments, driving licences, and identity cards. Under the agreement, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office in London would act as a &#x27;post box&#x27;, through which Gibraltar&#x27;s police and other government departments could communicate with their counterparts in Spain. In addition, identity documents issued by the Government of Gibraltar now featured the words &#x27;United Kingdom&#x27;.
* 2000 May – 2001 May – Following an incident at sea the nuclear submarine HMS Tireless (S88) was repaired in Gibraltar causing diplomatic tension with Spain. Before consenting to the repair, the Government of Gibraltar insisted on a full safety assessment.

===Twenty-first century===
* 2001 — The UK Government announced plans to reach a final agreement with Spain over the future of Gibraltar, which would involve shared sovereignty; however agreement was not reached due to the opposition of the Gibraltarians.
* 2002 — On 12 July the Foreign Secretary, Jack Straw, in a formal statement in the House of Commons, said that after twelve months of negotiation the British Government and Spain are in broad agreement on many of the principles that should underpin a lasting settlement of Spain&#x27;s sovereignty claim, which included the principle that Britain and Spain should share sovereignty over Gibraltar. Political commentators saw this as an attempt by Britain to get Spain to help counterbalance France and Germany&#x27;s domination of the European Union. Straw visited Gibraltar to explain his ideas and was left in no doubt they had no support.
* 2002 – In November the Government of Gibraltar called Gibraltar&#x27;s second sovereignty referendum on the proposal, it achieved a turnout of 88% of which 98.97% of the electorate did not support the position taken by Mr Straw.

:The actual voting was as follows: 18,176 voted representing 87.9% of the electorate. There were 89 papers spoilt of which 72 were blank 18,087 of which 187 Voted YES, and 17,900 voted NO.

:The Referendum was supervised by a team of international observers headed by the Labour MP Gerald Kaufman, who certified that it had been held fairly, freely and democratically.
* 2002 – The British Overseas Territories Act 2002 made provision for the renaming of British Dependent Territories as British Overseas Territories, which changed the status of Gibraltar to an Overseas Territory. This act granted full British citizenship to British Overseas Territories, which was already available to Gibraltarians since 1983.
* 2004 August – Gibraltar celebrated 300 years of British rule. Spanish officials labelled this as the celebration of 300 years of British occupation.

:Despite this, Gibraltar celebrated its tercentenary, with a number of events on 4 August, including the population encircling the rock holding hands, and granting the Freedom of the City to the Royal Navy.
* 2004 18 November – A joint commission (&quot;Comisión mixta de Cooperación y Colaboración&quot;) was established between the &quot;Mancomunidad de Municipios de la Comarca del Campo de Gibraltar&quot; (the Council Association of the Campo de Gibraltar, the historic Spanish county that surrounds Gibraltar) and the Government of Gibraltar.
* 2004 28 October – The governments of the United Kingdom and Spain agreed to allow the Government of Gibraltar equal representation in a new open agenda discussion forum (so-called Tripartite Talks).
* 2005 July – First Tripartite Talks took place in Faro, Portugal.
* 2006 August – The following was announced:

* 2006 18 September Córdoba agreement – The British and Spanish foreign ministers and the Chief Minister of Gibraltar met at the Palacio de Viana, Córdoba and announced the following:

:1. Spain agrees to recognize Gibraltar&#x27;s international dialling code (350) and allow mobile roaming.
:2. Spanish restrictions on civil flights at the airport will be removed. A new terminal building will also be constructed, allowing a direct passage to/from the north side of the fence/frontier (in order to overcome problems of terminology relating to references to the words &quot;frontier&quot; or &quot;fence&quot;, the phrase &quot;fence/frontier&quot; is used in the documents).
:3. There will be normality of traffic flow at the fence/frontier.
:4. Britain agrees to pay uprated pensions to those Spanish citizens who lost their livelihoods when the border was unilaterally closed by Francisco Franco in 1969.
:5. A branch of the Instituto Cervantes will be opened in Gibraltar.

:This agreement is seen as a major milestone in Gibraltar&#x27;s history.
* 2006 November – The new constitution was drafted and later approved by the people of Gibraltar in a referendum. It was described as non-colonial in nature by Britain and Gibraltar. However, UK Europe Minister Jim Murphy, told the Foreign Affairs Committee of the House of Commons that the new Constitution is a &quot;modernization&quot; but stated that &quot;[I have] never described it as an end to the colonial relationship.&quot; Although others have.
* 2006 16 December – The first passenger carrying Iberia aircraft landed in Gibraltar flying directly from Madrid, and a daily scheduled service started. The service was later reduced in frequency and terminated in September 2008.
* 2007 10 February — Spain lifted restrictions on Gibraltar&#x27;s ability to expand and modernize its telecommunications infrastructure. These included a refusal to recognize International Direct Dialling (IDD) code which restricted the expansion of Gibraltar&#x27;s telephone numbering plan, and the prevention of roaming arrangements for Gibraltar&#x27;s GSM mobile phones in Spain.
* 2007 1 May GB Airways began scheduled flights between Madrid and Gibraltar which were later withdrawn in September.
* 2007 29 June – With a unanimous vote in the Gibraltar Parliament, local MPs approved new legislation that removes the phrases &#x27;the Colony&#x27; and &#x27;UK possession&#x27; from Gibraltar&#x27;s laws.
* 2007 11 October The Gibraltar Social Democrats were returned to Government for a fourth term after a General Election.
* 2008 18 June – In the annual UN Special Committee on Decolonization meeting on the Gibraltar question, Peter Caruana, Chief Minister of Gibraltar stated that he would not attend future meetings as the Gibraltar Government is of the opinion that &quot;there is no longer any need for us to look to the Committee to help us bring about our decolonization&quot;. The Committee agreed that the Question of Gibraltar would be discussed again next year.
* 2008 22 September – It was announced that the remaining Iberia flights to Madrid would cease operation at the end of September 2008 due to &quot;economic reasons&quot;, namely, lack of demand.
* 2008 10 October – The bulk carrier MV Fedra ran aground on rocks at Europa Point, and broke in two. The crew were safely rescued, but some of the fuel oil escaped in the very bad weather. The Captain was later arrested.
* 2009 – in May there were a number of Spanish incursions into British Waters around Gibraltar leading to intervention by the police and a diplomatic protest by the UK.
* 2009 – 7 December four armed Civil Guard officers are detained after three landed in Gibraltar in pursuit of two suspected smugglers, who were themselves arrested. The Spanish Interior Minister Alfredo Pérez Rubalcaba personally telephoned Chief Minister Peter Caruana to apologize, stating that there were &quot;no political intentions&quot; behind the incident. The Chief Minister was prepared to accept it had not been a political act. Spanish officers were released by the Police the following day, who said that &quot;Enquiries established that the Guardia Civil mistakenly entered Gibraltar Territorial Waters in hot pursuit and have since apologised for their actions&quot;
* 2009 12 December Miss Gibraltar Kaiane Aldorino wins the title Miss World in Johannesburg. Her homecoming five days later is a major public event in Gibraltar.
* 2009 17 December A ferry service restarts between Gibraltar and Algeciras after a gap of 40 years.
* 2010 In order to overcome budget problems which follow the departure and arrest of the previous mayor, the mayor of La Linea de la Conception proposes to charge a toll for entry to Gibraltar and to tax telephone lines to Gibraltar. The proposals are opposed by the Spanish Government and the Gibraltar government has dismissed concerns.
* 2011 GSLP / Liberal Alliance returned to power in the 2011 General Election, bringing to an end 15 years of GSD Government. Fabian Picardo becomes Chief Minister.
* 2016 About 80 of the Gibraltar electorate favour remaining in EU
* 2020 British exit from the EU renders Gibraltar foreign territory, but Spain retains the &#x27;status quo&#x27;, pending further negotiations, A preliminary agreement avoids a hard border between Gibraltar and Spain 

==See also==
* History of Spain
* History of the United Kingdom

==Notes==
==Bibliography==
* 
* Chapter 2, &quot;La lucha por Gibraltar&quot; (The Struggle for Gibraltar) is available (PDF)

==External links==
* 
* . An online anthology of historical texts dealing with Gibraltar from 1720 to 1890.
* A history of the political evolution of Gibraltar from the 19th century to 2000.
* . An essay by Dr. M. G. Sanchez
* euroweeklynews.com – English Language Newspaper in Spain</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q635162" start="28" end="35" title="Hominidae" label="hominid"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="78" end="89" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q170081" start="199" end="213" title="Neanderthal, Germany" label="Neander Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267238" start="277" end="295" title="Devil&amp;#x27;s Tower Cave" label="Devil&amp;#x27;s Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q259118" start="298" end="308" title="Mousterian" label="Mousterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355749" start="327" end="345" title="Gorham&amp;#x27;s Cave" label="Gorham&amp;#x27;s Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="389" end="395" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323008" start="690" end="705" title="Clive Finlayson" label="Clive Finlayson"/>
<link wikidata="Q130775" start="713" end="729" title="Gibraltar Museum" label="Gibraltar Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211051" start="978" end="1003" title="Neanderthals of Gibraltar" label="Neanderthals of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q179234" start="1199" end="1218" title="Cro-Magnon" label="early modern humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="1256" end="1267" title="Phoenicians" label="Phoenicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="1344" end="1357" title="Carthage" label="Carthaginians"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="1454" end="1459" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q152854" start="1496" end="1515" title="Pillars of Hercules" label="Pillars of Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026739" start="1527" end="1537" title="Jebel Musa, Morocco" label="Jebel Musa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130287" start="1541" end="1552" title="Monte Hacho" label="Monte Hacho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1591" end="1597" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="1688" end="1720" title="fall of the Western Roman Empire" label="fall of the Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="1751" end="1758" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="1773" end="1778" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="1854" end="1862" title="Visigoth" label="Visigoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="1880" end="1897" title="Iberian peninsula" label="Iberian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="1995" end="2011" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q126936" start="2078" end="2096" title="Visigothic Kingdom" label="Visigothic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="2137" end="2144" title="Umayyad" label="Umayyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q230497" start="2153" end="2168" title="Tariq ibn Ziyad" label="Tariq ibn Ziyad"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="2180" end="2186" title="Berber people" label="Berber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5823" start="2233" end="2238" title="Ceuta" label="Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="2355" end="2362" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="2586" end="2593" title="Moorish" label="Moorish"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="2607" end="2618" title="Reconquista" label="Reconquista"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="2634" end="2641" title="Almohad" label="Almohad"/>
<link wikidata="Q307312" start="2649" end="2667" title="Abd al-Mu&amp;#x27;min" label="Abd al-Mu&amp;#x27;min"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="2717" end="2723" title="castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5402282" start="2765" end="2780" title="Moorish Gibraltar" label="Medinat al-Fath"/>
<link wikidata="Q249047" start="2999" end="3013" title="Moorish Castle" label="Moorish Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q562333" start="3090" end="3097" title="Ibn Hud" label="Ibn Hud"/>
<link wikidata="Q217177" start="3099" end="3104" title="Taifa" label="Taifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q562333" start="3153" end="3160" title="Ibn Hud" label="Ibn Hud"/>
<link wikidata="Q510879" start="3226" end="3247" title="Muhammad I of Granada" label="Muhammad ibn al-Ahmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q847837" start="3268" end="3274" title="Nasrid dynasty" label="Nasrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="3275" end="3293" title="Emirate of Granada" label="Emirate of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q972278" start="3328" end="3348" title="Muhammed II al-Faqih" label="Muhammed II al-Faqih"/>
<link wikidata="Q582861" start="3377" end="3384" title="Marinid" label="Marinid"/>
<link wikidata="Q316859" start="3469" end="3492" title="Ferdinand IV of Castile" label="Ferdinand IV of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118163" start="3498" end="3516" title="Siege of Algeciras (1309)" label="siege to Algeciras"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734497" start="3518" end="3540" title="Alonso Pérez de Guzmán" label="Alonso Pérez de Guzmán"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839917" start="4264" end="4268" title="qaid" label="caid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443529" start="4290" end="4315" title="Second Siege of Gibraltar" label="Second Siege of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q582861" start="4369" end="4376" title="Marinid" label="Marinid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664566" start="4390" end="4402" title="Abd al-Malik Abd al-Wahid" label="Abd al-Malik"/>
<link wikidata="Q335620" start="4415" end="4426" title="Abu Al-Hasan Ali ibn Othman" label="Abul Hassan"/>
<link wikidata="Q298808" start="4528" end="4549" title="Alfonso XI of Castile" label="Alfonso XI of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842877" start="4624" end="4644" title="Alonso Jofre Tenorio" label="Alonso Jofre Tenorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066445" start="4906" end="4936" title="Siege of Algeciras (1342-1344)" label="Siege of Algeciras (1342-1344)"/>
<link wikidata="Q484552" start="4938" end="4947" title="Algeciras" label="Algeciras"/>
<link wikidata="Q298808" start="5239" end="5249" title="Alfonso XI of Castile" label="Alfonso XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="5357" end="5368" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205962" start="5478" end="5498" title="Castilian Civil War" label="Civil War in Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q310963" start="5530" end="5537" title="Peter I of Castile" label="Peter I"/>
<link wikidata="Q262363" start="5577" end="5585" title="Henry II of Castile" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q847837" start="5592" end="5598" title="Nasrid dynasty" label="Nasrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="5607" end="5614" title="Emirate of Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267953" start="5616" end="5626" title="Muhammad V of Granada" label="Muhammad V"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019522" start="5686" end="5711" title="Siege of Algeciras (1369)" label="Siege of Algeciras (1369)"/>
<link wikidata="Q310963" start="6097" end="6104" title="Peter of Castile" label="Peter 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267953" start="6179" end="6189" title="Muhammed V of Granada" label="Muhammad V"/>
<link wikidata="Q847837" start="6195" end="6201" title="Nasrid" label="Nasrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8810" start="6210" end="6217" title="Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019522" start="6255" end="6273" title="Siege of Algeciras (1369)" label="Siege of Algeciras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="6327" end="6343" title="Sultanate of Fez" label="Sultanate of Fez"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6345" end="6370" title="Abu al-Abbas Ahmad of Fez" label="Abu al-Abbas Ahmad of Fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267953" start="6379" end="6400" title="Muhammad V of Granada" label="Muhammad V of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q847837" start="6543" end="6550" title="Nasrid dynasty" label="Nasrids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="6967" end="6978" title="kingdom of Fez" label="king of Fez"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6980" end="6984" title="Fayd of Fez" label="Fayd"/>
<link wikidata="Q484799" start="7125" end="7133" title="Marbella" label="Marbella"/>
<link wikidata="Q492748" start="7138" end="7146" title="Estepona" label="Estepona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029043" start="7352" end="7369" title="Enrique Pérez de Guzmán, 2nd Count of Niebla" label="Enrique de Guzmán"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="7437" end="7446" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="7721" end="7732" title="Reconquista" label="Reconquista"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341759" start="7778" end="7801" title="House of Medina Sidonia" label="House of Medina Sidonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q112122143" start="7960" end="7982" title="Duke of Medina Sidonia" label="Duke of Medina Sidonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q310918" start="8081" end="8089" title="Henry IV of Castile" label="Henry IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q484552" start="8310" end="8319" title="Algeciras" label="Algeciras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509716" start="8385" end="8402" title="collegiate church" label="collegiate church"/>
<link wikidata="Q101437" start="8431" end="8438" title="Pius II" label="Pius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q651123" start="8510" end="8543" title="Cathedral of St. Mary the Crowned" label="Cathedral of St. Mary the Crowned"/>
<link wikidata="Q188411" start="8589" end="8613" title="Bernard of Clairvaux" label="St. Bernard of Clairvaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q28914" start="8658" end="8670" title="patron saint" label="patron saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q559279" start="8932" end="8950" title="Alfonso of Castile, Prince of Asturias" label="Alfonso of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757986" start="9197" end="9214" title="Enrique de Guzman, 2nd Duke of Medina Sidonia" label="Enrique de Guzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q45859" start="9359" end="9380" title="Isabella I of Castile" label="Isabella I of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q186851" start="9535" end="9552" title="Catholic Monarchs" label="Catholic Monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q10750609" start="9574" end="9594" title="Marquis of Gibraltar" label="Marquis of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q45859" start="9646" end="9673" title="Isabella I of Castile" label="Queen Isabella I of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="9683" end="9705" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="Ferdinand II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8810" start="9836" end="9843" title="Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061030" start="9876" end="9891" title="Alhambra Decree" label="Alhambra Decree"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9905" end="9937" title="History of the Jews in Spain#Edict of Expulsion" label="expulsion of the Jews from Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083760" start="10114" end="10170" title="Juan Alonso Pérez de Guzmán, 3rd Duke of Medina Sidonia" label="Juan Alfonso Perez de Guzman, 3rd Duke of Medina Sidonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5831" start="10308" end="10315" title="Melilla" label="Melilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477326" start="10744" end="10757" title="Warrant (law)" label="Royal Warrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5836" start="10768" end="10774" title="Toledo, Spain" label="Toledo"/>
<link wikidata="Q45859" start="10778" end="10799" title="Isabella I of Castile" label="Isabella I of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q475471" start="10827" end="10839" title="Coat of arms of Gibraltar" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q157098" start="11332" end="11351" title="Philip I of Castile" label="Philip I of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="11706" end="11715" title="Charles I of Spain" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q899359" start="11738" end="11746" title="Barbary pirate" label="Corsairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q501768" start="11756" end="11769" title="Barbary Coast" label="Barbary Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q200582" start="11780" end="11790" title="Hayreddin Barbarossa" label="Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q188924" start="11823" end="11829" title="galley" label="galley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107055" start="12011" end="12034" title="Giovanni Battista Calvi" label="Giovanni Battista Calvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q130182" start="12111" end="12125" title="Charles V Wall" label="Charles V Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6300483" start="12240" end="12251" title="Juan Mateos" label="Juan Mateos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="12317" end="12326" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q36207" start="12334" end="12348" title="St Bernard&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="first hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q208176" start="12463" end="12470" title="Morisco" label="Morisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q34464" start="12558" end="12568" title="Philip III of Spain" label="Philip III"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="12670" end="12692" title="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="12705" end="12721" title="Dutch Republic" label="United Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142350" start="12813" end="12829" title="Bay of Gibraltar" label="Bay of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q667179" start="12831" end="12850" title="Battle of Gibraltar (1607)" label="Battle of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q159766" start="12929" end="12932" title="Dutch East India Company" label="VOC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890865" start="12962" end="12988" title="Battle of Gibraltar (1621)" label="Battle of Gibraltar (1621)"/>
<link wikidata="Q335182" start="13052" end="13078" title="Edward Montagu, 1st Earl of Sandwich" label="Councillor General Montagu"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="13175" end="13183" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q170467" start="13644" end="13661" title="Philip V of Spain" label="Philip of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q150665" start="13748" end="13764" title="Charles VI, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Archduke Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="13783" end="13800" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="13906" end="13917" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="13922" end="13929" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q638845" start="13941" end="13960" title="Treaty of The Hague (1701)" label="Treaty of The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q622783" start="14090" end="14109" title="Spanish Netherlands" label="Spanish Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="14217" end="14225" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="14314" end="14343" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="14432" end="14438" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="14633" end="14648" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="14832" end="14834" title="New Style" label="NS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="14846" end="14848" title="Old Style" label="OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="14864" end="14893" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q128983" start="15000" end="15012" title="George Rooke" label="George Rooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="15176" end="15184" title="Habsburg" label="Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q150665" start="15222" end="15238" title="Charles VI, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Archduke Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323266" start="15267" end="15283" title="Diego de Salinas" label="Diego de Salinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311437" start="15325" end="15344" title="Netherlands Marine Corps" label="Dutch Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="15349" end="15370" title="Royal Marines" label="British Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q689289" start="15379" end="15411" title="George of Hesse-Darmstadt" label="Prince George of Hesse-Darmstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="15535" end="15544" title="Spaniards" label="Spaniards"/>
<link wikidata="Q244504" start="15556" end="15564" title="Catalans" label="Catalans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323266" start="15709" end="15725" title="Diego de Salinas" label="Diego de Salinas"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15726" end="15737" title=":s:Terms of surrender of the Spanish authorities of Gibraltar in 1704" label="surrendered"/>
<link wikidata="Q128983" start="16162" end="16174" title="George Rooke" label="George Rooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="16305" end="16333" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Anne, Queen of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090591" start="16596" end="16607" title="Joe Bossano" label="Joe Bossano"/>
<link wikidata="Q170467" start="18491" end="18508" title="Philip V of Spain" label="Philip V of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q128983" start="18539" end="18555" title="George Rooke" label="Sir George Rooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q651123" start="18963" end="18972" title="Cathedral of St. Mary the Crowned" label="Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209319" start="19061" end="19079" title="Our Lady of Europe" label="Our Lady of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q484552" start="19728" end="19737" title="Algeciras" label="Algeciras"/>
<link wikidata="Q846153" start="19759" end="19768" title="San Roque, Cádiz" label="San Roque"/>
<link wikidata="Q427982" start="20323" end="20327" title="Siege of Gibraltar (1727)" label="1727"/>
<link wikidata="Q815145" start="20348" end="20352" title="Great Siege of Gibraltar" label="1779"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="20374" end="20400" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="20408" end="20416" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20428" end="20432" title="Pacte de Famille#Later Franco-Spanish Pacts" label="ally"/>
<link wikidata="Q69461" start="20436" end="20442" title="Early Modern France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061526" start="20770" end="20782" title="City Council of Gibraltar" label="city council"/>
<link wikidata="Q186851" start="21086" end="21103" title="Catholic Monarchs" label="Catholic Monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="21175" end="21197" title="Mary, mother of Jesus" label="Saint Mary the Crowned"/>
<link wikidata="Q152457" start="21265" end="21274" title="Saint Roch" label="San Roque"/>
<link wikidata="Q846153" start="21456" end="21465" title="San Roque, Cádiz" label="San Roque"/>
<link wikidata="Q925913" start="21803" end="21814" title="Los Barrios" label="Los Barrios"/>
<link wikidata="Q484552" start="21875" end="21884" title="Algeciras" label="Algeciras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="22000" end="22007" title="Genoa" label="Genoese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8851" start="22225" end="22231" title="Málaga" label="Málaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q694502" start="22233" end="22255" title="Battle of Vélez-Málaga" label="Battle of Vélez-Málaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111140" start="22518" end="22540" title="Francisco Castillo Fajardo, marquis of Villadarias" label="marquis of Villadarias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381694" start="22758" end="22768" title="John Leake" label="John Leake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046947" start="22915" end="22928" title="Royal Marines" label="Royal Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q313303" start="23054" end="23063" title="grenadier (soldier)" label="grenadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5575361" start="23168" end="23176" title="goatherd" label="goatherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521458" start="23193" end="23206" title="Simón Susarte" label="Simón Susarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q474485" start="23575" end="23592" title="Marshal of France" label="Marshal of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q719590" start="23593" end="23601" title="René de Froulay, Count de Tessé" label="de Tessé"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="24407" end="24422" title="Crown of Aragon" label="Crown of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="24524" end="24533" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6257763" start="24562" end="24576" title="John Shrimpton" label="John Shrimpton"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="24658" end="24668" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358152" start="24984" end="24997" title="Roger Elliott (governor)" label="Roger Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q327543" start="25024" end="25056" title="The Convent (Gibraltar)" label="Convent of the Franciscan friars"/>
<link wikidata="Q499956" start="25116" end="25122" title="Tories (British political party)" label="Tories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794171" start="25173" end="25187" title="Thomas Stanwix" label="Thomas Stanwix"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="25568" end="25581" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="" start="25611" end="25620" title=":s:Peace and Friendship Treaty of Utrecht between Spain and Great Britain#ARTICLE X" label="article X"/>
<link wikidata="Q154674" start="25628" end="25647" title="Treaty of Utrecht (1713)" label="Treaties of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q130805" start="27213" end="27221" title="George I of Great Britain" label="George I"/>
<link wikidata="Q427982" start="27520" end="27549" title="Siege of Gibraltar (1727)" label="Second of the sieges by Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q604204" start="27910" end="27940" title="Anglo-Spanish War (1727)" label="Anglo-Spanish War of 1727–1729"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195251" start="27946" end="27963" title="Treaty of Seville" label="Treaty of Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q52636" start="28061" end="28068" title="Menorca" label="Menorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081538" start="28117" end="28135" title="Jorge Próspero de Verboom" label="Marquis of Verboom"/>
<link wikidata="Q13148" start="28553" end="28578" title="La Línea de la Concepción" label="La Línea de la Concepción"/>
<link wikidata="Q5941303" start="28613" end="28627" title="Humphrey Bland" label="Humphrey Bland"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="29251" end="29277" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q815145" start="29384" end="29408" title="Great Siege of Gibraltar" label="Great Siege of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101410" start="29592" end="29655" title="George Augustus Eliott, 1st Baron Heathfield" label="George Augustus Eliott, later 1st Baron Heathfield of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11860464" start="29848" end="29867" title="Great Siege Tunnels" label="Great Siege Tunnels"/>
<link wikidata="Q82337" start="30120" end="30138" title="Portland limestone" label="Portland limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010150" start="30342" end="30355" title="William Green (general)" label="William Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101410" start="30470" end="30492" title="George Augustus Eliott, 1st Baron Heathfield" label="George Augustus Elliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="31000" end="31018" title="Knight of the Bath" label="Knight of the Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q217450" start="31074" end="31096" title="Treaty of Paris (1783)" label="Treaties of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q52636" start="31109" end="31116" title="Menorca" label="Menorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q740724" start="31313" end="31328" title="Treaty of Paris (1814)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q83235" start="31741" end="31755" title="Horatio Nelson" label="Admiral Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q160649" start="31971" end="31977" title="typhus" label="typhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q171416" start="32129" end="32148" title="Battle of Trafalgar" label="Battle of Trafalgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009226" start="32235" end="32253" title="Trafalgar Cemetery" label="Trafalgar Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q620225" start="32326" end="32345" title="Apostolic Vicariate" label="Apostolic Vicariate"/>
<link wikidata="Q866196" start="32384" end="32387" title="Episcopal see" label="See"/>
<link wikidata="Q15682" start="32391" end="32396" title="Cadiz" label="Cadiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361663" start="32440" end="32459" title="Roman Catholic Bishop of Gibraltar" label="Bishop of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32732" end="32769" title="Colin Campbell (Gibraltar Governor)" label="Lieutenant General Sir Colin Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q420319" start="33319" end="33335" title="Francisco Javier Castaños, 1st Duke of Bailén" label="General Castaños"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="33630" end="33644" title="Peninsular War" label="Peninsular War"/>
<link wikidata="Q222702" start="33749" end="33755" title="Tarifa" label="Tarifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="34592" end="34604" title="Crown Colony" label="Crown Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406050" start="34764" end="34786" title="Royal Gibraltar Police" label="Gibraltar Police Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q93896" start="34818" end="34844" title="Cathedral of the Holy Trinity, Gibraltar" label="Church of the Holy Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="34869" end="34877" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q93896" start="34980" end="35009" title="Cathedral of the Holy Trinity, Gibraltar" label="Cathedral of the Holy Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="35035" end="35052" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563892" start="35053" end="35073" title="Diocese of Gibraltar in Europe" label="Diocese of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511010" start="35089" end="35103" title="Letters Patent" label="Letters Patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508362" start="35208" end="35224" title="George Tomlinson (bishop)" label="George Tomlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917759" start="35251" end="35270" title="Bishop in Europe" label="Bishop of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q93896" start="35276" end="35313" title="Cathedral of the Holy Trinity, Gibraltar" label="Church of the Holy Trinity, Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q951830" start="35419" end="35429" title="Royal Mint" label="Royal Mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="35498" end="35508" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5631346" start="35914" end="35935" title="HMS Anson (1886)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Anson&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142350" start="35952" end="35968" title="Bay of Gibraltar" label="Bay of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="36555" end="36560" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="36615" end="36629" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q218819" start="36703" end="36716" title="customs union" label="customs union"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061526" start="36817" end="36829" title="City Council of Gibraltar" label="City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="37058" end="37064" title="Francisco Franco" label="Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="37072" end="37078" title="Spanish State" label="regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="37088" end="37097" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="37128" end="37138" title="Second Spanish Republic" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="37208" end="37225" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555665" start="37265" end="37289" title="HMS Arethusa (26)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Arethusa&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564846" start="37301" end="37323" title="HMS Hunter (H35)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Hunter&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q10400" start="37374" end="37381" title="Almeria" label="Almeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="37414" end="37429" title="Royal Navy" label="British sailors"/>
<link wikidata="Q158427" start="37449" end="37497" title="German pocket battleship Deutschland" label="German pocket battleship &amp;quot;Deutschland&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q52631" start="37578" end="37583" title="Ibiza" label="Ibiza"/>
<link wikidata="Q153324" start="37607" end="37620" title="Condor Legion" label="Condor Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q189848" start="37639" end="37647" title="Guernica" label="Guernica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3726514" start="37696" end="37710" title="Spanish destroyer José Luis Díez" label="Jose Luis Diez"/>
<link wikidata="Q285828" start="37873" end="37886" title="Gibraltarian people" label="Gibraltarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519345" start="37950" end="37966" title="Archimede class submarine" label="General Sanjurjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q162615" start="38072" end="38081" title="Cartagena, Spain" label="Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="38446" end="38455" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q907234" start="38647" end="38661" title="French Morocco" label="French Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q170360" start="38682" end="38705" title="Second Armistice at Compiègne" label="French-German Armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q503347" start="38725" end="38782" title="Destruction of the French Fleet at Mers-el-Kebir" label="destruction of the French fleet at Mers-el-Kebir, Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="38946" end="38953" title="Madeira" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="38957" end="38964" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="38999" end="39005" title="Tanger" label="Tanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="39037" end="39050" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="39079" end="39096" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048848" start="39161" end="39176" title="non-belligerent" label="non-belligerent"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="39233" end="39238" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q936629" start="39285" end="39292" title="Force H" label="Force H"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777138" start="39319" end="39329" title="racecourse" label="racecourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q695850" start="39367" end="39374" title="airbase" label="airbase"/>
<link wikidata="Q503347" start="39724" end="39781" title="Destruction of the French Fleet at Mers-el-Kebir" label="destruction of the French fleet at Mers-el-Kebir, Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="40138" end="40147" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="40255" end="40261" title="Francisco Franco" label="Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="40351" end="40357" title="Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638425" start="40478" end="40502" title="Decima Flottiglia MAS" label="Italian commando frogmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q484552" start="40518" end="40527" title="Algeciras" label="Algeciras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635043" start="40586" end="40598" title="Lionel Crabb" label="Lionel Crabb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711111" start="40733" end="40745" title="Albert Risso" label="Albert Risso"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809542" start="40838" end="40885" title="Association for the Advancement of Civil Rights" label="Association for the Advancement of Civil Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708538" start="40974" end="40987" title="Joshua Hassan" label="Joshua Hassan"/>
<link wikidata="Q194132" start="41204" end="41219" title="Operation Torch" label="Operation Torch"/>
<link wikidata="Q900119" start="41433" end="41463" title="non-self-governing territories" label="non-self-governing territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q128735" start="41916" end="41937" title="Explosion of the RFA Bedenham" label="RFA Bedenham explodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="42130" end="42148" title="Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="42182" end="42196" title="Francisco Franco" label="General Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q169896" start="42214" end="42219" title="Disputed status of Gibraltar" label="claim"/>
<link wikidata="Q526594" start="42751" end="42772" title="territorial integrity" label="territorial integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="42778" end="42796" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="43003" end="43022" title="UN General Assembly" label="UN General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="" start="43044" end="43054" title=":s:UN General Assembly Resolution 2231" label="2231 (XXI)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="43094" end="43105" title=":s:UN General Assembly Resolution 2353" label="2353 (XXII)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069503" start="43329" end="43347" title="Fernando Castiella" label="Fernando Castiella"/>
<link wikidata="Q170108" start="43632" end="43660" title="1967 Gibraltar sovereignty referendum" label="first sovereignty referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302549" start="44027" end="44032" title="doves (Gibraltar)" label="doves"/>
<link wikidata="Q169908" start="44653" end="44686" title="Gibraltar Constitution Order 1969" label="Gibraltar Constitution Order 1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q417633" start="44732" end="44747" title="self-governance" label="self-government"/>
<link wikidata="Q128852" start="44765" end="44782" title="Gibraltar Parliament" label="House of Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061526" start="44788" end="44800" title="City Council of Gibraltar" label="City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="45427" end="45434" title="Tangier" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q484552" start="45483" end="45492" title="Algeciras" label="Algeciras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336213" start="45668" end="45700" title="Robert Peliza" label="Robert (later Sir Robert) Peliza"/>
<link wikidata="Q15982329" start="45708" end="45738" title="Integration with Britain Party" label="Integration with Britain Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174840" start="45819" end="45830" title="Peter Isola" label="Peter Isola"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="45878" end="45883" title="Edward Heath" label="Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809542" start="46114" end="46161" title="Association for the Advancement of Civil Rights" label="Association for the Advancement of Civil Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091316" start="46330" end="46334" title="TGWU" label="TGWU"/>
<link wikidata="Q49775" start="46348" end="46362" title="General Strike" label="General Strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="46804" end="46831" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q358834" start="46883" end="46897" title="Foreign Office" label="Foreign Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q333692" start="46907" end="46921" title="Roy Hattersley" label="Roy Hattersley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5681995" start="47205" end="47226" title="Hattersley Memorandum" label="Hattersley Memorandum"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="47438" end="47454" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q335038" start="47579" end="47594" title="Peter Carington, 6th Baron Carrington" label="Lord Carrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q722282" start="47599" end="47614" title="Marcelino Oreja, 1st Marquis of Oreja" label="Marcelino Oreja"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555664" start="47626" end="47642" title="Lisbon Agreement, 1980" label="Lisbon Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563892" start="47983" end="48013" title="Diocese of Gibraltar in Europe" label="Diocese of Gibraltar in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q93896" start="48019" end="48059" title="Cathedral of the Holy Trinity, Gibraltar" label="Cathedral of the Holy Trinity, Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925745" start="48117" end="48145" title="British Nationality Act 1981" label="British Nationality Act 1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868270" start="48368" end="48403" title="History of nationality in Gibraltar" label="History of nationality in Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="48555" end="48564" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q9648" start="48574" end="48590" title="Falkland Islands" label="Falkland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="49018" end="49036" title="European Community" label="European Community"/>
<link wikidata="" start="49068" end="49086" title=":s:Brussels Agreement" label="Brussels Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="" start="49357" end="49365" title=":s:Gibraltar Airport Agreement" label="proposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q501083" start="49387" end="49404" title="Gibraltar Airport" label="Gibraltar Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q327543" start="49495" end="49506" title="The Convent (Gibraltar)" label="The Convent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824721" start="49594" end="49607" title="Adolfo Canepa" label="Adolfo Canepa"/>
<link wikidata="Q53025" start="49618" end="49650" title="Gibraltar Socialist Labour Party" label="Gibraltar Socialist Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090591" start="49665" end="49676" title="Joe Bossano" label="Joe Bossano"/>
<link wikidata="Q222883" start="49825" end="49844" title="Special Air Service" label="Special Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="49852" end="49864" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="49904" end="49919" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="Provisional IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145378" start="50010" end="50027" title="Operation Flavius" label="Operation Flavius"/>
<link wikidata="Q62627" start="50109" end="50115" title="Semtex" label="Semtex"/>
<link wikidata="Q357983" start="50178" end="50199" title="Guard Mounting" label="Changing of the Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="50241" end="50253" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197174" start="50326" end="50350" title="Royal Gibraltar Regiment" label="Royal Gibraltar Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="50365" end="50380" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="50385" end="50395" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q138198" start="50565" end="50602" title="Spanish Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Spanish Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q156799" start="50624" end="50639" title="Felipe González" label="Felipe González"/>
<link wikidata="Q129947409" start="50743" end="50756" title="Peter Cumming" label="Peter Cumming"/>
<link wikidata="Q136754" start="50774" end="50800" title="Gibraltar Social-Democrats" label="Gibraltar Social-Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q734818" start="50856" end="50867" title="condominium (international law)" label="condominium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090591" start="51197" end="51208" title="Joe Bossano" label="Joe Bossano"/>
<link wikidata="Q249192" start="51225" end="51238" title="Peter Caruana" label="Peter Caruana"/>
<link wikidata="Q185088" start="51346" end="51361" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (Spain)" label="Partido Popular"/>
<link wikidata="Q318474" start="51388" end="51400" title="Abel Matutes" label="Abel Matutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10742" start="51538" end="51555" title="Autonomous communities of Spain" label="autonomous region"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="51568" end="51577" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995" start="51585" end="51599" title="Basque Country (autonomous community)" label="Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q128986" start="51824" end="51847" title="Government of Gibraltar" label="Government of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q169857" start="51918" end="51941" title="Court system of Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar&amp;#x27;s courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406050" start="51943" end="51949" title="Royal Gibraltar Police" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q205647" start="51978" end="51993" title="driving licence" label="driving licence"/>
<link wikidata="Q47988" start="52000" end="52013" title="identity card" label="identity card"/>
<link wikidata="Q358834" start="52041" end="52072" title="Foreign and Commonwealth Office" label="Foreign and Commonwealth Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327349" start="52439" end="52457" title="HMS Tireless (S88)" label="HMS Tireless (S88)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="52462" end="52483" title="Disputed status of Gibraltar#Recent disputes" label="repaired in Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="52903" end="52920" title="Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q311278" start="52922" end="52932" title="Jack Straw" label="Jack Straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="52963" end="52979" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="53415" end="53429" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q170110" start="53578" end="53624" title="2002 Gibraltar sovereignty referendum" label="Gibraltar&amp;#x27;s second sovereignty referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q750345" start="54036" end="54050" title="Gerald Kaufman" label="Gerald Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q610845" start="54136" end="54173" title="British Overseas Territories Act 2002" label="British Overseas Territories Act 2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="54242" end="54270" title="British Overseas Territories" label="British Overseas Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q99864" start="54788" end="54807" title="Freedom of the City" label="Freedom of the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="54815" end="54825" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54874" end="54918" title="Comisión mixta de Cooperación y Colaboración" label="Comisión mixta de Cooperación y Colaboración"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54960" end="55023" title="Mancomunidad de Municipios de la Comarca del Campo de Gibraltar" label="Mancomunidad de Municipios de la Comarca del Campo de Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q159457" start="55421" end="55435" title="Faro, Portugal" label="Faro, Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170026" start="55503" end="55520" title="Cordoba Agreement, 2006" label="Córdoba agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q585760" start="55573" end="55600" title="Chief Minister of Gibraltar" label="Chief Minister of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55612" end="55628" title="Palacio de Viana" label="Palacio de Viana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="55630" end="55637" title="Córdoba, Spain" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q34768" start="55715" end="55742" title="international dialing code" label="international dialling code"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="56366" end="56382" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q165715" start="56412" end="56431" title="Instituto Cervantes" label="Instituto Cervantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559140" start="56558" end="56574" title="Gibraltar Constitution Order 2006" label="new constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="56638" end="56648" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q333702" start="56747" end="56757" title="Jim Murphy" label="Jim Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q187972" start="57043" end="57049" title="Iberia Airlines" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695833" start="57245" end="57270" title="Gibraltar telecom dispute" label="Spain lifted restrictions"/>
<link wikidata="Q128852" start="57774" end="57794" title="Gibraltar Parliament" label="Gibraltar Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q136754" start="57959" end="57985" title="Gibraltar Social Democrats" label="Gibraltar Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578352" start="58040" end="58056" title="2007 Gibraltar general election" label="General Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q249192" start="58163" end="58176" title="Peter Caruana" label="Peter Caruana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6719539" start="58740" end="58748" title="MV Fedra" label="MV Fedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q658246" start="58773" end="58785" title="Europa Point" label="Europa Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q214199" start="58851" end="58859" title="fuel oil" label="fuel oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q932821" start="59125" end="59136" title="Civil Guard (Spain)" label="Civil Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q333638" start="59290" end="59313" title="Alfredo Pérez Rubalcaba" label="Alfredo Pérez Rubalcaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q249192" start="59351" end="59364" title="Peter Caruana" label="Peter Caruana"/>
<link wikidata="Q238155" start="59811" end="59826" title="Kaiane Aldorino" label="Kaiane Aldorino"/>
<link wikidata="Q173402" start="59842" end="59852" title="Miss World" label="Miss World"/>
<link wikidata="Q34647" start="59856" end="59868" title="Johannesburg" label="Johannesburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q484552" start="60005" end="60014" title="Algeciras" label="Algeciras"/>
<link wikidata="Q53025" start="60386" end="60390" title="Gibraltar Socialist Labour Party" label="GSLP"/>
<link wikidata="Q152744" start="60393" end="60400" title="Liberal Party of Gibraltar" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752319" start="60435" end="60456" title="2011 Gibraltar general election" label="2011 General Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q136754" start="60489" end="60492" title="Gibraltar Social Democrats" label="GSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356379" start="60505" end="60519" title="Fabian Picardo" label="Fabian Picardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q585760" start="60528" end="60542" title="Chief Minister of Gibraltar" label="Chief Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q24083761" start="60551" end="60610" title="European Union (Referendum) Act 2016 (Gibraltar)" label="About 80 of the Gibraltar electorate favour remaining in EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781" start="60846" end="60862" title="History of Spain" label="History of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q113162" start="60865" end="60894" title="History of the United Kingdom" label="History of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q20977983" start="61250" end="61268" title="euroweeklynews.com" label="euroweeklynews.com"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12080" wikidata="Q3043938" url="?curid=12080" title="Demographics of Gibraltar">
<text>Demographic features of the population of Gibraltar include ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects.

==Ethnic origins==
One of the main features of Gibraltar&#x27;s population is the diversity of their ethnic origins. The demographics of Gibraltar reflects Gibraltarians&#x27; racial and cultural fusion of the many European and non-European immigrants who came to the Rock over three hundred years. They are the descendants of economic migrants that came to Gibraltar after the majority of the Spanish population left in 1704.

===Spanish===
The majority of the Spanish population in Gibraltar (about 5000), with few exceptions, left Gibraltar when the Dutch and English took the city in 1704. The few Spaniards who remained in Gibraltar in August 1704 were augmented by others who arrived in the fleet with Prince George of Hesse-Darmstadt, possibly some two hundred in all, mostly Catalans.

Menorcans began migrating to Gibraltar at the beginning of the common British rule in 1713, thanks to the links between both British possessions during the 18th century. Initially, Menorcans came to Gibraltar looking for work in several trades, especially when Gibraltar was rebuilt after the 1783 Grand Siege. Immigration continued even after Menorca (the original English name was &quot;Minorca&quot;) was returned to Spain in 1802 by the Treaty of Amiens.

Immigration from Spain (like the exiles from the Spanish Civil War) and intermarriage with Spaniards from the surrounding Spanish towns was a constant feature of Gibraltar&#x27;s history until the then Spanish dictator, General Francisco Franco, closed the border with Gibraltar in 1969, cutting off many Gibraltarians from their relatives on the Spanish side of the frontier.

Together, Gibraltarians of Spanish origin are one of the bigger groups (more than 24% according to last names, even more taking into account the fact that many Spanish women married native Gibraltarians).

===British===
Britons have come and settled or gone since the first days of the conquest. One group of Britons have had temporary residence in Gibraltar (to work in the administration and the garrison). This group, who represented a larger proportion in the beginning of the British period, are nowadays only about 3% of the total population (around 1,000 persons).

A larger group is formed by the Britons who moved to Gibraltar and settled down. Some of them, since the beginning, moved to Gibraltar to earn a living as traders and workers. Others moved to Gibraltar on a temporary assignment and then married local women. Major construction projects, such as the dockyard in the late 1890s and early 20th century brought large numbers of workers from Great Britain.

13% of Gibraltarian residents are from the United Kingdom and the electoral roll shows that 27% of Gibraltar&#x27;s population has British surnames.

===Genoese and other Italians===
Genoese came during the 18th and 19th centuries, especially from the poorer parts of Liguria, some of them annually following fishing shoals, as repairmen for the British navy, or as successful traders and merchants; many others came during the Napoleonic period to avoid obligatory conscription to the French Army. Genoese formed the larger group of the new population in the 18th century and middle 19th century. Other Italians came from islands like Sardinia and Sicily. Nowadays, people with Genoese/Italian last names represent about 20% of the population.

===Portuguese===
Portuguese were one of the earliest groups to move to Gibraltar, especially from the Algarve region in the far south of Portugal. Most of them went to work as labourers and some as traders. Their number increased significantly during the 18th century. Interestingly, in 1814 out of 49 lightermen, 43 were from Portugal and they were part of a community comprising around 650 working men aged 17 and above. A notable example of the Portuguese presence in Gibraltair is the existence, in the territory, of an example of calçada portuguesa.

A further increase in the community occurred when many Spaniards left their jobs in Gibraltar after General Franco closed the border in 1969. In the 1970s and 1980s many Portuguese worked in Gibraltar, especially in construction. Even today many Portuguese still live in the territory and many are still working in the construction sector, both working inbuilding sites and importing material from Portugal. As of 2023, for instance, a Portuguese company was in charge of building the tallest building in Gibraltar.

About 10% of last names in Gibraltar have Portuguese origin; the Portuguese are part of a wider Portuguese-speaking community comprising also Luso-Indians and Brazilians. Moreover, today there are around 500 Portuguese who live in La Línea de la Concepción and commute to Gibraltar for work every day. A notable Luso-Gibraltarian is football player Bernardo Lopes.

===Moroccans===
Moroccans have always had a significant presence in Gibraltar. However, the modern community has more recent origins. Moroccans began arriving in Gibraltar soon after the Spanish government imposed the first restrictions on Spanish workers in Gibraltar in 1964. By the end of 1968 there were at least 1,300 Moroccan workers resident in Gibraltar and this more than doubled following the final closure of the frontier with Spain in June 1969.
There is also a significant number of Moroccan Jews in Gibraltar, representing Jews of both Sephardic origin and Arabic speaking Jews of Morocco (although almost no Gibraltarian Jews today speak Arabic as a first language). Most notably the Hassan family which runs Gibraltar&#x27;s largest law firm Hassans International Law Firm and the late Sir Joshua Hassan who served four terms as Chief Minister for a total of 20 years.

===Other groups===
Other groups include:
*Malta was in the same imperial route to the east as Gibraltar. Maltese people came to Gibraltar when jobs were scarce at home, or to escape the law in Malta.
*Jews, most of them of Sephardi origin, were able to re-establish their rites, forbidden in Catholic Spain, right after the British occupation in 1704. Also a significant number of Jews from London settled in Gibraltar, especially since the Great Siege. 
*Indians, came as merchants after the opening of the Suez Canal in 1870; many others migrated as workers after the closure of the frontier with Spain in 1969 to replace Spanish ones.
*French, many of whom came after the French Revolution in 1789, set up trade and commerce.

==National censuses==
== Population overview ==
The population of Gibraltar was 29,752 in 2011.

===Vital statistics===

1

===Structure of the population===

== CIA World Factbook demographic statistics ==

The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.

===Population age===
: &quot;0-14 years:&quot; 19.99% (male 3,034; female 2,888)
: &quot;15-64 years:&quot; 62.62% (male 9,357; female 9,197)
: &quot;65 years and over:&quot; 17.39% (male 2,523; female 2,630) (2023 est.)

===Sex ratio===
: &quot;At birth:&quot; 1.05 males/female
: &quot;0-14 years:&quot; 1.05 males/female
: &quot;15-64 years:&quot; 1.02 males/female
: &quot;65 years and over:&quot; 0.96 males/female
: &quot;total population:&quot; 1.01 males/female (2023 est.)

The median age is: 
: total: 36.6 years
: male: 36 years
: female: 37.2 years (2023 est.)

===Life expectancy at birth===
: &quot;total population:&quot; 80.7 years
: &quot;male:&quot; 77.8 years
: &quot;female:&quot; 83.6 years (2023 est.)

===Fertility===
1.9 children born/woman (2023 est.)

===Infant mortality===
: &quot;total:&quot; 6.9 deaths/1,000 live births
: &quot;male:&quot; 5.3 deaths/1,000 live births 
: &quot;female:&quot; 6.1 deaths/1,000 live births (2023 est.)

===Nationality===
: &quot;noun:&quot; Gibraltarian(s)
: &quot;adjective:&quot; Gibraltar

===Religions===

(2012 census)

===Languages===
English (used in schools and for official purposes), Spanish. Most Gibraltarians converse in &quot;Llanito&quot;, an Andalusian Spanish based vernacular. It consists of an eclectic mix of Andalusian Spanish and British English as well as languages such as Maltese, Portuguese, Italian of the Genoese variety and Haketia. Among more educated Gibraltarians, it also typically involves code-switching to English. Arabic is spoken by the Moroccan community, just like Hindi and Sindhi is spoken by the Indian community of Gibraltar. Maltese is still spoken by some families of Maltese descent.

==Notes==
==References==
*Government of Gibraltar website

==See also==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="42" end="51" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="60" end="69" title="ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="219" end="228" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="273" end="287" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic origins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193559" start="348" end="374" title="Culture of Gibraltar" label="racial and cultural fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="387" end="395" title="European ethnic groups" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q690347" start="440" end="444" title="Rock of Gibraltar" label="Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="774" end="782" title="Spaniard" label="Spaniard"/>
<link wikidata="Q689289" start="880" end="912" title="Prince George of Hesse-Darmstadt" label="Prince George of Hesse-Darmstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q244504" start="955" end="963" title="Catalan people" label="Catalans"/>
<link wikidata="Q52636" start="966" end="973" title="Menorca" label="Menorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q112183" start="1407" end="1423" title="Treaty of Amiens" label="Treaty of Amiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="1426" end="1437" title="Immigration" label="Immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777040" start="1517" end="1526" title="Andalusian people" label="Spaniards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116986" start="1536" end="1561" title="Campo de Gibraltar" label="surrounding Spanish towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053198" start="1588" end="1612" title="History of Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar&amp;#x27;s history"/>
<link wikidata="Q183318" start="1636" end="1644" title="dictator" label="dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="1654" end="1670" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="1831" end="1838" title="Spanish people" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q842438" start="2024" end="2031" title="British people" label="Britons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="2963" end="2970" title="Genoa" label="Genoese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="3048" end="3055" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="3126" end="3138" title="Royal Navy" label="British navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="3384" end="3392" title="Italians" label="Italians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="3416" end="3424" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="3429" end="3435" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="3543" end="3553" title="Portuguese people" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q26831" start="3628" end="3635" title="Algarve" label="Algarve"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="3663" end="3671" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q616484" start="4061" end="4079" title="Portuguese pavement" label="calçada portuguesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="4182" end="4196" title="Francisco Franco" label="General Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705204" start="4741" end="4752" title="Luso-Indian" label="Luso-Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958813" start="4758" end="4768" title="Brazilian diaspora" label="Brazilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q13148" start="4830" end="4855" title="La Línea de la Concepción" label="La Línea de la Concepción"/>
<link wikidata="Q18066905" start="4948" end="4962" title="Bernardo Lopes" label="Bernardo Lopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891793" start="4981" end="4990" title="Moroccans" label="Moroccans"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152214" start="5461" end="5474" title="Moroccan Jews" label="Moroccan Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="5515" end="5524" title="Sephardic" label="Sephardic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772615" start="5664" end="5670" title="Hassan (surname)" label="Hassan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679951" start="5723" end="5753" title="Hassans" label="Hassans International Law Firm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708538" start="5767" end="5784" title="Joshua Hassan" label="Sir Joshua Hassan"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="5893" end="5898" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286876" start="5956" end="5970" title="Maltese people" label="Maltese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="6044" end="6049" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="6052" end="6055" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="6074" end="6082" title="Sephardi Jews" label="Sephardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061030" start="6130" end="6157" title="Alhambra decree" label="forbidden in Catholic Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q815145" start="6292" end="6303" title="Great Siege of Gibraltar" label="Great Siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q925034" start="6307" end="6314" title="Non-resident Indian and person of Indian origin" label="Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="6359" end="6369" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="6490" end="6496" title="French people" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="6839" end="6857" title="CIA World Factbook" label="CIA World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="7991" end="7998" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="8044" end="8051" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q79388" start="8090" end="8097" title="Llanito" label="Llanito"/>
<link wikidata="Q489811" start="8108" end="8126" title="Andalusian Spanish" label="Andalusian Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036511" start="8133" end="8143" title="vernacular" label="vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="8202" end="8217" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166" start="8247" end="8254" title="Maltese language" label="Maltese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="8256" end="8266" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="8268" end="8275" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479433" start="8283" end="8290" title="Genoese dialect" label="Genoese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569973" start="8303" end="8310" title="Haketia" label="Haketia"/>
<link wikidata="Q255615" start="8374" end="8388" title="code-switching" label="code-switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="8401" end="8407" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="8455" end="8460" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33997" start="8465" end="8471" title="Sindhi language" label="Sindhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166" start="8520" end="8527" title="Maltese language" label="Maltese"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12081" wikidata="Q1153922" url="?curid=12081" title="Politics of Gibraltar">
<text>The politics of Gibraltar takes place within a framework of a parliamentary representative democratic British Overseas Territory, whereby the Monarch of the United Kingdom is the constitutional head of state represented by the Governor of Gibraltar. The Chief Minister of Gibraltar is the head of Government. As a British Overseas Territory, the Government of Gibraltar is not subordinate to the Government of the United Kingdom. The British Government, however, is responsible for defence and external affairs but Gibraltar has full internal self-government under its 2006 Constitution.

The government of Spain continues with an irredentist territorial claim to Gibraltar, which was ceded in perpetuity to the British Crown in 1713 by Article X of the Treaty of Utrecht. In a referendum held in 2002, a proposal for shared sovereignty was overwhelmingly rejected by the Gibraltar electorate with 98.97% voting against. The sovereignty issue remains an important factor in local politics.

Gibraltar has a number of political parties which have developed to address local issues. The preamble to the 2006 Constitution repeated from the 1969 Constitution states that &quot;Her Majesty&#x27;s Government will never enter into arrangements under which the people of Gibraltar would pass under the sovereignty of another state against their freely and democratically expressed wishes.&quot;

==Executive branch==

As an overseas territory of Britain, the head of state is King Charles III, who is represented by the Governor of Gibraltar. Britain retains responsibility for defence, foreign relations, internal security and overall financial stability .
|Monarch
|King Charles III
|&quot;N/A&quot;
|8 September 2022
|Governor
|Sir Ben Bathurst
|&quot;N/A&quot;
|4 June 2024
|Chief Minister
|Fabian Picardo
|&quot;GSLP/Liberals Alliance&quot;
|9 December 2011

==Government==

The Government of Gibraltar is elected for a term of four years. The head of government is the chief minister, currently the Hon. Fabian Picardo of the Gibraltar Socialist Labour Party (GSLP), who has been in office since 9 December 2011, in alliance with the Liberal Party of Gibraltar (Liberals), following the 2011 General Election. The Leader of the Opposition is the Hon. Keith Azopardi of the Gibraltar Social Democrats (GSD) since 2019.

The composition of the Government of Gibraltar is the following:

==Legislature==

The Gibraltar Parliament (previously the House of Assembly) consists of seventeen elected members, and the Speaker. Under the electoral system of partial bloc voting used since 1969, voters (since 2007) could choose up to ten candidates, who do not necessarily need to be from the same party (but usually are). The winning candidates are then chosen by simple plurality; consequently, a party seeking to form a government stands ten candidates, and the party that forms the government is usually successful in having all ten of its candidates elected; the remaining seats are usually won by the &#x27;best loser&#x27; which then forms the opposition. The last election was held on 17 October 2019. The next election is scheduled to be held on 12 October 2023.

==Governor==
King Charles III is represented by the governor and commander-in-chief, presently Lieutenant General Sir Ben Bathurst (sworn in June 2024). After an election, the governor appoints the leader of the largest party in the unicameral parliament, as chief minister. The governor is not involved in the day-to-day administration of Gibraltar, and his role is largely as a ceremonial head of state. The governor is responsible for matters of defence and security only.

==Political parties and general elections==

There are three political parties currently represented in the Gibraltar Parliament: Gibraltar Social Democrats; Gibraltar Socialist Labour Party and the Liberal Party of Gibraltar. All parties support Gibraltar&#x27;s right to self-determination, and reject any concessions on the issue of sovereignty.

==European Parliament elections==

Until the United Kingdom&#x27;s withdrawal from the European Union in January 2020, Gibraltar was part of the EU under the British Treaty of accession, but had not voted in elections for the European Parliament although its membership of the European Union meant it was affected by European Union law. A ten-year campaign to acquire the vote culminated in the case of Matthews v. United Kingdom. Denise Matthews, a British Citizen resident in Gibraltar, claimed that the exclusion of the Gibraltar electorate from enfranchisement in the European Parliamentary elections was a breach of human rights. The European Court of Human Rights decided in her favour, ruling that the European Parliament formed a part of Gibraltar&#x27;s legislature and held that the UK was bound by its conventions to secure the right for the people of Gibraltar to elect the European Parliament. The UK Government passed the European Parliament (Representation) Act in 2003 in order to comply with the ruling. Gibraltar was included in the South West England Region for the purposes of European Parliament elections, and first voted in the 2004 election.

The 2004 European Election was the first UK election in which Gibraltar participated. The Conservative Party took 69.52% of the vote, which has generally been interpreted as a protest against the handling of Gibraltar by the Labour Party. The Conservatives also campaigned strongly, with the support of the Gibraltar branch of the party and a visit from the party leader Michael Howard.

In 2009, the Conservatives again topped the poll with 54% but in contrast to 2004 the turnout at 35% was much lower, being comparable to other EU states.

In 2014 the Liberal Democrat Party topped the poll, but the votes cast in South West England resulted in the none of the Liberal Democrat candidates becoming MEPs. Six MEPs were returned, two UKIP, two Conservative, one Labour and one Green.

==Constitutional reform==

===Select Committee proposals===
In 1999, the Government of Gibraltar established a Select Committee on Constitutional Reform, to consider how the 1969 Constitution should be reformed.

In March 2006, British Foreign Secretary Jack Straw announced in the British House of Commons that the details of a new constitution had been agreed. There were some differences between the draft constitution and the one to which the UK agreed, namely that the Governor&#x27;s title would remain unchanged, and that the Police Authority would remain independent of the Government of Gibraltar.

===2006 Constitution===
In December 2006 Gibraltar was granted a new constitution, providing a modern constitutional relationship between Gibraltar and the United Kingdom, not based on colonialism. The constitution does not in any way diminish British sovereignty of Gibraltar, and the United Kingdom retains its full internal responsibility for Gibraltar, including Gibraltar&#x27;s external relations and defence, and the Member State responsible for Gibraltar in the European Union.

Writing to the Spanish Foreign Minister, Jack Straw stated:

: &quot;My own view [is] that the label &quot;colonial&quot; is misleading and anachronistic in this context; regardless of the United Nations dimension. As Peter Caruana and I said in our joint statement on Monday, the new Constitution provides for &quot;a modern and mature&quot; relationship between the UK and Gibraltar. I do not think that this description would apply to any relationship based on colonialism.&quot;

After several months of political wrangling, the Gibraltar Government published the draft Constitution Order, which includes the existing preamble promising that there would be no transfer of sovereignty against the wishes of the Gibraltarians and a new addition explaining the status.

: &quot;Whereas Gibraltar is part of Her Majesty’s dominions and Her Majesty’s Government have given assurances to the people of Gibraltar that Gibraltar will remain part of Her Majesty’s dominions unless and until an Act of Parliament otherwise provides, and furthermore that Her Majesty’s Government will never enter into arrangements under which the people of Gibraltar would pass under the sovereignty of another state against their freely and democratically expressed wishes:&quot;

: &quot;And whereas the people of Gibraltar have in a referendum held on [date] freely approved and accepted the Constitution annexed to this Order which gives the people of Gibraltar that degree of self-government which is compatible with British Sovereignty of Gibraltar and with the fact that the UK remains fully responsible for Gibraltar’s external relations.&quot;

The proposal was put to the people in a referendum and approved. The constitution took effect in 2007 and 29 January declared a public holiday in celebration.

===Integration with the UK===
Various groups in Gibraltar have campaigned in favour of a far closer relationship with Britain, in the form of devolved integration or incorporation into Britain itself. This is similar to the offer made to Malta in 1955, under which Malta would be represented in the British House of Commons and be placed under the Home Office, while retaining internal self-government. This would be a similar status to France&#x27;s overseas departments and to Spain&#x27;s North African enclaves, Ceuta and Melilla, claimed by Morocco. One of Spain&#x27;s arguments in rejecting comparisons between Gibraltar and these territories is that they are part of Spain, whereas Gibraltar is a British overseas territory and not part of the UK.

However, the British Foreign Office rejected the idea in 1976, along with independence, on the grounds that any further constitutional reform or decolonisation would have to take into account the so-called &quot;Spanish dimension&quot;. Similarly, this has also been opposed by governments in Gibraltar itself; in its election manifesto in 2003, the Gibraltar Social Democrats argued that integration would &quot;necessarily involve the loss of a significant degree of this vital self-government&quot; and &quot;would simply hand power over our vital affairs (and therefore our ability to survive) to people in London.&quot;

While there is still attachment to the idea of Gibraltar being British, some, like leader of the Liberal Party, Joseph Garcia, see the Rock&#x27;s future as being within a larger &#x27;Europe of the Regions&#x27;, rather than as part of one nation state or another.

===Condominium===
The idea of a condominium, with sovereignty over Gibraltar shared between the UK and Spain, has been proposed. In 1985, during talks with British Foreign Secretary Geoffrey Howe, Spanish Foreign Minister Fernando Morán proposed a condominium or leaseback period of between 15 and 20 years, before Spain regained full sovereignty, but this received no reply from the British government.

In 1991, the Spanish Prime Minister, Felipe Gonzalez, was reported to have proposed a plan for joint sovereignty, under which Gibraltar would become effectively autonomous, with the British and Spanish monarchs as joint heads of state, but this was rejected by the Government of Gibraltar in July of that year.

In 1997, the then Spanish Foreign Minister Abel Matutes put forward a proposal for joint sovereignty over Gibraltar, which also entailed full Spanish sovereignty after a transitional period, but his British counterpart, Robin Cook, stated that there was &quot;no question of compromise on sovereignty&quot;.

Although the co-principality of Andorra, in which the president of France and the bishop of Urgell are joint heads of state, has been suggested as a model for Gibraltar, in 2010, its then chief minister, Peter Caruana, argued that this was not a case of joint sovereignty between Spain and France, as under Andorra&#x27;s 1993 Constitution, neither country exercised sovereignty over the Principality.

==United Nations==
Gibraltar was caught unaware when the whole issue of the relationship between the territory and the UK, as well as the question of Spain was brought before the United Nations Committee on Decolonization, otherwise known as the &quot;Committee of 24&quot;, in 1963.

Resolution 2231 (XXI), which formed part of the Spanish claim, stated that &quot;any colonial situation which partially or completely destroys the national unity and territorial integrity of a country is incompatible with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.&quot;

Resolution 2353 (XXII) also urged the United Kingdom and Spain to overcome their differences, respecting the &quot;interests&quot; of the people of Gibraltar and declared the 1967 referendum to be a &quot;contravention of the provisions of Resolution 2231.

It was supported by 73 countries (mainly Latin American, Arab, African and Eastern European countries), rejected by 19 (United Kingdom and the countries of the Commonwealth of Nations), while 27 countries abstained (Western Europe and the United States).

Since then and up to the present time, representatives of Gibraltar have regularly petitioned the &quot;UNC24&quot; and the &quot;UNC4&quot;, although no progress has been achieved. The Committees regularly roll out their &#x27;consensus resolution&#x27; which:

*&quot;(a) Urges both Governments, while listening to the interests and aspirations of Gibraltar, to reach, in the spirit of the statement of 27 November 1984, a definitive solution to the question of Gibraltar, in the light of relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and applicable principles, and in the spirit of the Charter of the United Nations;&quot;
*&quot;(b) Welcomes the ongoing successful implementation of the first package of measures concluded at the Tripartite Forum for Dialogue on Gibraltar.&quot;

The commitment of the British Government is not to hold the talks envisaged by the above resolution without the consent of the Gibraltarians.

:&quot;The [British] Government will never – &quot;never&quot; is a seldom-used word in politics – enter into an agreement on sovereignty without the agreement of the Government of Gibraltar and their people. In fact, we will never even enter into a process without that agreement. The word &quot;never&quot; sends a substantial and clear commitment and has been used for a purpose. We have delivered that message with confidence to the peoples and the Governments of Gibraltar and Spain. It is a sign of the maturity of our relationship now that that is accepted as [Britain]&#x27;s position.&quot;

The effective stalemate has led Peter Caruana to conclude that attending future meetings of the Committee of 24 is a pointless exercise.

==Relations with Spain==

In a referendum on 10 September 1967, the people of Gibraltar voted by 12,138 to 44 to reject the transfer of sovereignty to Spain and to remain under British sovereignty. This day is now celebrated as Gibraltar&#x27;s National Day. In a referendum organised by the Government of Gibraltar on 7 November 2002, voters overwhelmingly rejected the principle that Spain and the United Kingdom should share sovereignty over Gibraltar, by 17,900 votes to 187 on a turnout of almost 88%.

Unlike most other British territories, Gibraltar has not been offered independence by the UK. It has been suggested that this is on the grounds that the Treaty of Utrecht, under which Spain ceded the territory to the British Crown, states that, if the British Crown should ever wish to dispose of Gibraltar, it must first be offered to Spain. However, the Government of Gibraltar has pointed out at the UN that Article 103 of the UN Charter overrules and annuls this &quot;reversionary clause&quot;.

Neither the United Kingdom nor Spain seem keen to test the legal status of Article X of the Treaty of Utrecht in court. The remaining parts of the treaty that regulated such things as the slave trade, and the transfer of Menorca to the British, have become obsolete.

Spain argues that Gibraltar&#x27;s status is an anachronism, and that it should become an autonomous community of Spain, similar to Catalonia or the Basque Country. It also argues that the principle of territorial integrity, not self-determination applies, drawing parallels with the British handover of Hong Kong to the People&#x27;s Republic of China in 1997.

At the same time, the British government continues to state that there can be no change in the status of Gibraltar without their democratic consent .

The Gibraltarian government has asked the UN Committee of 24 to refer the issues to the International Court of Justice for an advisory opinion, but Spain has lobbied against this. The government of Gibraltar has also invited the committee to visit the territory, but so far, despite no objection from the United Kingdom, they have not done so.

The 2006 constitution further increases the level of self-government in the territory, and the colonial status of Gibraltar is now considered to be over. In a letter to the United Nations describing this, the British Foreign Secretary stated that &quot;I do not think that this description would apply to any relationship based on colonialism.&quot;

==Pressure groups==
In addition to the parties there are a number of pressure groups active in Gibraltar, not aligned to any political party.

===Gibraltar Women&#x27;s Association===
The Gibraltar Women&#x27;s Association was founded on 16 February 1966, by Mrs Angela Smith.

It was originally known as the Gibraltar Housewives Association, and subsequently, in the early eighties it was changed to the Gibraltar Women&#x27;s Association keeping in with more modern times that not all women were solely housewives.

===Equality Rights Group GGR===
Launched in September 2000 by Felix Alvarez, initially named GGR (Gib Gay Rights) now has a wider human rights platform in Gibraltar and is known as Equality Rights Group GGR .

Although it still defends sexual minorities it has also been active on issues regarding the disabled, and issues regarding the protection of children against sex abuse.

===Environmental Safety Group===
The Environmental Safety Group (ESG) is a non-governmental organisation that was formed in 2000. It is a registered charity and works to promote environmental issues within the community. Concerns of: air and water quality, pollution, preservation of our green areas, traffic, need for renewable energy, litter/recycling and climate change have been the focus of many ESG campaigns. The group is apolitical and enjoys widespread support from the community. Its membership runs into several hundred and many others are regularly invited to support or participate in local and global environmental campaigns.

===Gibraltar Local Disability Movement===
The Gibraltar Local Disability Movement (GLDM) was established in 1985 to improve the lives of disabled people in Gibraltar, promote equal opportunities and tackle discrimination. The movement ceased to be active for several years during the 1990s and early 2000s, but was reactivated in 2005 to address the situation for disabled people in Gibraltar, which did not see great improvement for several years. Although the 2006 Equal Opportunities Act protects disabled people in Gibraltar from discrimination, Gibraltar remains behind the UK and other countries on issues such as disability allowances and wheelchair access to both private and government buildings. www.disability.gi

===Voice of Gibraltar Group===
The Voice of Gibraltar Group was founded in 1996. In 1997 it organised a march attended by 10,000 people campaigning for Spanish recognition of Gibraltarians&#x27; rights within the EU for the support of the new British Labour Government in this matter. In 2001 it drew criticism from the Government of Gibraltar for pressuring the Select Committee of the House of Assembly to accelerate completion of its work and for introducing what the Government claimed were partisan politics into the matter of Gibraltar remaining British. The same year, in concert with the Self-Determination for Gibraltar Group, the VOGG organised a demonstration attended by an estimated 10,000 people. Joining a Government-sponsored initiative led by local musicians under the auspices of Rock on the Rock Club, a non-political organisation, the VOGG mounted protest in Neath, the constituency of Peter Hain the UK Minister for Europe.
It campaigned, with others, for a &quot;no&quot; vote in the 2002 referendum It has been described as &quot;Gibraltar&#x27;s most-hardline protest group&quot;.

===Integration With Britain Movement===
The Integration With Britain Movement (IWBM) is a pressure group advocating further integration with the United Kingdom. They aim for Gibraltar to attain a state of devolved integration similar to that pertaining in Scotland, Wales &amp; Northern Ireland. They are led by Joe Caruana and are successors to the defunct Integration With Britain Party (IWBP).

==See also==

* Judiciary of Gibraltar

==References==
==External links==

*Gibraltar Government website
*The Gibraltar Social Democrats
*The Gibraltar Socialist Labour party
*The Progressive Democrats
*CityMayors article
*The Conservative Party branch in Gibraltar
*Friends of the Earth, Gibraltar
* The Gibraltar Local Disability Movement
* Environmental Safety Group
* Equality Rights - GGR</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1153922" start="4" end="25" title="Politics of Gibraltar" label="politics of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="62" end="75" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="76" end="101" title="representative democracy" label="representative democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="102" end="128" title="British Overseas Territories" label="British Overseas Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="142" end="171" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="Monarch of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q195965" start="227" end="248" title="Governor of Gibraltar" label="Governor of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q585760" start="254" end="281" title="Chief Minister of Gibraltar" label="Chief Minister of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q128986" start="346" end="369" title="Government of Gibraltar" label="Government of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="396" end="428" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="Government of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q417633" start="543" end="558" title="self-governance" label="self-government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559140" start="569" end="586" title="Gibraltar Constitution Order 2006" label="2006 Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194749" start="593" end="612" title="government of Spain" label="government of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q182274" start="631" end="642" title="irredentist" label="irredentist"/>
<link wikidata="Q169896" start="643" end="673" title="disputed status of Gibraltar" label="territorial claim to Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="712" end="725" title="British Crown" label="British Crown"/>
<link wikidata="" start="737" end="746" title=":s:Peace and Friendship Treaty of Utrecht between Spain and Great Britain#ARTICLE X" label="Article X"/>
<link wikidata="Q154674" start="754" end="771" title="Treaty of Utrecht" label="Treaty of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q170110" start="778" end="801" title="2002 Gibraltar sovereignty referendum" label="referendum held in 2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="825" end="836" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520990" start="1017" end="1034" title="List of political parties in Gibraltar" label="political parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164193" start="1106" end="1118" title="Constitution of Gibraltar" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q169908" start="1137" end="1154" title="Gibraltar Constitution Order 1969" label="1969 Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="1417" end="1435" title="British overseas territory" label="overseas territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1439" end="1446" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="1469" end="1485" title="Charles III" label="King Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q195965" start="1513" end="1534" title="Governor of Gibraltar" label="Governor of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="1571" end="1578" title="Defense (military)" label="defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q166542" start="1580" end="1597" title="International relations" label="foreign relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6047930" start="1599" end="1616" title="internal security" label="internal security"/>
<link wikidata="Q31275820" start="1629" end="1648" title="financial stability" label="financial stability"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="1652" end="1659" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="Monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="1661" end="1677" title="Charles III" label="King Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q195965" start="1714" end="1722" title="Governor of Gibraltar" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q25346624" start="1724" end="1740" title="Ben Bathurst" label="Sir Ben Bathurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q585760" start="1772" end="1786" title="Chief Minister of Gibraltar" label="Chief Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356379" start="1788" end="1802" title="Fabian Picardo" label="Fabian Picardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q53025" start="1810" end="1814" title="Gibraltar Socialist Labour Party" label="GSLP"/>
<link wikidata="Q152744" start="1815" end="1823" title="Liberal Party of Gibraltar" label="Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q22088817" start="1824" end="1832" title="GSLP–Liberal Alliance" label="Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q585760" start="1968" end="1982" title="Chief Minister of Gibraltar" label="chief minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746176" start="1998" end="2002" title="The Honourable" label="Hon."/>
<link wikidata="Q2356379" start="2003" end="2017" title="Fabian Picardo" label="Fabian Picardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q53025" start="2025" end="2057" title="Gibraltar Socialist Labour Party" label="Gibraltar Socialist Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q152744" start="2133" end="2159" title="Liberal Party of Gibraltar" label="Liberal Party of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752319" start="2186" end="2207" title="2011 Gibraltar general election" label="2011 General Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16842520" start="2227" end="2237" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Most Loyal Opposition (Gibraltar)" label="Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384005" start="2250" end="2264" title="Keith Azopardi" label="Keith Azopardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q136754" start="2272" end="2298" title="Gibraltar Social Democrats" label="Gibraltar Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q128852" start="2405" end="2425" title="Gibraltar Parliament" label="Gibraltar Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746726" start="2547" end="2566" title="Plurality-at-large voting" label="partial bloc voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578352" start="2598" end="2602" title="2007 Gibraltar general election" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="3175" end="3191" title="Charles III" label="King Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q25346624" start="3276" end="3292" title="Ben Bathurst" label="Sir Ben Bathurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="3395" end="3405" title="unicameral" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="3406" end="3416" title="parliament" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670755" start="3421" end="3435" title="chief minister" label="chief minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q128852" start="3747" end="3767" title="Gibraltar Parliament" label="Gibraltar Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q136754" start="3769" end="3795" title="Gibraltar Social Democrats" label="Gibraltar Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q53025" start="3797" end="3829" title="Gibraltar Socialist Labour Party" label="Gibraltar Socialist Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q152744" start="3838" end="3864" title="Liberal Party of Gibraltar" label="Liberal Party of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="4034" end="4090" title="Brexit" label="United Kingdom&amp;#x27;s withdrawal from the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="4215" end="4234" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791504" start="4392" end="4418" title="Matthews v. United Kingdom" label="Matthews v. United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q122880" start="4628" end="4658" title="European Court of Human Rights" label="European Court of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5412890" start="4925" end="4965" title="European Parliament (Representation) Act 2003" label="European Parliament (Representation) Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973373" start="5040" end="5065" title="South West England (European Parliament constituency)" label="South West England Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704885" start="5140" end="5153" title="2004 European Parliament election in the United Kingdom" label="2004 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="5246" end="5264" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="5381" end="5393" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q325381" start="5527" end="5541" title="Michael Howard" label="Michael Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="5711" end="5733" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrat Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10647" start="5891" end="5895" title="UK Independence Party" label="UKIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q9669" start="5934" end="5939" title="Green Party of England and Wales" label="Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="6170" end="6195" title="Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs" label="British Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q311278" start="6196" end="6206" title="Jack Straw" label="Jack Straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="6224" end="6248" title="British House of Commons" label="British House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q311278" start="7078" end="7088" title="Jack Straw" label="Jack Straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q249192" start="7255" end="7268" title="Peter Caruana" label="Peter Caruana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559140" start="8708" end="8718" title="2006 Gibraltarian constitutional referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="9066" end="9071" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="9127" end="9151" title="British House of Commons" label="British House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q763388" start="9176" end="9187" title="Home Office" label="Home Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="9265" end="9271" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q202216" start="9279" end="9298" title="overseas department" label="overseas department"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="9307" end="9312" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="9320" end="9332" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="9334" end="9341" title="enclave" label="enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5823" start="9344" end="9349" title="Ceuta" label="Ceuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5831" start="9354" end="9361" title="Melilla" label="Melilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="9374" end="9381" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="9533" end="9559" title="British overseas territory" label="British overseas territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q358834" start="9606" end="9620" title="Foreign Office" label="Foreign Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q136754" start="9935" end="9961" title="Gibraltar Social Democrats" label="Gibraltar Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q152744" start="10308" end="10321" title="Liberal Party of Gibraltar" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442437" start="10323" end="10336" title="Joseph Garcia (Gibraltarian politician)" label="Joseph Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q734818" start="10510" end="10521" title="Condominium (international law)" label="condominium"/>
<link wikidata="Q332323" start="10660" end="10673" title="Geoffrey Howe" label="Geoffrey Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069513" start="10700" end="10714" title="Fernando Morán (politician)" label="Fernando Morán"/>
<link wikidata="Q156799" start="10920" end="10935" title="Felipe Gonzalez" label="Felipe Gonzalez"/>
<link wikidata="Q318474" start="11238" end="11250" title="Abel Matutes" label="Abel Matutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q311214" start="11415" end="11425" title="Robin Cook" label="Robin Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q228" start="11536" end="11543" title="Andorra" label="Andorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="11558" end="11577" title="president of France" label="president of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q877736" start="11586" end="11602" title="bishop of Urgell" label="bishop of Urgell"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="11784" end="11789" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="11794" end="11800" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462267" start="11831" end="11843" title="Constitution of Andorra" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q530843" start="12086" end="12128" title="United Nations Committee on Decolonization" label="United Nations Committee on Decolonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="12905" end="12928" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q171328" start="13589" end="13618" title="United Nations Charter" label="Charter of the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13734" end="13776" title="Tripartite Forum for Dialogue on Gibraltar" label="Tripartite Forum for Dialogue on Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="14698" end="14708" title="referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="14818" end="14823" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q154674" start="15328" end="15345" title="Treaty of Utrecht (1713)" label="Treaty of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15751" end="15785" title=":s:Peace and Friendship Treaty of Utrecht between Spain and Great Britain#ARTICLE X" label="Article X of the Treaty of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="15864" end="15875" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q52636" start="15897" end="15904" title="Menorca" label="Menorca"/>
<link wikidata="Q10742" start="16034" end="16063" title="Autonomous communities of Spain" label="autonomous community of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5705" start="16076" end="16085" title="Catalonia" label="Catalonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3995" start="16093" end="16107" title="Basque Country (autonomous community)" label="Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q526594" start="16146" end="16167" title="territorial integrity" label="territorial integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="16173" end="16191" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="16248" end="16257" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="16265" end="16296" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801" start="16546" end="16576" title="International Court of Justice" label="International Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559140" start="16807" end="16824" title="2006 Gibraltarian constitutional referendum" label="2006 constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q417633" start="16856" end="16871" title="self-governance" label="self-government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442127" start="17734" end="17747" title="Felix Alvarez" label="Felix Alvarez"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18089" end="18115" title="Environmental Safety Group" label="Environmental Safety Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="18127" end="18156" title="non-governmental organisation" label="non-governmental organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q708676" start="18190" end="18208" title="charitable organisation" label="registered charity"/>
<link wikidata="Q625376" start="18294" end="18307" title="water quality" label="water quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="18309" end="18318" title="pollution" label="pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12705" start="18371" end="18387" title="renewable energy" label="renewable energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q132580" start="18396" end="18405" title="recycling" label="recycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="18410" end="18424" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559170" start="18739" end="18774" title="Gibraltar Local Disability Movement" label="Gibraltar Local Disability Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="19272" end="19274" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q333165" start="20324" end="20334" title="Peter Hain" label="Peter Hain"/>
<link wikidata="Q170110" start="20424" end="20439" title="2002 Gibraltar sovereignty referendum" label="2002 referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6043208" start="20568" end="20601" title="Integration With Britain Movement" label="Integration With Britain Movement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20836" end="20847" title="Joe Caruana" label="Joe Caruana"/>
<link wikidata="Q15982329" start="20882" end="20912" title="Integration With Britain Party" label="Integration With Britain Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q169857" start="20938" end="20960" title="Judiciary of Gibraltar" label="Judiciary of Gibraltar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12082" wikidata="Q2737668" url="?curid=12082" title="Economy of Gibraltar">
<text>The economy of Gibraltar consists largely of the services sector. While part of the European Union until Brexit, the British overseas territory of Gibraltar has a separate legal jurisdiction from the United Kingdom and a different tax system.
The role of the UK Ministry of Defence, which at one time was Gibraltar&#x27;s main source of income, has declined, with today&#x27;s economy mainly based on shipping, tourism, financial services, and the Internet (mostly gambling).

As of 2020, Brexit represents a major uncertainty for the Gibraltar economy.

==Shipping==
; Bunkering
Gibraltar is one of the largest bunkering ports in the Mediterranean Sea, with 4.3 million tonnes of bunkers delivered in 2021 to over 5,500 ships. This has become the main activity within the Port of Gibraltar. Increased competition from Algeciras in 2022 resulted in a fall to around 3.4m tonnes.

==Finance==
Until Brexit Gibraltar was a constituent part of the European Union as a Special Member State territory, having joined the European Economic Community with the United Kingdom in 1973, under the provisions of the Treaty of Rome relating to European dependent territories. However, it is exempt from the Common external tariff, the Common Agricultural Policy and the requirement to levy Value added tax.

Financial institutions operating in Gibraltar are regulated by the Gibraltar Financial Services Commission.
Gibraltar has had a stock exchange since 2014, the Gibraltar Stock Exchange.

Subject to notifying the EU Commissioner, who must be satisfied that they meet certain criteria in accordance with the relevant EU Directive, Gibraltar-licensed or -authorised financial institutions can provide services throughout the EU and European Economic Area without having to seek separate licences or authorisation in the host Member State. This is known as the &quot;passporting&quot; of financial services.

In December 2008 in a landmark decision the European Court of Justice ruled that:

This allowed the implementation of a new low tax system which took full effect in 2010.

Referred to as an International Finance Centre, Gibraltar was among 35 jurisdictions identified by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) as a tax haven in June 2000. However, the list&#x27;s disclaimer states:

As a result of having made a commitment in accordance with the OECD&#x27;s 2001 Progress Report on the OECD&#x27;s Project on Harmful Tax Practices, Gibraltar is not included in the OECD&#x27;s list of uncooperative tax havens. It has also never been listed on the FATF Blacklist of uncooperative countries in the fight against money laundering. It may also be referred to as an offshore financial centre, by international institutions such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF).

However, in its April 2009 progress report, the OECD listed Gibraltar in the list of jurisdictions which, although committed, had not &quot;substantially implemented&quot; yet the internationally agreed tax standard. Following Gibraltar&#x27;s signing of 12 additional Tax Information Exchange Agreements (TIEAs), as of October 2009, with jurisdictions including the UK, US and Germany, to sum 13, Gibraltar is currently listed in the OECD &quot;white list&quot;, and is considered a jurisdiction that has substantially implemented the tax standard. It therefore shares the same status as OECD member states such as the UK, the US, Spain or Germany.

Fiscal advantages, including no tax on capital income, are offered to a maximum of 8,464 offshore qualified companies incorporated in Gibraltar. After an agreement with the European Union in 2005, this tax exempt regime is due to disappear on 31 December 2010.

A 2007 IMF report on the regulatory environment and anti-money laundering has once again endorsed Gibraltar&#x27;s robust regulatory environment.
According to the report:

In 2008 Gibraltar was listed for the first time in the Global Financial Centres Index published by the City of London Corporation. The Rock was ranked 26th in a list of 69 leading finance centres around the world based on an online survey of 1,236 business professionals, who provided a total of 18,878 assessments. In the most recent GFCI report of 2011, Gibraltar was ranked 63rd in the world, and 8th of the leading offshore financial centres (OFCs).

The Tax Justice Network ranked Gibraltar at #43 out of 71 jurisdictions on its 2011 Financial Secrecy Index. Gibraltar&#x27;s &quot;secrecy score&quot; was 78, equating to Switzerland in that category.

Gibraltar was also ranked in the top 20 centres for e-readiness, coming 20th after major capitals and leading offshore centres.

==Tourism==

==Present and historical manufacturing in Gibraltar==

=== Pre-1900 History ===

* 1704 - The HM Dockyard in Gibraltar is established after the Capture of Gibraltar. The initial facilities include a quay, careening wharf, and multiple workshops. 
* 1720 - South Mole is built during the 1720s. It is a small dockyard with a careening wharf, mast house, and multiple workshops as well.
* 1810 - Marcus Henry Bland arrives in Gibraltar and founds Bland Group as a shipping agency.
* 1840 - Coaling facilities are introduced to Gibraltar.
* 1891 - The Gaggero family take over operations of the Bland Group, as Joseph Gaggero buys the company.
* 1895 - Captain Augustus Phillimore&#x27;s plan for a new naval dockyard is approved by Parliament.

=== 20th Century History ===

* 1902 - An air lock diving-bell plant and barge are imported to install heavy moorings in Gibraltar’s rocky seabed.
* 1914 - Two Bland Group ships are attacked by German submarines.
* 1931 - Gibraltar Airways is launched.
* 1969 - The Spanish-Gibraltar border closes, and the Bland Group shifts its focus to tourism.
* 1972 - Gibraltar Industries is founded.
* 1984 - The HM Dockyard is sold to A&amp;P Group, later passed to the Government of Gibraltar as Gibraltar Ship Repair.
* 1990 - The HM Dockyard is taken over by Norway’s Kværner, then closed in 1996 for 18 months.

=== Modern Day (21st Century) ===

* 2005 - Gibraltar Corporation is founded. It is a manufacturer of springs, wire forms, and metal stampings.
* 2020 - Bassadone Automotive Group supplyies ambulances and other project vehicles converted locally from SUV vehicles to the United Nations and other agencies, employing some 320 staff across its range of activities.
* 2022 - The HM Dockyard is acquired by UK-based Balaena Ltd, reviving the military ship repair operation.
* 2022 - KeyBanc Capital Markets closes a syndication of a US$400M Senior Secured Revolving Credit Facility for Gibraltar Industries, Inc.

==Internet business==
Gibraltar offers a favourable tax system, good internet connectivity along with a well-developed regulatory system. All gambling operations in Gibraltar require licensing under the Gambling Act 2005. The Gibraltar Regulatory Authority is the Gambling Commissioner under the Gambling Act 2005, and therefore the regulatory body.The UK has published plans to protect online gamblers from crime and exploitation by banning gambling adverts from poorly regulated countries which specifically mention Gibraltar as an approved location.

==Defence spending==

The UK&#x27;s Ministry of Defence was originally the mainstay of Gibraltar&#x27;s economy but this has greatly reduced to around 6% of the gross domestic product. In 2006 the Ministry of Defence announced that the provision of services to the military base would be contracted to make further cost savings. This was finalised in January 2007.

==Economy in detail==
Gibraltar benefits from an extensive shipping trade, a well regulated international finance center, tourism, and has become a global leader in the virtual gaming industry.

Self-sufficient Gibraltar benefits from an extensive shipping trade, offshore banking, and its position as an international conference center. The British military presence has been sharply reduced and now contributes about 7% to the local economy, compared with 60% in 1984. The financial sector, tourism (almost 5 million visitors in 1998), shipping services fees, and duties on consumer goods also generate revenue. The financial sector, the shipping sector, and tourism each contribute 25%-30% of GDP. Telecommunications accounts for another 10%. In recent years, Gibraltar has seen major structural change from a public to a private sector economy, but changes in government spending still have a major impact on the level of employment.

Figures from the CIA World Factbook show the main export markets in 2006 were United Kingdom 30.8%, Spain 22.7%, Germany 13.7%, Turkmenistan 10.4%, Switzerland 8.3%, Italy 6.7% while the corresponding figures for imports are Spain 23.4%, Russia 12.3%, Italy 12%, UK 9%, France 8.9%, Netherlands 6.8% and United States 4.7%.

The Gibraltar Government state that economy grew in 2004/2005 by 7% to a GDP of £599,180,000. Based on statistics in the 2006 surveys, the Government statisticians estimate it has grown by 8.5% in 2005/6 and by 10.8% in 2006/7 and that the GDP is probably now around 730 million. Inflation was running at 2.6% in 2006 and predicted to be 2% to 3% in 2007. Speaking at the 2007 budget session, Peter Caruana, the Chief Minister said &quot;The scale of Gibraltar&#x27;s economic success makes it one of the most affluent communities in the entire world.&quot;

Labour force:
12,690 (including non-Gibraltar labourers) (2001)

Labour force - by occupation:
services 60%, industry 40%, agriculture NEGL%
Unemployment rate
2% (2001)

Budget
revenues: $455.1 million
expenditures: $423.6 million (2005 est.)

Public debt
15.7% of GDP (2005 est.)

Industries
tourism, banking and finance, ship repairing, tobacco

Industrial production growth rate
NA%

Electricity - production
142 million kWh (2006 est.)

Electricity - production by source

fossil fuel
100%

hydro
0%

nuclear
0%

other
0%

Electricity - consumption
142 million kWh (2006 est.)

Electricity - exports
0 kWh (1998)

Electricity - imports
0 kWh (1998)

Oil - production
 (2001 est.)

Oil - consumption
 2001

Oil - exports
NA (2001)

Oil - imports
NA (2001)

Agriculture - products
none

Exports
$271 million (2004 est.)

Exports - commodities
(principally reexports) petroleum 51%, manufactured goods 41%, other 8%

Exports - partners
UK, Morocco, Portugal, Netherlands, Spain, US, Germany

Imports
$2.967 billion (2004 est.)

Imports - commodities
Fuels, manufactured goods, and foodstuffs

Imports - partners
UK, Spain, Japan, Netherlands

Fiscal year
1 July - 30 June

The above figures taken from the CIA World Factbook September 2009 edition.

==Interaction with the nearby area==
In September 2009 the Gibraltar Chamber of Commerce released an Economic impact study and analysis of the economies of Gibraltar and the Campo de Gibraltar produced by Professor John Fletcher of Bournemouth University. The report aimed at clarifying the effects of Gibraltar&#x27;s economy on the Campo area. It demonstrated that Gibraltar&#x27;s economy has a significant and very positive economic impact on the Campo de Gibraltar. It also noted that the Campo region played a &quot;significant role [..] in Gibraltar&#x27;s economic development as well&quot;, concluding that &quot;[b]oth economies and societies would be the poorer without the other...&quot;

Its conclusions were:
==Taxation==
In 2019, &quot;the International Agreement on Taxation and Protection of Financial Interests between Spain and the United Kingdom on Gibraltar&quot; was signed by all three countries. This agreement covers such issues as tax co-operation between the authorities in Gibraltar and Spain, the criteria for tax residence of individuals and companies and procedures for administrative cooperation.

== Various economic indicators by national origin ==
The average annual earnings of Indo-Gibraltarians is nearly twice that of the rest of Gibraltarian people and approximately 1.5 times that of immigrants in the UK, thus making people of Indian descent by far the most economically affluent ethnic group in Gibraltar.

==References==
==External links==
*The Gibraltar Government website
*The Financial Services Commission
*The Gibraltar regulatory authority
*Government revenue and expenditure 2006 - pdf</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2737668" start="4" end="24" title="Economy of Gibraltar" label="economy of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55638" start="49" end="64" title="Tertiary sector of the economy" label="services sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="84" end="98" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="105" end="111" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="117" end="143" title="British overseas territories" label="British overseas territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="147" end="156" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503392" start="163" end="190" title="Law of Gibraltar" label="separate legal jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="200" end="214" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q856251" start="231" end="241" title="Tax law" label="tax system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143261" start="259" end="281" title="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)" label="UK Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931217" start="401" end="409" title="shipping in Gibraltar" label="shipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829148" start="411" end="418" title="Tourism in Gibraltar" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q837171" start="420" end="438" title="financial services" label="financial services"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="448" end="456" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="489" end="495" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009603" start="612" end="621" title="bunkering" label="bunkering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="898" end="904" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="945" end="959" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="965" end="995" title="Special Member State territories and the European Union#Gibraltar" label="Special Member State territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="1015" end="1042" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q167457" start="1104" end="1118" title="Treaty of Rome" label="Treaty of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820592" start="1194" end="1216" title="Common external tariff" label="Common external tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q220687" start="1222" end="1248" title="Common Agricultural Policy" label="Common Agricultural Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q128635" start="1277" end="1292" title="Value added tax" label="Value added tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q650241" start="1295" end="1316" title="Financial institution" label="Financial institution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1362" end="1401" title="Gibraltar Financial Services Commission" label="Gibraltar Financial Services Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137946" start="1454" end="1478" title="Gibraltar Stock Exchange" label="Gibraltar Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q326124" start="1609" end="1621" title="Directive (European Union)" label="EU Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q8932" start="1723" end="1745" title="European Economic Area" label="European Economic Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q185441" start="1816" end="1828" title="Member State of the European Union" label="Member State"/>
<link wikidata="Q837171" start="1878" end="1896" title="financial services" label="financial services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518827" start="1943" end="1968" title="European Court of Justice" label="European Court of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q41550" start="2174" end="2228" title="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" label="Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q272051" start="2241" end="2250" title="tax haven" label="tax haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q607466" start="2575" end="2589" title="FATF Blacklist" label="FATF Blacklist"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="2638" end="2654" title="money laundering" label="money laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q205181" start="2689" end="2714" title="offshore financial centre" label="offshore financial centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="2758" end="2785" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689443" start="3063" end="3098" title="Tax Information Exchange Agreements" label="Tax Information Exchange Agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996149" start="3234" end="3256" title="whitelisted gambling jurisdictions" label="&amp;quot;white list&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850816" start="3484" end="3498" title="capital income" label="capital income"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178478" start="3563" end="3575" title="Incorporation (business)" label="incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q705450" start="3647" end="3657" title="tax exemption" label="tax exempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007303" start="3759" end="3780" title="anti-money laundering" label="anti-money laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772346" start="3934" end="3964" title="Global Financial Centres Index" label="Global Financial Centres Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094147" start="3982" end="4008" title="City of London Corporation" label="City of London Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q690347" start="4010" end="4018" title="Rock of Gibraltar" label="The Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q205181" start="4298" end="4323" title="offshore financial centre" label="offshore financial centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q638213" start="4338" end="4357" title="Tax Justice Network" label="Tax Justice Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q674304" start="4506" end="4517" title="Banking in Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q28137037" start="4589" end="4600" title="e-readiness" label="e-readiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6824" start="4762" end="4766" title="1704" label="1704"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559077" start="4773" end="4797" title="Gibdock" label="HM Dockyard in Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q694073" start="4823" end="4843" title="Capture of Gibraltar" label="Capture of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q828909" start="4878" end="4882" title="Wharf" label="quay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908" start="4928" end="4932" title="1720" label="1720"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567969" start="4935" end="4945" title="South Mole, Gibraltar Harbour" label="South Mole"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922" start="5066" end="5070" title="1810" label="1810"/>
<link wikidata="Q47476910" start="5073" end="5091" title="Marcus Bland" label="Marcus Henry Bland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924983" start="5124" end="5135" title="Bland Group" label="Bland Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619" start="5160" end="5164" title="1840" label="1840"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837" start="5217" end="5221" title="1891" label="1891"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844" start="5322" end="5326" title="1895" label="1895"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043" start="5454" end="5458" title="1902" label="1902"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083" start="5571" end="5575" title="1914" label="1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="5616" end="5633" title="U-boat" label="German submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q18782" start="5637" end="5641" title="1931" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484885" start="5644" end="5661" title="GB Airways" label="Gibraltar Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485" start="5677" end="5681" title="1969" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473841" start="5688" end="5712" title="Gibraltar–Spain border" label="Spanish-Gibraltar border"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476" start="5772" end="5776" title="1972" label="1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q2432" start="5814" end="5818" title="1984" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q277630" start="5848" end="5861" title="A&amp;amp;P Group" label="A&amp;amp;P Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q128986" start="5883" end="5906" title="Government of Gibraltar" label="Government of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064" start="5935" end="5939" title="1990" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q6449839" start="5984" end="5992" title="Kværner" label="Kværner,"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019" start="6066" end="6070" title="2005" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q25337" start="6175" end="6179" title="2020" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q192152" start="6280" end="6283" title="SUV" label="SUV"/>
<link wikidata="Q130240449" start="6394" end="6398" title="2022 in Gibraltar" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740314" start="6508" end="6531" title="KeyBank" label="KeyBanc Capital Markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666557" start="6566" end="6606" title="Revolving credit" label="Senior Secured Revolving Credit Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q856251" start="6691" end="6701" title="Tax law" label="tax system"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="6708" end="6716" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11416" start="6781" end="6789" title="gambling" label="gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519686" start="6842" end="6859" title="Gambling Act 2005" label="Gambling Act 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016933" start="6865" end="6895" title="Gibraltar Regulatory Authority" label="Gibraltar Regulatory Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143261" start="7229" end="7248" title="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="7354" end="7376" title="gross domestic product" label="gross domestic product"/>
<link wikidata="Q245016" start="7458" end="7471" title="military base" label="military base"/>
<link wikidata="Q591763" start="8384" end="8398" title="private sector" label="private sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="8515" end="8533" title="CIA World Factbook" label="CIA World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="8576" end="8590" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="8598" end="8603" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="8611" end="8618" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="8626" end="8638" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="8646" end="8657" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="8664" end="8669" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="8723" end="8728" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="8736" end="8742" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="8750" end="8755" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="8768" end="8774" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="8781" end="8792" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="8802" end="8815" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="9675" end="9682" title="tourism" label="tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22687" start="9684" end="9691" title="banking" label="banking"/>
<link wikidata="Q43015" start="9696" end="9703" title="finance" label="finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11446" start="9705" end="9709" title="ship" label="ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="9721" end="9728" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="9769" end="9780" title="Electricity" label="Electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="9859" end="9870" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q170196" start="9877" end="9882" title="Hydropower" label="hydro"/>
<link wikidata="Q80877" start="9887" end="9894" title="Nuclear reactor" label="nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="10142" end="10153" title="Agriculture" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="10251" end="10260" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="10319" end="10321" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="10323" end="10330" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="10332" end="10340" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="10342" end="10353" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="10355" end="10360" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="10362" end="10364" title="United States" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="10366" end="10373" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="10506" end="10511" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="10526" end="10537" title="Fiscal year" label="Fiscal year"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10692" end="10721" title="Gibraltar Chamber of Commerce" label="Gibraltar Chamber of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116986" start="10807" end="10825" title="Campo de Gibraltar" label="Campo de Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182943" start="10865" end="10887" title="Bournemouth University" label="Bournemouth University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11847" end="11865" title="Indo-Gibraltarians" label="Indo-Gibraltarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q285828" start="11902" end="11921" title="Gibraltarian people" label="Gibraltarian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005196" start="11958" end="11978" title="Immigration to the United Kingdom since 1922" label="immigrants in the UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="12055" end="12067" title="ethnic group" label="ethnic group"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12083" wikidata="Q5154201" url="?curid=12083" title="Communications in Gibraltar">
<text>Communications in [[Gibraltar]] comprise a wide range of telephony systems (both fixed-line and mobile), Internet access, broadcasting (radio and television) and satellite control. There is also printed and online media. Regulation of telecommunications and broadcasting are the responsibility of the Gibraltar Regulatory Authority (GRA), established by means of the Gibraltar Regulatory Authority Act in 2000.

==Telecommunications==

===History===

The first submarine telegraph cable started its operation in Gibraltar in 1870. Gibraltar was a landing point of the long-range submarine cable that from Porthcurno, in the United Kingdom ran to Lisbon, Gibraltar, Malta, Alexandria, Suez, Aden, Bombay, over land to the east coast of India, then on to Penang, Malacca, Singapore, Batavia (current Jakarta), to finally reach Darwin, Australia. It was the first direct link between Australia and Great Britain. The company that laid the first part of the cable took the name of Falmouth, Gibraltar and Malta Telegraph Company and had been founded in 1869. This company later operated as the Eastern Telegraph Company from Mount Pleasant in Gibraltar and eventually became Cable &amp; Wireless.

The first telephones were introduced to Gibraltar in 1886 by a private company which was later taken over by the colonial authorities. The first wireless message was transmitted to Gibraltar in 1903. Since 1926, the telephone service was operated by the City Council. An automatic exchange was installed in the last floor of the City Hall. On 4 April 1927, following an agreement signed between the Compañía Telefónica Nacional de España, the Spanish incumbent telecommunications operator, and the Gibraltar City Council, direct communications between Spain and Gibraltar were established.

Upon the approval of the 1969 Constitution and the dissolution of the City Council, the telephone service was transferred to the newly formed Government of Gibraltar. In the 1970s there were three generations of automatic telephone exchange equipment in use with four and five digit numbers. The volume of calls grew and a System X digital exchange was installed.

Until 1990, all telephone services were operated by the Gibraltar Government Telephone Department. International circuits were provided by Cable &amp; Wireless, present in Gibraltar since 1870 as the Falmouth, Malta, Gibraltar Telegraph Company. However, Cable &amp; Wireless left Gibraltar in 1987. On 1 January 1988, British Telecom (BT) and the Government of Gibraltar formed a joint venture company called Gibraltar Telecommunications International Ltd (known by its commercial brand Gibtel) to operate Gibraltar&#x27;s international telecommunications services. Gibtel was subsequently granted a licence to offer mobile telephony introducing a GSM900 network.

In 1990, the Government decided to privatise its Telephone Department and therefore entered into a joint venture with Nynex of the United States. Gibraltar Nynex Communications Ltd (GNC) became responsible for fixed-line telephony. GNC was the first acquisition of Nynex outside the Americas. In 1997, GNC, through its wholly owned subsidiary, GNC Networks, commenced Internet services. GNC Networks was later renamed GibConnect. ADSL services were introduced in 2002.

In 2001, BT sold its 50% stake in Gibtel to GNC. Both companies subsequently merged to form Gibtelecom, a joint venture between the Government of Gibraltar and Nynex&#x27;s successor company, Verizon. The name Gibtelecom begun to be used in July 2002, and as of 1 October 2003 this name was formally adopted by the company (which up until then was still Gibraltar Nynex Communications). In April 2007, Verizon sold its shares to Telekom Slovenije which is the incumbent telecommunications operator in Slovenia and is quoted on the Ljubljana Stock Exchange.

===Infrastructure===
Telephones – Numbers in use: 25,000 (2006)

Telephones – mobile cellular:
15,000 (2006)

The telecommunications infrastructure in Gibraltar is modelled on that of the UK; for example; the ringing tone of fixed telephone lines is identical to that of the UK, although that of mobile phones may resemble that of mainland Europe, with long tones. Telephone jacks are also British Standard BS 6312, as opposed to the RJ11 versions found in other parts of Europe and the world.

===Numbering plan===
Calling code: +350

=== Telecom dispute ===
Telecommunication services in Gibraltar were subject to Spanish restrictions until 10 February 2007. Subsequent to the resolution of the dispute, the Gibraltar telephone numbering plan has been increased to eight digits for land lines, adding a prefix of 200 to the existing Gibtelecom five digit numbers which is required to be dialled from October 2008.

Gibtelecom was also prevented from having roaming agreements with Spanish GSM networks so its mobile phones did not operate in Spain. Gibtelecom had roaming arrangements with local GSM networks in most other countries. After the Córdoba Agreement, Gibtel (Gibtelecom&#x27;s mobile service) could roam on Spanish network Movistar (Telefónica). As of recent customers can now roam on Vodafone and Yoigo. Orange still (September 2008) identifies as AMENA and does not allow Gibraltar phones to register.

==Fixed line services==
In the 1980s there was a shortage of local line capacity on the existing crossbar exchange, which itself had replaced the relay and Strowger switch exchanges and a modern digital System/X switch was installed.

Cable and Wireless, who provided international circuits installed a satellite earth station which made International Subscriber Dialling possible.

When the frontier with Spain was re-opened, telephone and telex circuits cut by General Franco were re-established. Subsequently, fibre links into the FLAG cable system (which had a landing point in Estepona, about 50 km from Gibraltar) were established and along with microwave links to Morocco giving Gibraltar a resilient communications infrastructure. Gibtelecom is also a partner in the EIG cable system, which will have a landing point in Gibraltar.

Provision for Local Loop Unbundling was introduced in Gibraltar, under the 2006 Communications Act, similar to the UK&#x27;s 2003 Communications Act. Earlier in December 2005, the European Commission initiated the second stage of infringement proceedings against the British Government relating to Gibraltar&#x27;s failure to transpose five European Union directives on electronic communications, but these were closed after the relevant legislation was passed into law by the then House of Assembly in June 2006.

Fixed line numbers are now eight digits, with Gibtelecom numbers being prefixed with 200. A second operator, CTS Gibraltar Limited, provided fixed line services beginning with the prefix 216, but closed down in early 2013.

==Mobile network==
GSM Network Identifiers : GIBTEL

Gibraltar Telecommunications International Limited (Gibtel) (now Gibtelecom) introduced mobile phones in Gibraltar using a GSM900 network. The new GPRS network installed by the Scandinavian company allows faster and permanent connectivity for all mobile users, as well as providing high-speed picture and video messaging for owners of the new range of multi-purpose hand-sets.

Gibtelecom operates 3G &amp; 4G networks.

CTS ceased providing 3G services in early 2013.

A new provider, Shine Mobile, launched on 23 September 2013. On 12 May 2016 the Company posted a notice on its website [www.shinemobile.gi] saying that &quot;As from 18/05/2016, our services are going to be SUSPENDED; therefore your Shine line will NOT be operational.&quot; It was said that was to facilitate working on upgrading infrastructure, but as of 29 May 2016 the service is still down. Suspending service with less than a week&#x27;s notice, suggests this may not have just been related to upgrading infrastructure which presumably would have been in the planning stage for more than six days. Shine Mobile will not be back.

==Broadcasting==

===Television===
Television stations:
1 (plus three low-power repeaters) (2002)

Television licences:
7,452 (2002)
Requirement abolished (2007).

GBC Television is operated by the Gibraltar Broadcasting Corporation (GBC) is transmitted on VHF Channel 12 with UHF repeaters on 56 and 53.

Until 1999, GBC retransmitted BBC Prime, but was relaunched as a community-based service focusing on local news and other items of local interest. GBC programming starts at around 19:30 and finishes before midnight with the most popular programme being the local news bulletin, News Watch at 20:30. During the day fillers and the sound of GBC radio are transmitted.
The station was funded by a mix of advertising, government funding, and an annual television licence fee. In June 2006, the licence was abolished by the Government. A new general manager was appointed in 2010 with a mandate to develop the station to meet future requirements of the community.

The majority of homes also have access to satellite television with mostly United Kingdom channels. Gibraltar also receives Spanish national digital television and radio stations, as well as Spanish digital regional (from Andalusia) and local stations (from the Campo de Gibraltar area).

===Radio===
Radio stations:
AM 1, FM 4, DAB+, Internet 2 (2019)

Radios:
37,000 (1997) – Radio licences now discontinued

The Gibraltar Broadcasting Corporation (GBC) operates Radio Gibraltar on both FM and AM, broadcasting a mix of local programming in English and Spanish, and retransmissions of the BBC World Service. In December 2005, GBC started internet streaming of its radio service, and in 2009 the daily Newswatch programme became available as video on demand. These services along with an up-to-date programme guide for GBC television and radio, can be found on the website.

The British Forces Broadcasting Service (BFBS) operates two radio stations on FM, BFBS1 and BFBS2 and a private cable television network. BFBS1 and 2 are also available on the Internet streamed from the UK.

On 1 October 2018, Rock Radio – Gibraltar&#x27;s Hit Music Station was launched. Rock Radio is Gibraltar&#x27;s first and only independent commercial radio station, the first to launch in over 50 years. The station transmits live from the top of the Rock on 99.2 FM, DAB+ and online.

===Amateur radio===
Callsigns:
ZB0x (VHF only), ZB2xx (Full), ZB3x (novice) + special event stations

Amateur radio started in Gibraltar shortly after the Second World War. The Gibraltar Amateur Radio Society (GARS) is a small but active society representing the interests of Amateur Radio both locally and internationally as a full International Amateur Radio Union (IARU) member society.

Each year for Gibraltar National Week amateur radio operators can use the ZG prefix instead of ZB. Special event stations are licensed by the GRA for example the Lighthouse Activity Weekend uses ZB2LGT.

==Internet==
Country code (top-level domain): .gi

Internet service providers (ISPs): 4

Gibnet Limited, a private company, began Internet services in January 1996, with a 64 kbit/s circuit to Spain. In 2005 it merged with Broadband Gibraltar Limited to form Sapphire Networks Limited. Sapphire have their own redundant fibre and microwave infrastructure into and around Gibraltar.

Sapphire is currently a self-sufficient, 100% optic-fibre provider, and sells high-bandwidth Internet services and Internet connectivity, competing directly with Gibtelecom.

GNC Networks, a wholly owned subsidiary of Gibraltar Nynex Communications, commenced services in 1997. GNC Networks was renamed Gibconnect and the parent company became Gibraltar Telecommunications International Limited, which is referred to as Gibtelecom, in 2002. ADSL services were introduced in 2002, by 2005, there were several thousand users. The company is co-owned by the Government of Gibraltar and Slovenia Telecom.

In 2000, the Gibraltar Regulatory Authority issued Ladbrokes, who then operated Gibraltar&#x27;s biggest call centre, with a licence to establish their own internet services. Under this Advanced Business Communications (Europe) began operating on the rock. The company applied for a licence in their own right. The GRA eventually denied ABC (Europe) a licence. Ladbrokes scaled down their Gibraltar operations and their &#x27;Internet permit&#x27; was not renewed. ABC ceased their Gibraltar operations in early 2002.

CTS Gibraltar Limited launched a WiMax service in 2008, competing against the established ADSL providers. It then expanded into ADSL for nearby housing estates, and set up a rival UTMS service. CTS was closed down in early 2013 due to significant debts owed to government authorities and other creditors.

Shine Mobile, launched in September 2013, has obtained a licence for broadband services, which it planned to introduce, but the company closed down.

In 2013, GibFibreSpeed Ltd, trading under A.J. Sheriff Electrical Ltd, obtained a broadband licence. GibFibreSpeed is Gibraltar&#x27;s first communications provider to offer Fibre to the Home (FTTH) broadband services. Since 2013, GibFibreSpeed has been upgrading its own independent all-fibre network and preparing for the launch of broadband services, it has since opened its stores and has planned to begin offering broadband in early 2015.

==Printed media==
===Newspapers===
The largest and most frequently published newspaper is the &quot;Gibraltar Chronicle&quot;, Gibraltar&#x27;s oldest established daily newspaper and the world&#x27;s second oldest English language newspaper to have been in print continuously with daily editions six days a week. &quot;Panorama&quot; is published on weekdays, and &quot;7 Days&quot;, &quot;The New People&quot;, and &quot;Gibsport&quot; are weekly. Other newspapers such as the weekly &quot;El Faro de Gibraltar&quot;, are published in Spanish.

Defunct newspapers include &quot;El Calpense&quot;, a Spanish-language newspaper that was published in Gibraltar between 1868 and 1982. In the 1960s it became a weekly newspaper. When the border between Spain and Gibraltar was eventually closed by the Spanish dictator in 1969, the newspaper changed its ownership and begun to be published in English. It later closed in 1982. Also, &quot;El Anunciador&quot; was a Spanish-language newspaper that was published between 1885 and 1940.

===Magazines===
Gibraltar has two prominent monthly magazines; &quot;Gibraltar Insight&quot; and the &quot;Gibraltar Magazine&quot;.

EuropeAxess Media, in liaison with the Roman Catholic Diocese of Gibraltar, also publishes a monthly magazine: &quot;Upon This Rock&quot;

&quot;Globe&quot; magazine also appears monthly, having first started as a bi-lingual publication which produced two versions of each of its articles – one in English and the other in Spanish. Over time, &quot;Globe&quot; phased out the Spanish language element and is now an English language monthly aimed at Gibraltar and the Campo de Gibraltar.

&quot;B&quot; magazine is Gibraltar&#x27;s first locally produced magazine aimed at women. It appears monthly and its contents include fashion, advice, health, weddings and similar features geared at young women. The publication also features a Social spotlight section composed of photos depicting events and fundraisers.

===Online Media===
Various online news outlets covering general news exist such as online editions of the Gibraltar Broadcasting Corporation, and the Gibraltar Chronicle. Independent online media include Your Gibraltar TV and sports news outlets such as GibFootballTalk.

==See also==
* Telecom dispute between Gibraltar and Spain

==References==
==External links==
*Gibraltar Broadcasting Corporation (Internet-streamed radio)
*BFBS Radio in Gibraltar
*Gibraltar Regulatory Authority
*Gibtelecom
*Sapphire Networks
*Amateur Radio in Gibraltar</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5154201" start="0" end="31" title="Communications in Gibraltar" label="Communications in [[Gibraltar]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016933" start="301" end="331" title="Gibraltar Regulatory Authority" label="Gibraltar Regulatory Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="471" end="480" title="telegraph" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q506572" start="481" end="486" title="Submarine communications cables" label="cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q847176" start="605" end="615" title="Porthcurno" label="Porthcurno"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="646" end="652" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="672" end="682" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q134514" start="684" end="688" title="Suez" label="Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q131694" start="690" end="694" title="Aden" label="Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="696" end="702" title="Bombay" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q188096" start="753" end="759" title="Penang" label="Penang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199713" start="781" end="788" title="Batavia, Dutch East Indies" label="Batavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630" start="798" end="805" title="Jakarta" label="Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11568" start="825" end="842" title="Darwin, Australia" label="Darwin, Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024869" start="977" end="1024" title="Falmouth, Gibraltar and Malta Telegraph Company" label="Falmouth, Gibraltar and Malta Telegraph Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046567" start="1090" end="1115" title="Eastern Telegraph Company" label="Eastern Telegraph Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1121" end="1135" title="Mount Pleasant (Gibraltar)" label="Mount Pleasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024869" start="1171" end="1191" title="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless plc" label="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="1339" end="1355" title="radio" label="wireless message"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061526" start="1448" end="1460" title="Gibraltar City Council" label="City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q94837" start="1523" end="1532" title="Gibraltar City Hall" label="City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q160229" start="1593" end="1631" title="Compañía Telefónica Nacional de España" label="Compañía Telefónica Nacional de España"/>
<link wikidata="Q169908" start="1810" end="1827" title="Gibraltar Constitution Order 1969" label="1969 Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q128986" start="1927" end="1950" title="Government of Gibraltar" label="Government of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663693" start="2108" end="2116" title="System X (telephony)" label="System X"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2206" end="2247" title="Gibraltar Government Telephone Department" label="Gibraltar Government Telephone Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024869" start="2289" end="2309" title="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless plc" label="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q593786" start="2469" end="2484" title="British Telecom" label="British Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351089" start="2560" end="2606" title="Gibraltar Telecommunications International Ltd" label="Gibraltar Telecommunications International Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351089" start="2638" end="2644" title="Gibtel" label="Gibtel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2799" end="2805" title="GSM frequency bands#GSM-900, GSM-1800 and EGSM/EGSM-900" label="GSM900"/>
<link wikidata="Q161500" start="2851" end="2860" title="privatise" label="privatise"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956079" start="2934" end="2939" title="Nynex" label="Nynex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351089" start="2962" end="2996" title="Gibraltar Nynex Communications Ltd" label="Gibraltar Nynex Communications Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q738621" start="3026" end="3046" title="landline" label="fixed-line telephony"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351089" start="3234" end="3244" title="GibConnect" label="GibConnect"/>
<link wikidata="Q161618" start="3246" end="3250" title="ADSL" label="ADSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4351089" start="3378" end="3388" title="Gibtelecom" label="Gibtelecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q467752" start="3478" end="3485" title="Verizon" label="Verizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335433" start="3715" end="3732" title="Telekom Slovenije" label="Telekom Slovenije"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866749" start="3817" end="3841" title="Ljubljana Stock Exchange" label="Ljubljana Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q11035" start="3865" end="3875" title="Telephones" label="Telephones"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="3929" end="3937" title="Cellular telephone" label="cellular"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502269" start="4053" end="4065" title="ringing tone" label="ringing tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="4175" end="4190" title="mainland Europe" label="mainland Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q956085" start="4209" end="4223" title="Telephone plug" label="Telephone jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q920219" start="4234" end="4250" title="British Standard" label="British Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971461" start="4251" end="4258" title="British telephone sockets" label="BS 6312"/>
<link wikidata="Q595851" start="4278" end="4282" title="RJ11, RJ14, RJ25" label="RJ11"/>
<link wikidata="Q34768" start="4360" end="4372" title="List of country calling codes" label="Calling code"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695833" start="4460" end="4480" title="Telecom dispute between Gibraltar and Spain" label="Spanish restrictions"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="4835" end="4838" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170026" start="4990" end="5007" title="Córdoba Agreement" label="Córdoba Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q967735" start="5081" end="5089" title="Movistar" label="Movistar"/>
<link wikidata="Q160229" start="5091" end="5101" title="Telefónica" label="Telefónica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939295" start="5143" end="5151" title="Vodafone Spain" label="Vodafone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630989" start="5156" end="5161" title="Yoigo" label="Yoigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359411" start="5163" end="5169" title="Orange España" label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q354142" start="5419" end="5434" title="Strowger switch" label="Strowger switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242551" start="5601" end="5634" title="International Subscriber Dialling" label="International Subscriber Dialling"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="5726" end="5740" title="Francisco Franco" label="General Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q641659" start="5797" end="5801" title="Fiber-Optic Link Around the Globe" label="FLAG"/>
<link wikidata="Q492748" start="5845" end="5853" title="Estepona" label="Estepona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3060738" start="6038" end="6041" title="EIG (cable system)" label="EIG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344439" start="6117" end="6138" title="Local Loop Unbundling" label="Local Loop Unbundling"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="6283" end="6302" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="6370" end="6388" title="British Government" label="British Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="6444" end="6458" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q128852" start="6585" end="6602" title="Gibraltar Parliament" label="House of Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q79708" start="7042" end="7046" title="General Packet Radio Service" label="GPRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q189443" start="7188" end="7215" title="Multimedia Messaging Service" label="picture and video messaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q624837" start="8199" end="8233" title="Gibraltar Broadcasting Corporation" label="Gibraltar Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q152466" start="8258" end="8261" title="VHF" label="VHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q628096" start="8278" end="8281" title="UHF" label="UHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q795566" start="8337" end="8346" title="BBC Prime" label="BBC Prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304122" start="8570" end="8583" title="news bulletin" label="news bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358248" start="8621" end="8628" title="Filler (media)" label="fillers"/>
<link wikidata="Q25821" start="8755" end="8777" title="television licence fee" label="television licence fee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743194" start="9158" end="9182" title="Canal Sur" label="Spanish digital regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="9189" end="9198" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116986" start="9229" end="9247" title="Campo de Gibraltar" label="Campo de Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q624837" start="9382" end="9416" title="Gibraltar Broadcasting Corporation" label="Gibraltar Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368380" start="9456" end="9458" title="FM broadcasting" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q183755" start="9463" end="9465" title="amplitude modulation" label="AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q423289" start="9558" end="9575" title="BBC World Service" label="BBC World Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q220499" start="9607" end="9625" title="internet streaming" label="internet streaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q723685" start="9710" end="9725" title="video on demand" label="video on demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q81617" start="9847" end="9882" title="British Forces Broadcasting Service" label="British Forces Broadcasting Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="10438" end="10451" title="Amateur radio" label="Amateur radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10491" end="10507" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352600" start="10669" end="10702" title="International Amateur Radio Union" label="International Amateur Radio Union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10741" end="10764" title="Gibraltar National Week" label="Gibraltar National Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q906278" start="10944" end="10956" title="Country codes" label="Country code"/>
<link wikidata="Q42415" start="10977" end="10980" title=".gi" label=".gi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="10982" end="11007" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q161618" start="11755" end="11759" title="ADSL" label="ADSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q133973" start="12468" end="12473" title="WiMax" label="WiMax"/>
<link wikidata="Q130773" start="13436" end="13455" title="Gibraltar Chronicle" label="Gibraltar Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q582714" start="13655" end="13663" title="Panorama (Gibraltar)" label="Panorama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13706" end="13712" title="7 days (Gibraltar)" label="7 Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351269" start="13827" end="13847" title="El Faro de Gibraltar" label="El Faro de Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q68330" start="13915" end="13926" title="El Calpense" label="El Calpense"/>
<link wikidata="Q169896" start="14070" end="14126" title="Disputed status of Gibraltar" label="border between Spain and Gibraltar was eventually closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5350759" start="14271" end="14284" title="El Anunciador" label="El Anunciador"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14436" end="14453" title="Gibraltar Insight" label="Gibraltar Insight"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14474" end="14492" title="Gibraltar Magazine" label="Gibraltar Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q869091" start="14540" end="14575" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Gibraltar" label="Roman Catholic Diocese of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116986" start="14968" end="14986" title="Campo de Gibraltar" label="Campo de Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q624837" start="15419" end="15453" title="Gibraltar Broadcasting Corporation" label="Gibraltar Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q130773" start="15463" end="15482" title="Gibraltar Chronicle" label="Gibraltar Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695833" start="15600" end="15643" title="Telecom dispute between Gibraltar and Spain" label="Telecom dispute between Gibraltar and Spain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12084" wikidata="Q7834990" url="?curid=12084" title="Transport in Gibraltar">
<text>Transportation in Gibraltar includes roadway, bus, air, aerial cable car and sea. Due to Gibraltar&#x27;s compact size and density, walking is the most popular mode of transport making up 48% of trips. Private vehicles make up 30% of trips while a further 15% of trips are made on motorcycles or mopeds.

==Road==
===Private transport===

Gibraltar has of highways, all of which are paved. It has one of the highest levels of per capita car ownership in the world, with as many motor vehicles as people. Unlike the United Kingdom and other British Overseas Territories, traffic in Gibraltar drives on the right, as it shares a land border with Spain. Traffic formerly drove on the left; the change to driving on the right was made at 5.00 a.m. on 16 June 1929.

Older roads in Gibraltar, primarily in the city centre, are fairly narrow with a typical speed limit of . Gibraltar has ten fuelling stations, and fuel prices are lower than in neighbouring Spain due to lower fuel duty. Some people from Spain even enter Gibraltar for the sole purpose of purchasing fuel.

Gibraltar&#x27;s international vehicle registration is GBZ, and vehicle registration plates of Gibraltar consist of the letter &#x27;G&#x27; followed by up to five digits (1-99999) or four digits (1000-9999) and a single letter. These are as standard, the same shape, type face and colours as those in the UK, however non-standard number plates have been permitted. The Chief Minister&#x27;s official car has the registration number &quot;G1&quot;, while the Governor&#x27;s car, following tradition, has a crown, in place of a number.

The two highways in Spain leading in the vicinity are the A-383 which ends in La Linea, and the CA-34, which leads to the border.

The traditional sole road into Spain, Winston Churchill Avenue, intersected with the airport&#x27;s runway requiring movable barricades to close when aircraft landed or departed resulting in congestion. A new tunnel was constructed to solve this problem although delays pushed back its official opening until 31 March 2023. The new road and tunnel is named Kingsway with the approval of Charles III and passes under the terminal and the eastern edge of the runway before connecting with Devil&#x27;s Tower Road. Runway access is now closed to everyday road traffic but is still available for exceptional or emergency use as well as pedestrians, cyclists and mobility scooters.

===Public transport===
There are a total of eight different bus routes in Gibraltar. There are two companies who provide stage-carriage bus services in Gibraltar: Gibraltar Bus Company and Calypso Transport.

The Government of Gibraltar owned Gibraltar Bus Company operates routes 1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8 and 9 with a fleet of 21 buses, 18 of which are Dennis Dart low-floor midibus with Caetano Nimbus bodies and featuring 28 seats and three Mercedes-Benz Sprinter minibuses with Unvi bodies and catering for 15 seated passengers. The Darts entered service the day the company was officially formed, Saturday 10 April 2004, when it took over the operation of private company Rock City Services, who had been unwilling to invest in its fleet. The trio of Sprinters entered service during November 2010 and operate Service 1 to the Moorish Castle Estate in the Upper Town area of the city.

Calypso Transport operates route 5 between the Frontier (the land border with Spain), the airport and the city centre and tickets between this route and those operated by the Gibraltar Bus Company are not inter-changeable. An adult single fare on either operators&#x27; services currently costs £1.00 and an all-day Hoppa ticket costs £1.50. A year-long trial period where free travel was permitted aboard the buses of the Gibraltar Bus Company ended in May 2012 and only qualifying residents, commuters and military personnel now qualify for free travel in the territory.

====Bus Fares - Both Operators&#x27; Services====


Calypso Transport uses a fleet of red double-decker buses.
Route 5 buses operate every 15 minutes Monday to Saturdays, and every 20 minutes on Sundays, this is a shuttle between Reclamation Road (British Steps) near John Macintosh Square and the Frontier/Airport terminus via the Market Place bus station Grand Casemates Square.

Gibraltar Bus Company increased the bus fares for all routes in Gibraltar in May 2013.

===Taxis===
Taxis are available from a number of taxi ranks around the Rock. Many taxis cater specifically for tours of the Upper Rock Nature Reserve and these can be picked up from the frontier or the city centre, however, taxi drivers are also obliged to take standard fares as well as tours.

==Rail==
===Historical===
There are no extant railways in Gibraltar. There was formerly an extensive railway within the Gibraltar Dockyard, and neighbouring works and storage facilities. It included tunnels, one of which went through the Rock of Gibraltar, and is still in use today as a road tunnel. At the turn of the 19th and 20th centuries there was also a temporary industrial railway in Gibraltar. At the period when both railways were operational, it was possible to travel right round the entire coastline of Gibraltar by train. The dockyard railway had a roster of 17 locomotives, distinguished by numbers, but four of which also carried names: &quot;Gibraltar&quot;, &quot;Catalan&quot;, &quot;Rosia&quot;, and &quot;Calpe&quot;.

===Access to the rail system in Spain===
Whilst railway track extends to the outskirts of La Linea from the aborted San Roque-La Línea railway line expansion project in the 1970s, the nearest actual railway station (in Spain) is &quot;San Roque - La Línea&quot; station on the ADIF Algeciras-Bobadilla railway line Junction via Ronda. In 2021, after details emerged about a possible accession agreement of Gibraltar into the Schengen Area, the Chief Minister Fabian Picardo commented on the potential of railway development upwards towards Europe.

Until 1969 a ferry from Gibraltar provided convenient access to Algeciras station, which along with the railway line to Ronda was built by a British company known as the Algeciras Gibraltar Railway Company.

===Access to the rail system in Morocco===
Ferries by &quot;FRS&quot; running twice a week from Gibraltar to Tanger-Med port provide access to the Moroccan railway system.

==Sea==
Being a peninsula, the sea has long been vital to Gibraltar&#x27;s transport links. The Royal Navy Dockyard was formerly Gibraltar&#x27;s major employer. 

There is still a harbour on the west side of the territory. The Gibraltar-registered merchant marine consists of 26 ships of 1000 tonnes and above. There is an irregular direct regular fast ferry service to Tanger-Med port, Morocco but many passengers now travel from Algeciras or Tarifa due to a more regular service being present at those ports.

The ferry between Gibraltar and Algeciras, which existed until 1969, when communications with Spain were severed by the Spanish dictator Francisco Franco, was reopened on 16 December 2009, served by the Spanish company Transcoma, which used a catamaran, &quot;Punta Europa Segundo&quot; in memory of the original ferry that served the cross-Bay route in the 1960s. The maritime operations of Transcoma were taken over by Grupo Medex on 10 November 2010, which announced a higher-capacity new ship for 2011. Freight ferries between Gibraltar and Algeciras for shipments of food goods were started after the UK&#x27;s withdrawal from the EU.

Various cruise liners visit the Port of Gibraltar throughout the year, and dock at the Gibraltar Cruise Terminal on the Western Arm of the North Mole. This provides the means of transport for a significant proportion of day-tripper tourists arriving in the territory.

==Air==
During World War I, the Royal Naval Air Service brought one of the first seaplanes to come to Gibraltar, a Wight Seaplane, to search for submarines.

In 1931 the seaplane Saro Windhover Captained by Edgar Percival for GB Airways was the first of regular passenger flights from Gibraltar to Morocco. If there was a levant wind, then the seaplane would land on an aerodrome in Morocco instead of Tangier harbour.
Work began in 1939 to build what is today Gibraltar Airport and is the territory&#x27;s only airport. It is situated very close to the border with Spain. Winston Churchill Avenue the road which runs from the Gibraltar–Spain border, crosses the runway, requiring the road to be closed each time an aircraft lands or takes off. Scheduled civilian passenger flights are operated by EasyJet, British Airways and Royal Air Maroc.

Following an agreement signed in Córdoba between the Governments of the United Kingdom, Spain and Gibraltar in September 2006, the use of Gibraltar Airport by both Gibraltarian and Spanish services was agreed. Gibraltar Airport will be adapted to have an entrance from Spain (as well as Gibraltar), in a similar manner to Basel and Geneva airports (which are also adjacent to borders).

Iberia commenced direct flights between Madrid and Gibraltar on 16 December 2006 with GB Airways following on 1 May 2007. However, GB Airways discontinued its Madrid service on 30 September 2007 and Iberia subsequently considered using smaller aircraft, possibly from its Air Nostrum regional partner – indicating that neither operator may have been able to fill their planes with passengers. Iberia eventually withdrew its service in September 2008. In 2009 Ándalus Líneas Aéreas started flights between Gibraltar and Madrid. However, on 13 August 2010, the airline ceased operations because the Spanish aviation authorities withdrew their licence.

Following the takeover by EasyJet, GB Airways dropped its direct Gibraltar–London Heathrow service on 28 October 2006 despite apparently remaining popular. The reason cited by GB Airways was the &quot;convenience of&quot; concentrating all its London services onto a single hub at Gatwick. Later, a sale of several of GB Airways&#x27; Heathrow slots is believed to have netted GB Airways with up to £80m. In late 2007 GB Airways was bought by EasyJet (and thus ceased to be a British Airways franchise partner); all flights were rebranded as EasyJet in 2008.

Flights are available from Gibraltar to London Heathrow, London Gatwick, Luton, Bristol, Casablanca, Tangier and Manchester airports. During 2012 bmibaby offered a service to East Midlands Airport, but the airline ceased operations in September 2012.

==Cable car==
A cable car runs from just south of the city centre to the Ape&#x27;s Den and the Top of the Rock, which despite its name is actually the second highest peak of the Rock.

==Proposed tunnel==

In January 2021, it was reported that the United Kingdom and Morocco would discuss building a Strait of Gibraltar crossing between Gibraltar and Tangiers.

==Dispute with Spain==

The road crossing into Spain was closed by the Spanish authorities in 1969 and only reopened for pedestrians in 1982 and for vehicles in 1985.

A ferry operated between Algeciras and Gibraltar until 1969. For a few months in 2004 Spain banned cruise ships which had visited Gibraltar from going to Spanish ports on the same journey. In 2003, the land frontier was closed for a day by Spain on the grounds that a visiting cruise liner, the MV &quot;Aurora&quot;, was affected by contagious food poisoning. No cases in Gibraltar were reported.

The airport is built on the isthmus which the Spanish Government claim not to have been ceded in the Treaty of Utrecht, thus the integration of Gibraltar Airport in the Single European Sky system has been blocked by Spain. The 1987 agreement for joint control of the airport with Spain was rejected by the then Government of Gibraltar. All successive Governments of Gibraltar have rejected it, although welcoming joint use of the airport (which being next to the border could operate in a similar manner to Geneva Airport or EuroAirport Basel Mulhouse Freiburg). Following the &quot;Cordoba Agreement&quot; (between the UK, Spain and Gibraltar) in 2006, the joint use of the airport was finally agreed.

The road crossing from Gibraltar into Spain can often be subject to long delays. A loop road is located next to the border to hold cars waiting in the queue to cross into Spain. Motorists (and sometimes pedestrians) crossing the border are randomly subjected to long delays and searches by the Spanish authorities.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7834990" start="0" end="27" title="Transport in Gibraltar" label="Transportation in Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="339" end="348" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q269949" start="356" end="363" title="highway" label="highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="437" end="440" title="Automobile" label="car"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="540" end="568" title="British Overseas Territories" label="British Overseas Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q220656" start="591" end="610" title="Left- and right-hand traffic" label="drives on the right"/>
<link wikidata="Q5954672" start="971" end="980" title="fuel duty" label="fuel duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200700" start="1132" end="1172" title="vehicle registration plates of Gibraltar" label="vehicle registration plates of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q585760" start="1438" end="1459" title="Chief Minister of Gibraltar" label="Chief Minister&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q195965" start="1527" end="1542" title="Governor of Gibraltar" label="Governor&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473841" start="1727" end="1733" title="Gibraltar-Spain border" label="border"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026058" start="1774" end="1798" title="Winston Churchill Avenue, Gibraltar" label="Winston Churchill Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="2123" end="2134" title="Charles III" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267239" start="2223" end="2246" title="Devil&amp;#x27;s Tower Road" label="Devil&amp;#x27;s Tower Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q128986" start="2627" end="2650" title="Government of Gibraltar" label="Government of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q837671" start="2760" end="2771" title="Dennis Dart" label="Dennis Dart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017070" start="2795" end="2809" title="Caetano Nimbus" label="Caetano Nimbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q930495" start="2850" end="2872" title="Mercedes-Benz Sprinter" label="Mercedes-Benz Sprinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="3805" end="3823" title="Military of Gibraltar" label="military personnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q854585" start="3961" end="3978" title="double-decker bus" label="double-decker bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q327587" start="4228" end="4250" title="Grand Casemates Square" label="Grand Casemates Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q690347" start="4412" end="4416" title="Rock of Gibraltar" label="Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q690347" start="4875" end="4892" title="Rock of Gibraltar" label="Rock of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q182528" start="5320" end="5327" title="Catalan Bay" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q690347" start="5364" end="5369" title="Mons Calpe" label="Calpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q13148" start="5468" end="5476" title="La Linea de la Concepcion" label="La Linea"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406183" start="5494" end="5520" title="San Roque-La Línea railway" label="San Roque-La Línea railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415262" start="5613" end="5633" title="San Roque station" label="San Roque - La Línea"/>
<link wikidata="Q358752" start="5655" end="5659" title="Adif" label="ADIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987176" start="5660" end="5687" title="Algeciras-Bobadilla railway" label="Algeciras-Bobadilla railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q13153" start="5706" end="5711" title="Ronda" label="Ronda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356379" start="5837" end="5851" title="Fabian Picardo" label="Fabian Picardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q27878175" start="6097" end="6132" title="Algeciras Gibraltar Railway Company" label="Algeciras Gibraltar Railway Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q518888" start="6244" end="6254" title="Tanger-Med" label="Tanger-Med"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062577" start="6282" end="6298" title="Rail transport in Morocco" label="Moroccan railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q34763" start="6324" end="6333" title="peninsula" label="peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374547" start="6404" end="6423" title="Royal Navy Dockyard" label="Royal Navy Dockyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q248897" start="6489" end="6496" title="Gibraltar Harbour" label="harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631499" start="6504" end="6513" title="Gibraltar west" label="west side"/>
<link wikidata="Q25653" start="6662" end="6667" title="ferry" label="ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q518888" start="6679" end="6689" title="Tanger-Med" label="Tanger-Med"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="6696" end="6703" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q484552" start="6740" end="6749" title="Algeciras" label="Algeciras"/>
<link wikidata="Q222702" start="6753" end="6759" title="Tarifa" label="Tarifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="6958" end="6974" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7040" end="7049" title="Transcoma" label="Transcoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q190403" start="7064" end="7073" title="catamaran" label="catamaran"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7081" end="7101" title="Punta Europa Segundo" label="Punta Europa Segundo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7242" end="7253" title="Grupo Medex" label="Grupo Medex"/>
<link wikidata="Q39804" start="7470" end="7482" title="cruise liner" label="cruise liner"/>
<link wikidata="Q248897" start="7494" end="7511" title="Port of Gibraltar" label="Port of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q41312" start="7549" end="7574" title="Gibraltar Cruise Terminal" label="Gibraltar Cruise Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056132" start="7601" end="7611" title="North Mole, Gibraltar Harbour" label="North Mole"/>
<link wikidata="Q15850009" start="7682" end="7693" title="day-tripper" label="day-tripper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637285" start="7763" end="7786" title="Royal Naval Air Service" label="Royal Naval Air Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7999647" start="7846" end="7860" title="Wight Seaplane" label="Wight Seaplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q179758" start="7910" end="7924" title="Saro Windhover" label="Saro Windhover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284217" start="7938" end="7952" title="Edgar Percival" label="Edgar Percival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484885" start="7957" end="7967" title="GB Airways" label="GB Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479870" start="8053" end="8064" title="Levant (wind)" label="levant wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q501083" start="8192" end="8209" title="Gibraltar Airport" label="Gibraltar Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026058" start="8304" end="8328" title="Winston Churchill Avenue, Gibraltar" label="Winston Churchill Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473841" start="8358" end="8380" title="Gibraltar–Spain border" label="Gibraltar–Spain border"/>
<link wikidata="Q191551" start="8529" end="8536" title="EasyJet" label="EasyJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8766" start="8538" end="8553" title="British Airways" label="British Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q866103" start="8558" end="8573" title="Royal Air Maroc" label="Royal Air Maroc"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170026" start="8586" end="8598" title="Córdoba Agreement" label="an agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="8609" end="8616" title="Córdoba, Spain" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q187972" start="8963" end="8969" title="Iberia (airline)" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166276" start="9003" end="9009" title="Adolfo Suárez Madrid–Barajas Airport" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484885" start="9049" end="9059" title="GB Airways" label="GB Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q407694" start="9235" end="9246" title="Air Nostrum" label="Air Nostrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q251492" start="9422" end="9443" title="Ándalus Líneas Aéreas" label="Ándalus Líneas Aéreas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="9689" end="9704" title="Heathrow Airport" label="London Heathrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8703" start="9895" end="9902" title="Gatwick" label="Gatwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249105" start="9958" end="9963" title="landing slots" label="slots"/>
<link wikidata="Q8766" start="10090" end="10105" title="British Airways" label="British Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q8703" start="10231" end="10245" title="Gatwick Airport" label="London Gatwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q8712" start="10247" end="10252" title="Luton Airport" label="Luton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8725" start="10254" end="10261" title="Bristol Airport" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q955433" start="10263" end="10273" title="Casablanca Airport" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433022" start="10275" end="10282" title="Tangier Ibn Battouta Airport" label="Tangier"/>
<link wikidata="Q8694" start="10287" end="10297" title="Manchester Airport" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q310448" start="10320" end="10327" title="bmibaby" label="bmibaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q8977" start="10349" end="10370" title="East Midlands Airport" label="East Midlands Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q498002" start="10442" end="10451" title="aerial tramway" label="cable car"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555330" start="10499" end="10513" title="Gibraltar Barbary Macaques" label="Ape&amp;#x27;s Den"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="10675" end="10689" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="10694" end="10701" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q788182" start="10727" end="10755" title="Strait of Gibraltar crossing" label="Strait of Gibraltar crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="10764" end="10773" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q126148" start="10778" end="10786" title="Tangiers" label="Tangiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q484552" start="10982" end="10991" title="Algeciras" label="Algeciras"/>
<link wikidata="Q777179" start="11252" end="11273" title="MV Aurora (2000)" label="MV &amp;quot;Aurora&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q195908" start="11384" end="11391" title="Disputed status of the isthmus between Gibraltar and Spain" label="isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q154674" start="11457" end="11474" title="Treaty of Utrecht (1713)" label="Treaty of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q501083" start="11500" end="11517" title="Gibraltar Airport" label="Gibraltar Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190830" start="11525" end="11544" title="Single European Sky" label="Single European Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q289972" start="11863" end="11877" title="Geneva Airport" label="Geneva Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q156971" start="11881" end="11916" title="EuroAirport Basel Mulhouse Freiburg" label="EuroAirport Basel Mulhouse Freiburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170026" start="11939" end="11956" title="Cordoba Agreement" label="Cordoba Agreement"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12087" wikidata="Q236601" url="?curid=12087" title="Glorioso Islands">
<text>The Glorieuses or Glorioso Islands ( or officially also ) are a group of islands and rocks totaling . They are controlled by France as part of the Scattered Islands in the Indian Ocean in the French Southern and Antarctic Lands, a French overseas territory, but are also claimed by Comoros, Madagascar and formerly by Seychelles. They are geographically part of the Comoro Islands between the French overseas region of Mayotte and the nation of Madagascar.

==Archipelago==
The archipelago consists of two islands, Grande Glorieuse () and Île du Lys, as two rock islands, &quot;Roches Vertes&quot; and &quot;Île aux Crabes&quot;, along with two sandbanks that emerge at low tide. They form part of a coral reef and lagoon. Grande Glorieuses is roughly circular in shape and measures about in diameter. It is verdant, mostly by the coconut plantation remains and casuarina trees.

Île du Lys, located at about northeast of Grande Glorieuses, is about long and consists of sand dunes and scrub with some mangroves. It was formerly quarried for phosphate (guano).

The Glorieuses have an Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of . There are anchorages offshore, and Grande Glorieuse has a long airstrip.

==Climate==
The climate is tropical and the terrain is low and flat, varying in height from sea level to . Île de Lys in particular is a nesting ground for migratory seabirds, and turtles lay eggs on the beaches. In the ocean, migratory species such as humpback whales and whale sharks may appear.

==History==
While probably earlier known to Arab (perhaps especially Yemeni) navigators, the Glorieuses were named and settled in 1880 by a Frenchman, Hippolyte Caltaux, who established a coconut plantation on Grande Glorieuse. The archipelago became a French possession in 1892 when Captain Richard of the &quot;Primauget&quot; made a formal claim. In 1895, the Glorioso Island became a part of the colony of Mayotte and dependencies.

Historically flora on the islands mostly consisted of bois de rose, portia, banyan and other large native trees, many of which were felled following the establishment of the French settlement and plantation.

From 1914 to 1958, concessions to exploit the islands were given to Seychelles companies. The islands are today nature reserves with a meteorological station garrisoned by the French Foreign Legion. Despite the Glorioso Islands never having been a part of the Malagasy Protectorate but a part of the colony of Mayotte and dependencies, then a part of French Comoros, Madagascar has claimed sovereignty over the islands since 1972. The Comoros claims Mayotte and Glorioso Islands. The Seychelles claimed the islands too before the France–Seychelles Maritime Boundary Agreement in 2001.

In 2012, France founded Glorioso Islands Marine Natural Park, a marine protected area, to preserve the endangered flora and fauna of the islands.

==Gallery==
==See also==
*France–Seychelles Maritime Boundary Agreement
*Moheli Marine Park
*Glorioso Islands Marine Natural Park

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q236601" start="4" end="14" title="Glorioso Islands" label="Glorieuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q236601" start="18" end="34" title="Glorioso Islands" label="Glorioso Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q190571" start="147" end="184" title="Scattered Islands in the Indian Ocean" label="Scattered Islands in the Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q129003" start="192" end="227" title="French Southern and Antarctic Lands" label="French Southern and Antarctic Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2327385" start="231" end="256" title="Overseas territory (France)" label="French overseas territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q970" start="282" end="289" title="Comoros" label="Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042" start="318" end="328" title="Seychelles" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q634740" start="366" end="380" title="Comoro Islands" label="Comoro Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q202216" start="400" end="415" title="Overseas department and region" label="overseas region"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063" start="419" end="426" title="Mayotte" label="Mayotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="445" end="455" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="478" end="489" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593495" start="539" end="549" title="Île du Lys" label="Île du Lys"/>
<link wikidata="Q11292" start="700" end="710" title="coral reef" label="coral reef"/>
<link wikidata="Q187223" start="715" end="721" title="lagoon" label="lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q756005" start="862" end="871" title="casuarina" label="casuarina"/>
<link wikidata="Q25391" start="976" end="980" title="dune" label="dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756" start="1002" end="1010" title="mangrove" label="mangrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="1042" end="1051" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q170185" start="1053" end="1058" title="guano" label="guano"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="1085" end="1108" title="Exclusive Economic Zone" label="Exclusive Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q62447" start="1183" end="1191" title="airstrip" label="airstrip"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="1350" end="1359" title="Bird migration" label="migratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="1360" end="1367" title="seabird" label="seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q223044" start="1374" end="1380" title="turtle" label="turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q132905" start="1447" end="1461" title="humpback whale" label="humpback whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q80378" start="1467" end="1478" title="whale shark" label="whale shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q121842" start="1633" end="1642" title="Frenchman" label="Frenchman"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="1681" end="1688" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063" start="1893" end="1927" title="Mayotte" label="colony of Mayotte and dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387305" start="1984" end="1996" title="Dalbergia maritima" label="bois de rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q715739" start="1998" end="2004" title="Thespesia populnea" label="portia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5678886" start="2006" end="2012" title="banyan" label="banyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042" start="2207" end="2217" title="Seychelles" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="2251" end="2266" title="nature reserves" label="nature reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q190107" start="2274" end="2296" title="meteorological station" label="meteorological station"/>
<link wikidata="Q188559" start="2315" end="2336" title="French Foreign Legion" label="French Foreign Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3951019" start="2399" end="2420" title="Malagasy Protectorate" label="Malagasy Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512031" start="2490" end="2504" title="French Comoros" label="French Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="2506" end="2516" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q26833062" start="2669" end="2714" title="France–Seychelles Maritime Boundary Agreement" label="France–Seychelles Maritime Boundary Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364608" start="2749" end="2785" title="Glorioso Islands Marine Natural Park" label="Glorioso Islands Marine Natural Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367500" start="2789" end="2810" title="marine protected area" label="marine protected area"/>
<link wikidata="Q26833062" start="2898" end="2943" title="France–Seychelles Maritime Boundary Agreement" label="France–Seychelles Maritime Boundary Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364399" start="2945" end="2963" title="Moheli Marine Park" label="Moheli Marine Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3364608" start="2965" end="3001" title="Glorioso Islands Marine Natural Park" label="Glorioso Islands Marine Natural Park"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12098" wikidata="Q14686" url="?curid=12098" title="Gulf of Finland">
<text>The Gulf of Finland (; ; ; ) is the easternmost arm of the Baltic Sea. It extends between Finland to the north and Estonia to the south, to Saint Petersburg - the second largest city of Russia - to the east, where the river Neva drains into it. Other major cities around the gulf include Helsinki and Tallinn. The eastern parts of the gulf belong to Russia, and some of Russia&#x27;s most important oil harbors are located there, including Primorsk. As the seaway to Saint Petersburg, the gulf is of considerable strategic importance to Russia. Some of the environmental problems affecting the Baltic Sea are at their most pronounced in the shallow gulf. Proposals for an undersea Helsinki–Tallinn Tunnel through the gulf have been made.

==Geography==
The Gulf of Finland has an area of . The length (from the Hanko Peninsula to Saint Petersburg) is and the width varies from near the entrance to on the meridian of Moshchny Island; in the Neva Bay, it decreases to . The gulf is relatively shallow, with the depth decreasing from the entrance to the gulf to the continent. The sharpest change occurs near Narva-Jõesuu, which is why this place is called the Narva wall. The average depth is with the maximum of . The depth of the Neva Bay is less than ; therefore, in March 2019, a channel was dug at the bottom for safe navigation. Because of the large influx of fresh water from rivers, especially from the Neva River (two-thirds of the total runoff), the gulf water has very low salinity – between 0.2 and 0.3 ‰ at the surface and 0.3–0.5 ‰ near the bottom. The average water temperature is close to in winter; in summer, it is at the surface and at the bottom. Parts of the gulf can freeze from late November to late April; the freezing starts in the east and gradually proceeds to the west. Complete freezing usually occurs by late January, and it may not occur in mild winters.
Frequent strong western winds cause waves, surges of water and floods.

The northern coast of the gulf is high and winding, with abundant small bays and skerries, but only a few large bays (Vyborg) and peninsulas (Hanko and Porkkalanniemi). The coast is mostly sloping; there are abundant sandy dunes, with occasional pine trees. The southern shores are smooth and shallow, but along the entire coast runs a limestone escarpment, the Baltic Klint, with a height up to . In the east, the gulf ends with Neva Bay; in the west it merges with the Baltic Sea.

The gulf contains numerous banks, skerries and islands. The largest include Kotlin Island with the city of Kronstadt (population 42,800), Beryozovye Islands, Lisiy Island, Maly Vysotsky Island with the nearby city of Vysotsk (population 1706), Gogland (Suursaari), Moshtchny (Lavansaari), Bolshoy Tyuters (Tytärsaari), Sommers, Naissaar, Kimitoön, Kökar, Seskar (Seiskari), Pakri Islands and others.

Starting in 1700, Russia constructed nineteen artificial islands with fortresses in the gulf. They aimed to defend Russia from maritime attacks, especially in the context of the Great Northern War of 1700–1721. Such fortresses include Fort Alexander, Krasnaya Gorka, Ino, Totleben and .

The largest rivers flowing into the gulf are the Neva (from the east), the Narva (from the south), and the Kymi (from the north). Keila, Pirita, Jägala, Kunda, Luga, Sista and Kovashi flow into the gulf from the south. From the north flow the Sestra River, Porvoo, Vantaa and several other small rivers. The Saimaa Canal connects the gulf with the Saimaa lake.

===Extent===
The International Hydrographic Organization defines the western limit of the Gulf of Finland as a line running from Spithami (59°13&#x27;N), in Estonia, through the Estonian island of Osmussaar from SE to NW and on to the SW extremity of Hanko Peninsula (22°54&#x27;E) in Finland.

==Geological history==

The modern depression can be traced to the incision of large rivers during the Cenozoic prior to the Quaternary glaciation. These rivers eroded the sedimentary strata above the Fennoscandian Shield. In particular the eroded material was made up of Ediacaran (Vendian) and Cambrian-aged claystone and sandstone. As erosion progressed, the rivers encountered harder layers of Ordovician-aged limestone, leading to the formation of the cliffs of Baltic Klint in northern Estonia and Ingria. Subsequently, the depression was somewhat reshaped by glacier activities. Its retreat formed the Littorina Sea, whose water level was some 7–9 metres higher than the present level of the Baltic Sea. Some 4,000 years ago the sea receded and shoals in the gulf have become its islands. Later uplifting of the Baltic Shield skewed the surface of the gulf; for this reason, its ancient northern shores are significantly higher than the southern ones.

==Flora and fauna==

The climate in the area is humid continental climate, characterized by temperate to hot summers and cold, occasionally severe winters with regular precipitation. The vegetation is dominated by a mixture of coniferous and deciduous forests and treeless coastal meadows and cliffs. The major forest trees are pine, spruce, birch, willows, rowan, aspen, common and gray alder. In the far eastern part of the gulf vegetation of the marshy areas consists mainly of bulrush and reeds, as well as fully aquatic plants, such as white and yellow waterlilies and acute sedge. Aquatic plants in the shallow waters of the gulf include &quot;Ruppia&quot; and spiny naiad.

Fish species of the gulf include Atlantic salmon, viviparous eelpout, gobies, belica, loach, European chub, common minnow, silver bream, common dace, ruffe, Crucian carp, stickleback, European smelt, common rudd, brown trout, tench, pipefish, burbot, perch, gudgeon, lumpsucker, roach, lamprey, vendace, garfish, common whitefish, common bream, zander, orfe, northern pike, spined loach, sprat, Baltic herring, sabre carp, common bleak, European eel and Atlantic cod. Commercial fishing is carried out in spring and autumn. Grey seal and ringed seal are met in the gulf, but the latter is very rare.

==History==

Many ancient sites were discovered on the shores of the gulf dated to up to 9000 years old. Humans began to inhabit these places soon after the ice age glaciers retreated and the water level of the Littorina Sea lowered to reveal the land. Remains of about 11 Neolithic settlements were found since 1905 in the mouth of the river Sestra River (Leningrad Oblast). They contain arrow tips and scrapers made of quartz, numerous food utensils and traces of fire camps – all indicative of hunting rather than agricultural or animal husbandry activities.
The gulf coast was later populated by Finnic peoples. Estonians inhabited the region of the modern Estonia, Votes were living on the south of the gulf and Izhorians to the south of Neva River. Korela tribes settled to the west of Lake Ladoga. They were engaged in slash-and-burn agriculture, animal husbandry, hunting and fishing. From the 8th to the 13th century, the Gulf of Finland and Neva were parts of the waterway from Scandinavia to the Byzantine Empire.

From the 9th century, the eastern coast of the gulf was controlled by Veliky Novgorod and was called &quot;Vodskaya Pyatina&quot;. As a result of the 1219, crusade and the Battle of Lindanise, northern Estonia became part of Denmark (Danish Estonia). In the 13th century, the city of Reval (Tallinn) () was established on the site of modern Tallinn, capital of Estonia. As a result of the Estonian uprising in 1343, northern Estonia was taken over by the Teutonic Order and sold by Denmark in 1346. In 1559, during the Livonian War, the Bishop of Ösel-Wiek in Old Livonia sold his lands to King Frederick II of Denmark. The Danish king gave the territory to his younger brother Magnus who landed on Saaremaa with an army in 1560. The whole of Saaremaa became a Danish possession in 1573, and remained so until it was transferred to Sweden in 1645.

In the 12th and 13th centuries, the Finnish tribes on the north of the gulf were conquered by the Swedes who then proceeded to the Slavs. The first encounter is attributed to 1142 when 60 Swedish ships attacked 3 Russian merchant vessels. After a Swedish attack in 1256, the Russian army of Alexander Nevsky crossed the frozen gulf and raided the Swedish territories in the modern Finland. In 1293, the Vyborg Castle and city of Vyborg was founded by the Swedish marshal Torkel Knutsson. The castle was fought over for decades between Sweden and the Novgorod Republic. By the Treaty of Nöteborg in 1323, Vyborg was finally recognized as a part of Sweden. It withstood a prolonged siege by Daniil Shchenya during the Russo-Swedish War of 1496–1499. The town&#x27;s trade privileges were chartered by King Eric of Pomerania in 1403. Vyborg remained in Swedish hands until its capture by Peter the Great in the Great Northern War (1710).

In 1323, the Treaty of Nöteborg set the border between Sweden and Russia along the river Sestra. In the 15th century, the Izhorian lands of the Novgorod Republic were attached to the Grand Duchy of Moscow. In 1550, Gustav I of Sweden founded a city on the site of modern Helsinki. As a result of the Russian defeat in the Ingrian War (1610–1617) and the Treaty of Stolbovo (1617) the lands on the Gulf of Finland and Neva River became part of the Swedish Ingria. Its capital Nyen was located in the delta of Neva River.

Russia reclaimed the eastern part of the gulf as a result of the victory in the Great Northern War (1700–1721). On 16 May 1703, Saint Petersburg was founded in the mouth of Neva River, not far from Nyen, and in 1712 it became the capital city of Russia. To protect the city from the Swedish fleet, the Kronshlot fortress was built on an artificial island near the Kotlin Island in May 1704. By 1705, five more such forts were built nearby composing the city Kronstadt. These fortifications, nicknamed by the contemporaries &quot;the Russian Dardanelles&quot;, were designed to control the Gulf waterway.

In 1710, the cities of Peterhof and Oranienbaum were founded on the southern shore of the Gulf of Finland. On 27 July 1714, near the Hanko Peninsula, the Russian Navy won the Battle of Gangut – a decisive victory over the Imperial Swedish Navy. The Russo-Swedish war ended in 1721 by the Treaty of Nystad, by which Russia received all the lands along the Neva and the Gulf of Finland, as well as Estland, Swedish Livonia and western part of the Karelian Isthmus, including Vyborg. However, Finland was returned to Sweden. The war resumed in (1788–1790), and the Battle of Hogland occurred on 6 July 1788 near the island Gogland. Both the battle and the war were relatively minor and indecisive, with the outcome of Russia retaining its territories.

The next Russo-Swedish war was fought in (1808–1809). It ended with the Treaty of Fredrikshamn giving the Russia rights on the territory of Finland and Åland. A newly established Grand Duchy of Finland in 1809 received broad autonomy from Russian Empire, and Western Karelia was returned to Finland. On 6 December 1917, the Parliament of Finland promulgated the Finnish Declaration of Independence. Western Karelia was annexed by the Soviet Union after the Winter War.

Estonia declared independence in 1918, and in 1918–1920 fought a successful war of independence against Soviet Russia. Estonia declared neutrality at the outbreak of World War II; however the country was repeatedly contested, invaded and occupied, first by the Soviet Union in 1940, then by Nazi Germany in 1941, and was ultimately reoccupied in 1944 by, and annexed into, the USSR as an administrative subunit (Estonian SSR). Estonia regained independence in 1991.

In March 1921, the Kronstadt rebellion by sailors was put down by the Red Army. The Gulf of Finland had several major naval operations during World War II. In August 1941, during the evacuation of the Baltic Fleet from Tallinn to Kronstadt, German forces sank 15 Russian military vessels, (5 destroyers, 2 submarines, 3 guard ships, 2 minesweepers, 2 gunboats and 1 Motor Torpedo Boat) as well as 43 transport and support ships. Several ships still remain on the gulf bottom near Cape Juminda, and a monument was raised there in memory of those lost in the events.

In 1978, construction was started on the Saint Petersburg Dam aiming to protect Saint Petersburg from the frequent floods. The work was halted at 60% completion in the late 1980s, due to the financial problems related to the breakup of the Soviet Union; it was resumed in 2001 and is – as of August 2011 – complete.

==Economy==
The southern coast of the gulf contains the Leningrad Nuclear Power Plant and a network of ports and unique natural and historical places. Navigation has long been the dominant activity in the gulf. The major port cities and their functions are, in Russia: Saint Petersburg (all kinds of goods), Kronstadt (container shipping),
Lomonosov (general cargo, containers, metals), Vyborg (general cargo), Primorsk (oil and petroleum products), Vysotsk (oil and coal), Ust-Luga (oil, coal, timber, containers); in Finland: Helsinki (containers), Kotka (containers, timber, agricultural products; it is the main transhipment cargo port for Russia), Hanko (containers, vehicles), Turku (containers, rail ferry), Kilpilahti/Sköldvik harbour (oil refinery); in Estonia: Tallinn (grains, refrigerators, oil), Paldiski, Sillamäe. Gulf of Finland is also part of the Volga–Baltic Waterway and White Sea–Baltic Canal. Important goods include apatite from the Kola Peninsula, Karelian granite and greenstone, timber from Arkhangelsk Oblast and Vologda, ferrous metals from Cherepovets, coal from Donbas and the Kuznetsk Basin, pyrite from Ural, potassium chloride from Solikamsk, oil from Volga region, and grains from many regions of Russia.

Passenger transport on the gulf includes a number of ferry lines which connect the following ports: Helsinki and Hanko (Finland), Mariehamn (Åland), Stockholm and Kapellskär (Sweden), Tallinn and Paldiski (Estonia), Rostock (Germany), Saint Petersburg and Kaliningrad (Russia), as well as many other cities. The capitals of Estonia and Finland both face the Gulf and with Estonia joining the EU (2004) and the Schengen Area (2007), travel between those culturally and linguistically close capitals increased dramatically. In 2023 over 7 million passengers traveled by ferry between Tallinn and Helsinki. There are proposals for a fixed link (bridge or tunnel) sometimes referred to with the portmanteau Talsinki.

Another major and historical activity in the gulf is fishing, especially on the northern coast near Vyborg, Primorsk and on the southern coast near Ust-Luga. Commercial fish species are herring, sprats, European smelt, whitefishes, carp bream, roaches, perch, European eel, lamprey and others. In 2005, the catchment was 2000 tons by the ships of Saint Petersburg and Leningrad Oblast alone.

In September 2005 the agreement was signed on the construction of the Nord Stream 1 offshore gas pipeline on the Baltic Sea, from Vyborg to the German city of Greifswald. The first line was expected become operational in 2011. Afterwards, the first line of Nord Stream was laid by May 2011 and was inaugurated on 8 November 2011; the second line was inaugurated on 8 October 2012, and was completed in September 2021, but has not entered service yet, as its approval got halted in February 2022.

==Archaeology==

The bottom of the gulf is one of the world&#x27;s largest ship cemeteries. Because of the low salinity and cold waters, and no shipworms, the ships are relatively well preserved. Since the 6th century, major waterways were running through the gulf, and from the 8th to the 10th century, about 3,000 tonnes of silver was transported there. Later, the gulf was actively used by Sweden and Russia for transport of goods. Every year saw dozens of lost ships. In the fall of 1743, 17 Russian warships returning from Finland sank in just 7 hours, and in the summer of 1747, 26 merchant vessels sank within 4 hours near Narva. A record was set in 1721 when during the evacuation of Russian troops from Finland, more than 100 vessels were lost within 3 months, including 64 in a single night.

By the end of 1996, about 5,000 submerged objects were identified in the Russian part of the gulf, including 2,500 ships, 1,500 airplanes, and small items such as boats, anchors, tanks, tractors, cars, cannons, and even naval mines, aerial bombs, torpedoes, and other ammunition. The ships belonged to Russia (25%), Germany (19%), United Kingdom (17%), Sweden (15%), Netherlands (8%), and Finland (7%). The remaining 9% are from Norway, Denmark, France, United States, Italy, Estonia, and Latvia. These objects present potential hazards to navigation, fishery, coastal construction, laying of submarine pipelines and cables, and the environment. Mines were laid in the gulf during World War I (38,932 units), the Russian Civil War, and the Winter War (1939–1940), with an estimated total number of 60,000; 85,000 more mines were set during World War II, and only a fraction of all those were eliminated after the wars.

==Pollution==

The ecological condition of the Gulf of Finland, Neva Bay and Neva River is unsatisfactory. There is significant contamination by ions of mercury and copper, organochlorine pesticides, phenols, petroleum products and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. Cleaning of waste water in Saint Petersburg was started in 1979 and by 1997 about 74% of wastewater was purified. This number rose to 85% in 2005, to 91.7% by 2008, and as of 2009 was expected to reach 100% by 2011 with the completion of the expansion of the main sewerage plant. Nevertheless, in 2008, the Federal Service of Saint Petersburg announced that no beach of Saint Petersburg is fit for swimming.

Fish catchment decreased 10 times between 1989 and 2005. Apart from pollution, another reason for that is hydraulic and engineering works. For example, construction of new ports in Ust-Luga and Vysotsk and on Vasilyevsky Island adversely affected the spawning of fish. Extraction of sand and gravel in the Neva Bay for the land reclamation destroy spawning sites of European smelt.

Construction of the Saint Petersburg Dam reduced water exchange of the Neva Bay with the eastern part of the gulf by 10–20% that increased the contamination level of Neva Bay. The largest changes occur within from the dam. Some shallow areas between Saint Petersburg and the dam are turning into swamps. Waterlogging and the associated rotting of plants may eventually lead to eutrophication of the area. Also worrying is expansion of oil ports in the gulf and the construction of a treatment center for spent fuel from the Leningrad Nuclear Power Plant.

The port of Kronstadt is currently serving as a transit point for the import in Russia of radioactive waste through the Baltic Sea. The waste, mostly depleted uranium hexafluoride, is further transported through Saint Petersburg to Novouralsk, Angarsk and other cities of eastern Russia. This transit point will be moved from Saint Petersburg to the port Ust-Luga, which is about west of Saint Petersburg, and within the Border Security Zone of Russia, as decided by the Russian government in 2003 (Order No. 1491-r of 14 October 2003). It is expected that after this completes it should reduce the ecological risks for Saint Petersburg. Ust-Luga is envisioned to be the largest transportation and logistics hub in northwestern Russia. However, in 2015 it was reported that some construction plans in Ust-Luga were frozen, and the construction of Ust-Luga Multimodal Complex, supposed to be the transit point for radioactive waste, never started.

== Gallery ==
==Major cities==

* Espoo
* Hamina
* Hanko
* Helsinki
* Kirkkonummi
* Kotka
* Kronstadt
* Kunda
* Loksa
* Lomonosov
* Loviisa
* Maardu
* Narva-Jõesuu
* Paldiski
* Peterhof
* Porvoo
* Primorsk
* Saint Petersburg
* Sestroretsk
* Sillamäe
* Sosnovy Bor
* Tallinn
* Vyborg
* Zelenogorsk
==See also==

* Kiperort Peninsula
* Kven Sea
* Peter the Great&#x27;s Naval Fortress

==References==
==External links==

* ESA satellite photograph of the Gulf of Finland (archived 7 July 2004)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14686" start="4" end="19" title="Gulf of Finland" label="Gulf of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="59" end="69" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="90" end="97" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="115" end="122" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="140" end="156" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="186" end="192" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q645" start="224" end="228" title="Neva" label="Neva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="288" end="296" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770" start="301" end="308" title="Tallinn" label="Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q15307" start="440" end="448" title="Primorsk, Leningrad Oblast" label="Primorsk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="557" end="604" title="Baltic Sea#Environmental status" label="environmental problems affecting the Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317590" start="672" end="680" title="undersea tunnel" label="undersea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035202" start="681" end="704" title="Helsinki–Tallinn Tunnel" label="Helsinki–Tallinn Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575641" start="811" end="826" title="Hanko Peninsula" label="Hanko Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329425" start="917" end="932" title="Moshchny Island" label="Moshchny Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q27698" start="941" end="949" title="Neva Bay" label="Neva Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q723372" start="1107" end="1119" title="Narva-Jõesuu" label="Narva-Jõesuu"/>
<link wikidata="Q371130" start="1948" end="1954" title="floods in Saint Petersburg" label="floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q216851" start="2038" end="2046" title="skerry" label="skerries"/>
<link wikidata="Q14657" start="2075" end="2081" title="Vyborg" label="Vyborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474150" start="2109" end="2123" title="Porkkalanniemi" label="Porkkalanniemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002146" start="2319" end="2331" title="Baltic Klint" label="Baltic Klint"/>
<link wikidata="Q819457" start="2517" end="2530" title="Kotlin Island" label="Kotlin Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q155863" start="2548" end="2557" title="Kronstadt" label="Kronstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654640" start="2579" end="2597" title="Beryozovye Islands" label="Beryozovye Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888000" start="2613" end="2633" title="Maly Vysotsky Island" label="Maly Vysotsky Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q15250" start="2658" end="2665" title="Vysotsk" label="Vysotsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049578" start="2685" end="2692" title="Gogland" label="Gogland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329425" start="2706" end="2715" title="Moshchny Island" label="Moshtchny"/>
<link wikidata="Q497267" start="2730" end="2745" title="Bolshoy Tyuters" label="Bolshoy Tyuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976258" start="2760" end="2767" title="Sommers" label="Sommers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132553" start="2769" end="2777" title="Naissaar" label="Naissaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q596607" start="2779" end="2787" title="Kimitoön (island)" label="Kimitoön"/>
<link wikidata="Q179730" start="2789" end="2794" title="Kökar" label="Kökar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741831" start="2796" end="2802" title="Seskar" label="Seskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327548" start="2815" end="2828" title="Pakri Islands" label="Pakri Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q13691" start="2888" end="2905" title="artificial island" label="artificial island"/>
<link wikidata="Q151616" start="3020" end="3038" title="Great Northern War" label="Great Northern War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4456495" start="3077" end="3091" title="Fort Alexander (Saint Petersburg)" label="Fort Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q4237958" start="3093" end="3107" title="Krasnaya Gorka fort" label="Krasnaya Gorka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972371" start="3109" end="3112" title="Fort Ino" label="Ino"/>
<link wikidata="Q645" start="3179" end="3183" title="Neva River" label="Neva"/>
<link wikidata="Q209031" start="3205" end="3210" title="Narva River" label="Narva"/>
<link wikidata="Q890526" start="3237" end="3241" title="Kymi (river)" label="Kymi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542679" start="3260" end="3265" title="Keila River" label="Keila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139148" start="3267" end="3273" title="Pirita River" label="Pirita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714829" start="3275" end="3281" title="Jägala River" label="Jägala"/>
<link wikidata="Q624225" start="3283" end="3288" title="Kunda River" label="Kunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q14684" start="3290" end="3294" title="Luga River" label="Luga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327760" start="3373" end="3385" title="Sestra River (Leningrad Oblast)" label="Sestra River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789447" start="3387" end="3393" title="Porvoonjoki" label="Porvoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092330" start="3395" end="3401" title="Vantaa (river)" label="Vantaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129324" start="3438" end="3450" title="Saimaa Canal" label="Saimaa Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192770" start="3478" end="3484" title="Saimaa" label="Saimaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q233611" start="3509" end="3548" title="International Hydrographic Organization" label="International Hydrographic Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3451054" start="3621" end="3629" title="Spithami" label="Spithami"/>
<link wikidata="Q648860" start="3689" end="3698" title="Osmussaar" label="Osmussaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575641" start="3743" end="3758" title="Hanko Peninsula" label="Hanko Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q23582839" start="3854" end="3862" title="river incision" label="incision"/>
<link wikidata="Q102416" start="3890" end="3898" title="Cenozoic" label="Cenozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040770" start="3912" end="3933" title="Quaternary glaciation" label="Quaternary glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q580133" start="3988" end="4008" title="Baltic Shield" label="Fennoscandian Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q188654" start="4059" end="4068" title="Ediacaran" label="Ediacaran"/>
<link wikidata="Q79064" start="4083" end="4091" title="Cambrian" label="Cambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q62100" start="4185" end="4195" title="Ordovician" label="Ordovician"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="4201" end="4210" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002146" start="4254" end="4266" title="Baltic Klint" label="Baltic Klint"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="4279" end="4286" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q14688" start="4291" end="4297" title="Ingria" label="Ingria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006740" start="4396" end="4409" title="Littorina Sea" label="Littorina Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q580133" start="4606" end="4619" title="Baltic Shield" label="Baltic Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="4795" end="4820" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="4974" end="4984" title="coniferous" label="coniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131316" start="4989" end="4998" title="deciduous" label="deciduous"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="5075" end="5079" title="pine" label="pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q145992" start="5081" end="5087" title="Picea abies" label="spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q25243" start="5089" end="5094" title="birch" label="birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q36050" start="5096" end="5103" title="willows" label="willows"/>
<link wikidata="Q12646464" start="5105" end="5110" title="rowan" label="rowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087592" start="5112" end="5117" title="aspen" label="aspen"/>
<link wikidata="Q156904" start="5119" end="5125" title="Alnus glutinosa" label="common"/>
<link wikidata="Q157641" start="5130" end="5140" title="Alnus incana" label="gray alder"/>
<link wikidata="Q145707" start="5228" end="5235" title="Typha" label="bulrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q28557" start="5240" end="5245" title="Phragmites communis" label="reeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q147030" start="5288" end="5293" title="Nymphaea alba" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q146406" start="5298" end="5304" title="Nuphar lutea" label="yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q157908" start="5321" end="5332" title="Carex acuta" label="acute sedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q157048" start="5397" end="5403" title="Ruppia" label="Ruppia"/>
<link wikidata="Q158868" start="5414" end="5425" title="Najas marina" label="spiny naiad"/>
<link wikidata="Q188879" start="5461" end="5476" title="Atlantic salmon" label="Atlantic salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q27336" start="5478" end="5496" title="viviparous eelpout" label="viviparous eelpout"/>
<link wikidata="Q56282003" start="5498" end="5504" title="goby" label="gobies"/>
<link wikidata="Q750967" start="5506" end="5512" title="Leucaspius delineatus" label="belica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360260" start="5514" end="5519" title="Misgurnus" label="loach"/>
<link wikidata="Q26821893" start="5521" end="5534" title="European chub" label="European chub"/>
<link wikidata="Q214278" start="5536" end="5549" title="common minnow" label="common minnow"/>
<link wikidata="Q183407" start="5551" end="5563" title="Blicca bjoerkna" label="silver bream"/>
<link wikidata="Q143326" start="5565" end="5576" title="common dace" label="common dace"/>
<link wikidata="Q187981" start="5578" end="5583" title="ruffe" label="ruffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q194031" start="5585" end="5597" title="Crucian carp" label="Crucian carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q215420" start="5599" end="5610" title="stickleback" label="stickleback"/>
<link wikidata="Q840795" start="5612" end="5626" title="European smelt" label="European smelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q200594" start="5628" end="5639" title="common rudd" label="common rudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857311" start="5641" end="5652" title="brown trout" label="brown trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q76280" start="5654" end="5659" title="tench" label="tench"/>
<link wikidata="Q675781" start="5661" end="5669" title="pipefish" label="pipefish"/>
<link wikidata="Q144700" start="5671" end="5677" title="burbot" label="burbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q166812" start="5679" end="5684" title="European perch" label="perch"/>
<link wikidata="Q237619" start="5686" end="5693" title="Gobio gobio" label="gudgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30066" start="5695" end="5705" title="Cyclopterus lumpus" label="lumpsucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q180447" start="5707" end="5712" title="Rutilus" label="roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q261485" start="5714" end="5721" title="lamprey" label="lamprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q754061" start="5723" end="5730" title="Coregonus albula" label="vendace"/>
<link wikidata="Q643373" start="5732" end="5739" title="garfish" label="garfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q743084" start="5741" end="5757" title="Coregonus lavaretus" label="common whitefish"/>
<link wikidata="Q144534" start="5759" end="5771" title="common bream" label="common bream"/>
<link wikidata="Q146641" start="5773" end="5779" title="zander" label="zander"/>
<link wikidata="Q144497" start="5781" end="5785" title="Ide (fish)" label="orfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q165278" start="5787" end="5800" title="northern pike" label="northern pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q728408" start="5802" end="5814" title="spined loach" label="spined loach"/>
<link wikidata="Q506823" start="5816" end="5821" title="European sprat" label="sprat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396858" start="5823" end="5837" title="Baltic herring" label="Baltic herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q198568" start="5839" end="5849" title="Pelecus cultratus" label="sabre carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q200473" start="5851" end="5863" title="common bleak" label="common bleak"/>
<link wikidata="Q26387" start="5865" end="5877" title="European eel" label="European eel"/>
<link wikidata="Q199788" start="5882" end="5894" title="Atlantic cod" label="Atlantic cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q27370" start="5952" end="5961" title="Grey seal" label="Grey seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q203208" start="5966" end="5977" title="ringed seal" label="ringed seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006740" start="6240" end="6253" title="Littorina Sea" label="Littorina Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="6302" end="6311" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327760" start="6372" end="6403" title="Sestra River (Leningrad Oblast)" label="Sestra River (Leningrad Oblast)"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="6450" end="6456" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q80962" start="6562" end="6578" title="animal husbandry" label="animal husbandry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745748" start="6629" end="6643" title="Balto-Finnic peoples" label="Finnic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q173302" start="6645" end="6654" title="Estonians" label="Estonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q836660" start="6699" end="6704" title="Votians" label="Votes"/>
<link wikidata="Q653956" start="6746" end="6755" title="Izhorians" label="Izhorians"/>
<link wikidata="Q213470" start="6784" end="6790" title="Karelians" label="Korela"/>
<link wikidata="Q15288" start="6821" end="6832" title="Lake Ladoga" label="Lake Ladoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q622543" start="6855" end="6869" title="slash-and-burn" label="slash-and-burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="7017" end="7028" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="7036" end="7052" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235" start="7125" end="7140" title="Veliky Novgorod" label="Veliky Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341824" start="7227" end="7246" title="Battle of Lyndanisse" label="Battle of Lindanise"/>
<link wikidata="Q9876461" start="7289" end="7303" title="Danish Estonia" label="Danish Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q627656" start="7444" end="7469" title="Saint George&amp;#x27;s Night Uprising" label="Estonian uprising in 1343"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="7510" end="7524" title="Teutonic Order" label="Teutonic Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q246863" start="7574" end="7586" title="Livonian War" label="Livonian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q669032" start="7592" end="7611" title="Bishopric of Ösel-Wiek" label="Bishop of Ösel-Wiek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458532" start="7615" end="7626" title="Old Livonia" label="Old Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154041" start="7650" end="7673" title="Frederick II of Denmark" label="Frederick II of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q951302" start="7754" end="7762" title="Saaremaa" label="Saaremaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q951302" start="7798" end="7806" title="Saaremaa" label="Saaremaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q174044" start="8195" end="8211" title="Alexander Nevsky" label="Alexander Nevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272243" start="8307" end="8320" title="Vyborg Castle" label="Vyborg Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q14657" start="8333" end="8339" title="Vyborg" label="Vyborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q111837" start="8367" end="8374" title="marshal" label="marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q373737" start="8375" end="8390" title="Torkel Knutsson" label="Torkel Knutsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q151536" start="8454" end="8471" title="Novgorod Republic" label="Novgorod Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q853685" start="8480" end="8498" title="Treaty of Nöteborg" label="Treaty of Nöteborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="8551" end="8557" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163079" start="8593" end="8608" title="Daniil Shchenya" label="Daniil Shchenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509437" start="8620" end="8650" title="Russo-Swedish War (1496–1499)" label="Russo-Swedish War of 1496–1499"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="8690" end="8699" title="Royal charter" label="chartered"/>
<link wikidata="Q161958" start="8708" end="8725" title="Eric of Pomerania" label="Eric of Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="8789" end="8804" title="Peter the Great" label="Peter the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q151616" start="8812" end="8830" title="Great Northern War" label="Great Northern War"/>
<link wikidata="Q853685" start="8853" end="8871" title="Treaty of Nöteborg" label="Treaty of Nöteborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q653956" start="8962" end="8970" title="Izhorians" label="Izhorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q170770" start="9023" end="9044" title="Grand Duchy of Moscow" label="Grand Duchy of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q52947" start="9055" end="9073" title="Gustav I of Sweden" label="Gustav I of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="9111" end="9119" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962709" start="9162" end="9173" title="Ingrian War" label="Ingrian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q928848" start="9194" end="9212" title="Treaty of Stolbovo" label="Treaty of Stolbovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564354" start="9287" end="9301" title="Swedish Ingria" label="Swedish Ingria"/>
<link wikidata="Q151616" start="9441" end="9459" title="Great Northern War" label="Great Northern War"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="9489" end="9505" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q155863" start="9819" end="9828" title="Kronstadt" label="Kronstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="9902" end="9913" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q178310" start="9989" end="9997" title="Petergof" label="Peterhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q157688" start="10002" end="10013" title="Lomonosov, Russia" label="Oranienbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575641" start="10099" end="10114" title="Hanko Peninsula" label="Hanko Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q681712" start="10141" end="10157" title="Battle of Gangut" label="Battle of Gangut"/>
<link wikidata="Q153286" start="10254" end="10270" title="Treaty of Nystad" label="Treaty of Nystad"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="10362" end="10369" title="Estonia" label="Estland"/>
<link wikidata="Q739032" start="10371" end="10386" title="Swedish Livonia" label="Swedish Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q209010" start="10411" end="10427" title="Karelian Isthmus" label="Karelian Isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q870196" start="10492" end="10495" title="Russo-Swedish War (1788–1790)" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657874" start="10528" end="10545" title="Battle of Hogland" label="Battle of Hogland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049578" start="10586" end="10593" title="Gogland" label="Gogland"/>
<link wikidata="Q736268" start="10725" end="10742" title="Finnish War" label="Russo-Swedish war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130792" start="10788" end="10810" title="Treaty of Fredrikshamn" label="Treaty of Fredrikshamn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689" start="10868" end="10873" title="Åland" label="Åland"/>
<link wikidata="Q62633" start="10895" end="10917" title="Grand Duchy of Finland" label="Grand Duchy of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q440068" start="10975" end="10990" title="Old Finland" label="Western Karelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q643412" start="11040" end="11061" title="Parliament of Finland" label="Parliament of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994771" start="11078" end="11113" title="Finnish Declaration of Independence" label="Finnish Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q134949" start="11173" end="11183" title="Winter War" label="Winter War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127302" start="11262" end="11281" title="Estonian War of Independence" label="war of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q208300" start="11672" end="11691" title="Kronstadt rebellion" label="Kronstadt rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q836124" start="11836" end="11866" title="Soviet evacuation of Tallinn" label="evacuation of the Baltic Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q174736" start="11945" end="11954" title="destroyer" label="destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="11959" end="11968" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466103" start="11973" end="11983" title="guard ship" label="guard ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q202527" start="11988" end="11999" title="minesweeper" label="minesweeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q214196" start="12004" end="12011" title="gunboat" label="gunboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630695" start="12019" end="12037" title="Motor Torpedo Boat" label="Motor Torpedo Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q27632" start="12260" end="12280" title="Saint Petersburg Dam" label="Saint Petersburg Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q371130" start="12325" end="12340" title="Floods in Saint Petersburg" label="frequent floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q3279825" start="12592" end="12621" title="Leningrad Nuclear Power Plant" label="Leningrad Nuclear Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035634" start="12805" end="12821" title="Big port Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q155863" start="12844" end="12853" title="Kronstadt" label="Kronstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q14657" start="12923" end="12929" title="Vyborg" label="Vyborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15307" start="12947" end="12955" title="Primorsk, Leningrad Oblast" label="Primorsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q15250" start="12986" end="12993" title="Vysotsk" label="Vysotsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q937354" start="13010" end="13018" title="Ust-Luga" label="Ust-Luga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984192" start="13020" end="13023" title="Baltic Pipeline System-II" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="13064" end="13072" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q18658830" start="13087" end="13092" title="Port of Hamina-Kotka" label="Kotka"/>
<link wikidata="Q216790" start="13189" end="13194" title="Hanko, Finland" label="Hanko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073103" start="13219" end="13224" title="Port of Turku" label="Turku"/>
<link wikidata="Q11893882" start="13251" end="13278" title="Port of Kilpilahti" label="Kilpilahti/Sköldvik harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q12353044" start="13280" end="13292" title="oil refinery" label="oil refinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770" start="13307" end="13314" title="Tallinn" label="Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q204091" start="13345" end="13353" title="Paldiski" label="Paldiski"/>
<link wikidata="Q207748" start="13355" end="13363" title="Sillamäe" label="Sillamäe"/>
<link wikidata="Q31263" start="13401" end="13422" title="Volga–Baltic Waterway" label="Volga–Baltic Waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q461457" start="13427" end="13449" title="White Sea–Baltic Canal" label="White Sea–Baltic Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q178397" start="13475" end="13482" title="apatite" label="apatite"/>
<link wikidata="Q165608" start="13492" end="13506" title="Kola Peninsula" label="Kola Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q192273" start="13508" end="13515" title="Karelia" label="Karelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="13517" end="13524" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q595991" start="13529" end="13539" title="Greenstone belt" label="greenstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370714" start="13541" end="13547" title="timber" label="timber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875" start="13553" end="13571" title="Arkhangelsk Oblast" label="Arkhangelsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015" start="13576" end="13583" title="Vologda Oblast" label="Vologda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285982" start="13585" end="13599" title="ferrous metals" label="ferrous metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144" start="13605" end="13616" title="Cherepovets" label="Cherepovets"/>
<link wikidata="Q605714" start="13628" end="13634" title="Donbas" label="Donbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q203313" start="13643" end="13657" title="Kuznetsk Basin" label="Kuznetsk Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q50769" start="13659" end="13665" title="pyrite" label="pyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q184630" start="13677" end="13695" title="potassium chloride" label="potassium chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q196384" start="13701" end="13710" title="Solikamsk" label="Solikamsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q336969" start="13712" end="13715" title="Absheron Peninsula" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="13721" end="13726" title="Volga" label="Volga"/>
<link wikidata="Q48329" start="13906" end="13915" title="Mariehamn" label="Mariehamn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689" start="13917" end="13922" title="Åland" label="Åland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="13925" end="13934" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975317" start="13939" end="13949" title="Kapellskär" label="Kapellskär"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861" start="13992" end="13999" title="Rostock" label="Rostock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829" start="14032" end="14043" title="Kaliningrad" label="Kaliningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969730" start="14186" end="14199" title="Schengen Area" label="Schengen Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630179" start="14479" end="14487" title="Talsinki" label="Talsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127419" start="14676" end="14683" title="herring" label="herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q506823" start="14685" end="14691" title="European sprat" label="sprats"/>
<link wikidata="Q840795" start="14693" end="14707" title="European smelt" label="European smelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q311392" start="14709" end="14720" title="Coregonus" label="whitefishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q144534" start="14722" end="14732" title="carp bream" label="carp bream"/>
<link wikidata="Q180447" start="14734" end="14741" title="Rutilus" label="roaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q600262" start="14743" end="14748" title="perch" label="perch"/>
<link wikidata="Q26387" start="14750" end="14762" title="European eel" label="European eel"/>
<link wikidata="Q261485" start="14764" end="14771" title="lamprey" label="lamprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q154125" start="14953" end="14966" title="Nord Stream 1" label="Nord Stream 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4098" start="15042" end="15052" title="Greifswald" label="Greifswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q21644350" start="15217" end="15228" title="Nord Stream 2" label="second line"/>
<link wikidata="Q331625" start="15455" end="15470" title="Ship graveyard" label="ship cemeteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q179615" start="15491" end="15499" title="salinity" label="salinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524890" start="15524" end="15532" title="shipworm" label="shipworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="15706" end="15712" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q168432" start="16353" end="16359" title="anchor" label="anchor"/>
<link wikidata="Q189929" start="16403" end="16413" title="naval mine" label="naval mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137468" start="16416" end="16427" title="aerial bomb" label="aerial bomb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16864" end="16875" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="16896" end="16913" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q134949" start="16923" end="16933" title="Winter War" label="Winter War"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="17256" end="17263" title="mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="17268" end="17274" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="17291" end="17300" title="pesticide" label="pesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q407142" start="17303" end="17310" title="phenols" label="phenols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059843" start="17312" end="17329" title="petroleum product" label="petroleum product"/>
<link wikidata="Q407212" start="17335" end="17366" title="polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon" label="polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q27600" start="17987" end="18005" title="Vasilyevsky Island" label="Vasilyevsky Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q131747027" start="18029" end="18037" title="spawn (biology)" label="spawning"/>
<link wikidata="Q10278900" start="18047" end="18065" title="Sand mining" label="Extraction of sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q840795" start="18144" end="18158" title="European smelt" label="European smelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q27632" start="18181" end="18201" title="Saint Petersburg Dam" label="Saint Petersburg Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q156698" start="18538" end="18552" title="eutrophication" label="eutrophication"/>
<link wikidata="Q3279825" start="18685" end="18714" title="Leningrad Nuclear Power Plant" label="Leningrad Nuclear Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q155863" start="18729" end="18738" title="Kronstadt" label="Kronstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q185252" start="18807" end="18824" title="radioactive waste" label="radioactive waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q105104185" start="18867" end="18896" title="depleted uranium hexafluoride" label="depleted uranium hexafluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q175393" start="18949" end="18959" title="Novouralsk" label="Novouralsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q103565" start="18961" end="18968" title="Angarsk" label="Angarsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4478482" start="19010" end="19023" title="Ust-Luga Multimodal Complex" label="transit point"/>
<link wikidata="Q937354" start="19072" end="19080" title="Ust-Luga" label="Ust-Luga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4366826" start="19138" end="19168" title="Border Security Zone of Russia" label="Border Security Zone of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47034" start="19699" end="19704" title="Espoo" label="Espoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q367780" start="19707" end="19713" title="Hamina" label="Hamina"/>
<link wikidata="Q216790" start="19716" end="19721" title="Hanko, Finland" label="Hanko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="19724" end="19732" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q748092" start="19735" end="19746" title="Kirkkonummi" label="Kirkkonummi"/>
<link wikidata="Q192155" start="19749" end="19754" title="Kotka" label="Kotka"/>
<link wikidata="Q155863" start="19757" end="19766" title="Kronstadt" label="Kronstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q213178" start="19769" end="19774" title="Kunda, Estonia" label="Kunda"/>
<link wikidata="Q213740" start="19777" end="19782" title="Loksa" label="Loksa"/>
<link wikidata="Q157688" start="19785" end="19794" title="Lomonosov, Russia" label="Lomonosov"/>
<link wikidata="Q748513" start="19797" end="19804" title="Loviisa" label="Loviisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q206555" start="19807" end="19813" title="Maardu" label="Maardu"/>
<link wikidata="Q723372" start="19816" end="19828" title="Narva-Jõesuu" label="Narva-Jõesuu"/>
<link wikidata="Q204091" start="19831" end="19839" title="Paldiski" label="Paldiski"/>
<link wikidata="Q178310" start="19842" end="19850" title="Petergof" label="Peterhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q193367" start="19853" end="19859" title="Porvoo" label="Porvoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15307" start="19862" end="19870" title="Primorsk, Leningrad Oblast" label="Primorsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="19873" end="19889" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q194084" start="19892" end="19903" title="Sestroretsk" label="Sestroretsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q207748" start="19906" end="19914" title="Sillamäe" label="Sillamäe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15335" start="19917" end="19928" title="Sosnovy Bor, Leningrad Oblast" label="Sosnovy Bor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770" start="19931" end="19938" title="Tallinn" label="Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q14657" start="19941" end="19947" title="Vyborg" label="Vyborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q46850" start="19950" end="19961" title="Zelenogorsk, Saint Petersburg" label="Zelenogorsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4221030" start="19978" end="19996" title="Kiperort Peninsula" label="Kiperort Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q6449691" start="19999" end="20007" title="Kven Sea" label="Kven Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296010" start="20010" end="20047" title="Peter the Great&amp;#x27;s Naval Fortress" label="Peter the Great&amp;#x27;s Naval Fortress"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12099" wikidata="Q1792" url="?curid=12099" title="Gdańsk">
<text>Gdańsk is a city on the Baltic coast of northern Poland, and the capital of the Pomeranian Voivodeship. With a population of 486,492, it is Poland&#x27;s sixth-largest city and principal seaport. Gdańsk lies at the mouth of the Motława River and is situated at the southern edge of Gdańsk Bay, close to the city of Gdynia and the resort town of Sopot; these form a metropolitan area called the Tricity (&quot;Trójmiasto&quot;), with a population of approximately 1.5 million.

The city has a complex history, having had periods of Polish, German and self rule. An important shipbuilding and trade port since the Middle Ages, in 1361 it became a member of the Hanseatic League which influenced its economic, demographic and urban landscape. It also served as Poland&#x27;s principal seaport, and was the largest city of Poland in the 15th-17th centuries. In 1793, within the Partitions of Poland, the city became part of Prussia, and thus a part of the German Empire from 1871 after the unification of Germany. Following World War I and the Treaty of Versailles, it was a Free City under the protection of the League of Nations from 1920 to 1939. On 1 September 1939 it was the scene of the first clash of World War II at Westerplatte. The contemporary city was shaped by extensive border changes, expulsions and new settlement after 1945. In the 1980s, Gdańsk was the birthplace of the Solidarity movement, which helped precipitate the collapse of the Eastern Bloc, the fall of the Berlin Wall and the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact.

Gdańsk is home to the University of Gdańsk, Gdańsk University of Technology, the National Museum, the Gdańsk Shakespeare Theatre, the Museum of the Second World War, the Polish Baltic Philharmonic, the Polish Space Agency and the European Solidarity Centre. Among Gdańsk&#x27;s most notable historical landmarks are the Town Hall, the Green Gate, Artus Court, Neptune&#x27;s Fountain, and St. Mary&#x27;s Church, one of the largest brick churches in the world. The city is served by Gdańsk Lech Wałęsa Airport, the country&#x27;s third busiest airport and the most important international airport in northern Poland.

Gdańsk is among the most visited cities in Poland, having received 3.4 million tourists according to data collected in 2019. The city also hosts St. Dominic&#x27;s Fair, which dates back to 1260, and is regarded as one of the biggest trade and cultural events in Europe. Gdańsk has also topped rankings for the quality of life, safety and living standards worldwide, and its historic city centre has been listed as one of Poland&#x27;s national monuments.

== Names==
=== Origin===
The name of the city was most likely derived from &quot;Gdania&quot;, a river presently known as Motława on which the city is situated. Other linguists also argue that the name stems from the Proto-Slavic adjective/prefix &quot;gъd-&quot;, which meant &#x27;wet&#x27; or &#x27;moist&#x27; with the addition of the morpheme &quot;ń&quot;/&quot;ni&quot; and the suffix &quot;-sk&quot;.

=== History===

The name of the settlement was recorded after St. Adalbert&#x27;s death in 997 CE as &quot;urbs Gyddanyzc&quot; and it was later written as &quot;Kdanzk&quot; in 1148, &quot;Gdanzc&quot; in 1188, &quot;Danceke&quot; in 1228, &quot;Gdańsk&quot; in 1236, &quot;Danzc&quot; in 1263, &quot;Danczk&quot; in 1311, &quot;Danczik&quot; in 1399, &quot;Danczig&quot; in 1414, and &quot;Gdąnsk&quot; in 1656.

In Polish documents, the form Gdańsk was always used. The Germanised form &quot;Danzig&quot; developed later, simplifying the consonant clusters to something easier for German speakers to pronounce. The cluster &quot;gd&quot; became &quot;d&quot; (&quot;Danzc&quot; from 1263), the combination &quot;ns&quot; became &quot;nts&quot; (&quot;Danczk&quot; from 1311), and finally an epenthetical &quot;i&quot; broke up the final cluster (&quot;Danczik&quot; from 1399).

In Polish, the modern name of the city is pronounced . In English (where the diacritic over the &quot;n&quot; is frequently omitted) the usual pronunciation is or . The Germanised name, &quot;Danzig&quot;, is usually pronounced , or alternatively in more Southern German-speaking areas. The city&#x27;s Latin name may be given as either &quot;Gedania&quot;, &quot;Gedanum&quot;, or &quot;Dantiscum&quot;; the variety of Latin and German names typically reflects the difficulty of pronunciation of the original Polish city&#x27;s name, all German- and Latin/Romance-speaking populations always encounter in trying to pronounce the difficult and complex Polish/Lechitic words.

===Ceremonial names===
On special occasions, the city is also referred to as &quot;The Royal Polish City of Gdańsk&quot; (Polish: &quot;Królewskie Polskie Miasto Gdańsk&quot;, Latin: &quot;Regia Civitas Polonica Gedanensis&quot;, Kashubian: &quot;Królewsczi Pòlsczi Gard Gduńsk&quot;). In the Kashubian language the city is called . Although some Kashubians may also use the name &quot;Our Capital City Gduńsk&quot; (&quot;Nasz Stoleczny Gard Gduńsk&quot;) or &quot;Our (regional) Capital City Gduńsk&quot; (&quot;Stoleczny Kaszëbsczi Gard Gduńsk&quot;), the cultural and historical connections between the city and the region of Kashubia are debatable and use of such names raises controversy among Kashubians.

==History==

===Ancient history===
The oldest evidence found for the existence of a settlement on the lands of what is now Gdańsk comes from the Bronze Age (which is estimated to be from 2500–1700 BC). The settlement that is now known as Gdańsk began in the 9th century, being mostly an agriculture and fishing-dependent village. In the beginning of the 10th century, it began becoming an important centre for trade (especially between the Pomeranians) until its annexation in 975 by Mieszko I.

===Early Poland===

The first written record thought to refer to Gdańsk is the &quot;vita&quot; of Saint Adalbert. Written in 999, it describes how in 997 Saint Adalbert of Prague baptised the inhabitants of &quot;urbs Gyddannyzc&quot;, &quot;which separated the great realm of the duke [i.e., Bolesław the Brave of Poland] from the sea.&quot; No further written sources exist for the 10th and 11th centuries. Based on the date in Adalbert&#x27;s &quot;vita&quot;, the city celebrated its millennial anniversary in 1997.

Archaeological evidence for the origins of the town was retrieved mostly after World War II had laid 90percent of the city centre in ruins, enabling excavations. The oldest seventeen settlement levels were dated to between 980 and 1308. Mieszko I of Poland erected a stronghold on the site in the 980s, thereby connecting the Polish state ruled by the Piast dynasty with the trade routes of the Baltic Sea. Traces of buildings and housing from the 10th century have been found in archaeological excavations of the city.

===Pomeranian Poland===

The site was ruled as a duchy of Poland by the Samborides. It consisted of a settlement at the modern Long Market, settlements of craftsmen along the Old Ditch, German merchant settlements around St Nicholas&#x27; Church and the old Piast stronghold. In 1215, the ducal stronghold became the centre of a Pomerelian splinter duchy. At that time the area of the later city included various villages.

In 1224/25, merchants from Lübeck were invited as &quot;hospites&quot; (immigrants with specific privileges) but were soon (in 1238) forced to leave by Świętopełk II of the Samborides during a war between Świętopełk and the Teutonic Order, during which Lübeck supported the latter. Migration of merchants to the town resumed in 1257. Significant German influence did not reappear until the 14th century, after the takeover of the city by the Teutonic Order.

At latest in 1263 Pomerelian duke, Świętopełk II granted city rights under Lübeck law to the emerging market settlement. It was an autonomy charter similar to that of Lübeck, which was also the primary origin of many settlers. In a document of 1271 the Pomerelian duke Mestwin II addressed the Lübeck merchants settled in the city as his loyal citizens from Germany.

In 1300, the town had an estimated population of 2,000. While overall the town was far from an important trade centre at that time, it had some relevance in the trade with Eastern Europe. Low on funds, the Samborides lent the settlement to Brandenburg, although they planned to take the city back and give it to Poland. Poland threatened to intervene, and the Brandenburgians left the town. Subsequently, the city was taken by Danish princes in 1301.

===Teutonic Order===
In 1308, the town was taken by Brandenburg and the Teutonic Knights restored order. Subsequently, the Order took over control of the town. Primary sources record a massacre carried out by the Teutonic Order against the local population, of 10,000 people, but the exact number killed is subject of dispute in modern scholarship. Multiple authors accept the number given in the original sources, while others consider 10,000 to have been a medieval exaggeration, although scholarly consensus is that a massacre of some magnitude did take place. The events were used by the Polish crown to condemn the Teutonic Order in a subsequent papal lawsuit.

The knights colonized the area, replacing local Kashubians and Poles with German settlers. In 1308, they founded &quot;Osiek Hakelwerk&quot; near the town, initially as a Lechitic fishing settlement. In 1340, the Teutonic Order constructed a large fortress, which became the seat of the knights&#x27; Komtur. In 1346 they changed the Town Law of the city, which then consisted only of the &quot;Rechtstadt&quot;, to Kulm law. In 1358, Danzig joined the Hanseatic League, and became an active member in 1361. It maintained relations with the trade centres Bruges, Novgorod, Lisboa, and Sevilla. Around 1377, the Old Town was equipped with city rights as well. In 1380, the &quot;New Town&quot; was founded as the third, independent settlement.

After a series of Polish-Teutonic Wars, in the Treaty of Kalisz (1343) the Order had to acknowledge that it would hold Pomerelia as a fief from the Polish Crown. Although it left the legal basis of the Order&#x27;s possession of the province in some doubt, the city thrived as a result of increased exports of grain (especially wheat), timber, potash, tar, and other goods of forestry from Prussia and Poland via the Vistula River trading routes, although after its capture, the Teutonic Order tried to actively reduce the economic significance of the town. While under the control of the Teutonic Order German migration increased. The Order&#x27;s religious networks helped to develop Danzig&#x27;s literary culture. A new war broke out in 1409, culminating in the Battle of Grunwald (1410), and the city came under the control of the Kingdom of Poland. A year later, with the First Peace of Thorn, it returned to the Teutonic Order.

===Kingdom of Poland===
In 1440, the city participated in the foundation of the Prussian Confederation which was an organisation opposed to the rule of the Teutonic Order. The organisation in its complaint of 1453 mentioned repeated cases in which the Teutonic Order imprisoned or murdered local patricians and mayors without a court verdict. On the request of the organisation King Casimir IV of Poland reincorporated the territory to the Kingdom of Poland in 1454. This led to the Thirteen Years&#x27; War between Poland and the State of the Teutonic Order (1454–1466). Since 1454, the city was authorized by the King to mint Polish coins. The local mayor pledged allegiance to the King during the incorporation in March 1454 in Kraków, and the city again solemnly pledged allegiance to the King in June 1454 in Elbląg, recognizing the prior Teutonic annexation and rule as unlawful. On 25 May 1457 the city gained its rights as an autonomous city.

On 15 May 1457, Casimir IV of Poland granted the town the &quot;Great Privilege&quot;, after he had been invited by the town&#x27;s council and had already stayed in town for five weeks. With the &quot;Great Privilege&quot;, the town was granted full autonomy and protection by the King of Poland. The privilege removed tariffs and taxes on trade within Poland, Lithuania, and Ruthenia (present day Belarus and Ukraine), and conferred on the town independent jurisdiction, legislation and administration of her territory, as well as the right to mint her own coin. Furthermore, the privilege united &quot;Old Town&quot;, &quot;Osiek&quot;, and &quot;Main Town&quot;, and legalised the demolition of &quot;New Town&quot;, which had sided with the Teutonic Order. By 1457, &quot;New Town&quot; was demolished completely, no buildings remained.

Gaining free and privileged access to Polish markets, the seaport prospered while simultaneously trading with the other Hanseatic cities. After the Second Peace of Thorn (1466) between Poland and the Teutonic Order the warfare ended permanently; Gdańsk became part of the Polish province of Royal Prussia, and later also of the Greater Poland Province. The city was visited by Nicolaus Copernicus in 1504 and 1526, and &quot;Narratio Prima&quot;, the first printed abstract of his heliocentric theory, was published there in 1540. After the Union of Lublin between Poland and Lithuania in 1569 the city continued to enjoy a large degree of internal autonomy (cf. Danzig law). Being the largest and one of the most influential cities of Poland, it enjoyed voting rights during the royal election period in Poland.

In the 1560s and 1570s, a large Mennonite community started growing in the city, gaining significant popularity. In the 1575 election to the Polish throne, Danzig supported Maximilian II in his struggle against Stephen Báthory. It was the latter who eventually became monarch but the city, encouraged by the secret support of Denmark and Emperor Maximilian, shut its gates against Stephen. After the Siege of Danzig, lasting six months, the city&#x27;s army of 5,000 mercenaries was utterly defeated in a field battle on 16 December 1577. However, since Stephen&#x27;s armies were unable to take the city by force, a compromise was reached: Stephen Báthory confirmed the city&#x27;s special status and her Danzig law privileges granted by earlier Polish kings. The city recognised him as ruler of Poland and paid the enormous sum of 200,000 guldens in gold as payoff (&quot;apology&quot;).

During the Polish–Swedish War of 1626–1629, in 1627, the naval Battle of Oliwa was fought near the city, and it is one of the greatest victories in the history of the Polish Navy. During the Swedish invasion of Poland of 1655–1660, commonly known as the Deluge, the city was unsuccessfully besieged by Sweden. In 1660, the war was ended with the Treaty of Oliwa, signed in the present-day district of Oliwa. In 1677, a Polish-Swedish alliance was signed in the city. Around 1640, Johannes Hevelius established his astronomical observatory in the Old Town. Polish King John III Sobieski regularly visited Hevelius numerous times.

Beside a majority of German-speakers, whose elites sometimes distinguished their German dialect as Pomerelian, the city was home to a large number of Polish-speaking Poles, Jewish Poles, Latvian-speaking Kursenieki, Flemings, and Dutch. In addition, a number of Scots took refuge or migrated to and received citizenship in the city, with first Scots arriving in 1380. During the Protestant Reformation, most German-speaking inhabitants adopted Lutheranism. Due to the special status of the city and significance within the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, the city inhabitants largely became bi-cultural sharing both Polish and German culture and were strongly attached to the traditions of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth.
The city suffered a last great plague and a slow economic decline due to the wars of the 18th century. After peace was restored in 1721, Danzig experienced steady economic recovery. As a stronghold of Stanisław Leszczyński&#x27;s supporters during the War of the Polish Succession, it was taken by the Russians after the Siege of Danzig in 1734. In the 1740s and 1750s Danzig was restored and Danzig port was again the most significant grain exporting ports in the Baltic region. The Danzig Research Society, which became defunct in 1936, was founded in 1743.

In 1772, the First Partition of Poland took place and Prussia annexed almost all of the former Royal Prussia, which became the Province of West Prussia. However, Gdańsk remained a part of Poland as an exclave separated from the rest of the country. The Prussian king cut off Danzig with a military controlled barrier, also blocking shipping links to foreign ports, on the pretense that a cattle plague may otherwise break out. Danzig declined in its economic significance. However, by the end of the 18th century, Gdańsk was still one of the most economically integrated cities in Poland. It was well-connected and traded actively with German cities, while other Polish cities became less well-integrated towards the end of the century, mostly due to greater risks for long-distance trade, given the number of violent conflicts along the trade routes.

===Prussia and Germany===
Danzig was annexed by the Kingdom of Prussia in 1793, in the Second Partition of Poland. Both the Polish and the German-speaking population largely opposed the Prussian annexation and wished the city to remain part of Poland. The mayor of the city stepped down from his office due to the annexation. The notable city councilor Jan (Johann) Uphagen, historian and art collector, also resigned as a sign of protest against the annexation. His house exemplifies Baroque in Poland and is now a museum, known as Uphagen&#x27;s House. An attempted student uprising against Prussia led by Gottfried Benjamin Bartholdi was crushed quickly by the authorities in 1797.

During the Napoleonic Wars, in 1807, the city was besieged and captured by a coalition of French, Polish, Italian, Saxon, and Baden forces. Afterwards, it was a free city from 1807 to 1814, when it was captured by combined Prussian-Russian forces.
In 1815, after France&#x27;s defeat in the Napoleonic Wars, it again became part of Prussia and became the capital of within the province of West Prussia. Since the 1820s, the Wisłoujście Fortress served as a prison, mainly for Polish political prisoners, including resistance members, protesters, insurgents of the November and January uprisings and refugees from the Russian Partition of Poland fleeing conscription into the Russian Army, and insurgents of the November Uprising were also imprisoned in Biskupia Górka (&quot;Bischofsberg&quot;). In May–June 1832 and November 1833, more than 1,000 Polish insurgents departed partitioned Poland through the city&#x27;s port, boarding ships bound for France, the United Kingdom and the United States (see &quot;Great Emigration&quot;).

The city&#x27;s longest serving mayor was Robert von Blumenthal, who held office from 1841, through the revolutions of 1848, until 1863. With the unification of Germany in 1871 under Prussian hegemony, the city became part of the German Empire and remained so until 1919, after Germany&#x27;s defeat in World War I. Starting from the 1850s, long-established Danzig families often felt marginalized by the new town elite originating from mainland Germany. This situation caused the Polish to allege that the Danzig people were oppressed by German rule and for this reason allegedly failed to articulate their natural desire for strong ties with Poland.

===Free City of Danzig and World War II===
When Poland regained its independence after World War I with access to the sea as promised by the Allies on the basis of Woodrow Wilson&#x27;s &quot;Fourteen Points&quot; (point 13 called for &quot;an independent Polish state&quot;, &quot;which should be assured a free and secure access to the sea&quot;), the Poles hoped the city&#x27;s harbour would also become part of Poland. However, in the end – since Germans formed a majority in the city, with Poles being a minority (in the 1923 census 7,896 people out of 335,921 gave Polish, Kashubian, or Masurian as their native language) – the city was not placed under Polish sovereignty. Instead, in accordance with the terms of the Versailles Treaty, it became the Free City of Danzig, an independent quasi-state under the auspices of the League of Nations with its external affairs largely under Polish control. Poland&#x27;s rights also included free use of the harbour, a Polish post office, a Polish garrison in Westerplatte district, and customs union with Poland. The Free City had its own constitution, national anthem, parliament, and government (). It issued its own stamps as well as its currency, the Danzig gulden.

With the growth of Nazism among Germans, anti-Polish sentiment increased and both Germanisation and segregation policies intensified, in the 1930s the rights of local Poles were commonly violated and limited by the local administration. Polish children were refused admission to public Polish-language schools, premises were not allowed to be rented to Polish schools and preschools. Due to such policies, only eight Polish-language public schools existed in the city, and Poles managed to organize seven more private Polish schools.

In the early 1930s, the local Nazi Party capitalised on pro-German sentiments and in 1933 garnered 50% of vote in the parliament. Thereafter, the Nazis under Gauleiter Albert Forster achieved dominance in the city government, which was still nominally overseen by the League of Nations&#x27; High Commissioner.

In 1937, Poles who sent their children to private Polish schools were required to transfer children to German schools, under threat of police intervention, and attacks were carried out on Polish schools and Polish youth. German militias carried out numerous beatings of Polish activists, scouts and even postal workers, as &quot;punishment&quot; for distributing the Polish press. German students attacked and expelled Polish students from the technical university. Dozens of Polish surnames were forcibly Germanized, while Polish symbols that reminded that for centuries Gdańsk was part of Poland were removed from the city&#x27;s landmarks, such as the Artus Court and the Neptune&#x27;s Fountain.

From 1937, the employment of Poles by German companies was prohibited, and already employed Poles were fired, the use of Polish in public places was banned and Poles were not allowed to enter several restaurants, in particular those owned by Germans. In 1939, before the German invasion of Poland and outbreak of World War II, local Polish railwaymen were victims of beatings, and after the invasion, they were also imprisoned and murdered in concentration camps.

The German government officially demanded the return of Danzig to Germany along with an extraterritorial (meaning under German jurisdiction) highway through the area of the Polish Corridor for land-based access from the rest of Germany. Hitler used the issue of the status of the city as a pretext for attacking Poland and in May 1939, during a high-level meeting of German military officials explained to them: &quot;It is not Danzig that is at stake. For us it is a matter of expanding our Lebensraum in the east&quot;, adding that there will be no repeat of the Czech situation, and Germany will attack Poland at first opportunity, after isolating the country from its Western Allies.

After the German proposals to solve the three main issues peacefully were refused, German-Polish relations rapidly deteriorated. Germany attacked Poland on 1 September after having signed a non-aggression pact with the Soviet Union.
The German attack began in Danzig, with a bombardment of Polish positions at Westerplatte by the German battleship , and the landing of German infantry on the peninsula. Outnumbered Polish defenders at Westerplatte resisted for seven days before running out of ammunition. Meanwhile, after a fierce day-long fight (1 September 1939), defenders of the Polish Post office were tried and executed then buried on the spot in the Danzig quarter of Zaspa in October 1939. In 1998 a German court overturned their conviction and sentence. The city was officially annexed by Nazi Germany and incorporated into the Reichsgau Danzig-West Prussia.

About 50 percent of members of the Jewish community had left the city within a year after a pogrom in October 1937. After the Kristallnacht riots in November 1938, the community decided to organize its emigration and in March 1939 a first transport to Palestine started. By September 1939 barely 1,700 mostly elderly Jews remained. In early 1941, just 600 Jews were still living in Danzig, most of whom were later murdered in the Holocaust. Out of the 2,938 Jewish community in the city, 1,227 were able to escape from the Nazis before the outbreak of war.

Nazi secret police had been observing Polish minority communities in the city since 1936, compiling information, which in 1939 served to prepare lists of Poles to be captured in Operation Tannenberg. On the first day of the war, approximately 1,500 ethnic Poles were arrested, some because of their participation in social and economic life, others because they were activists and members of various Polish organisations. On 2 September 1939, 150 of them were deported to the Sicherheitsdienst camp Stutthof some from Danzig, and murdered. Many Poles living in Danzig were deported to Stutthof or executed in the Piaśnica forest.

During the war, Germany operated a prison in the city, an &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot;-operated penal camp, a camp for Romani people, two subcamps of the Stalag XX-B prisoner-of-war camp for Allied POWs, and several subcamps of the Stutthof concentration camp within the present-day city limits.

In 1941, Hitler ordered the invasion of the Soviet Union, eventually causing the fortunes of war to turn against Germany. As the Soviet Army advanced in 1944, German populations in Central Europe took flight, resulting in the beginning of a great population shift. After the final Soviet offensives began in January 1945, hundreds of thousands of German refugees converged on Danzig, many of whom had fled on foot from East Prussia, some tried to escape through the city&#x27;s port in a large-scale evacuation involving hundreds of German cargo and passenger ships. Some of the ships were sunk by the Soviets, including the after an evacuation was attempted at neighbouring Gdynia. In the process, tens of thousands of refugees were killed.

The city also endured heavy Allied and Soviet air raids. Those who survived and could not escape had to face the Soviet Army, which captured the heavily damaged city on 30 March 1945, followed by large-scale rape and looting.

In line with the decisions made by the Allies at the Yalta and Potsdam conferences, the city became again part of Poland, although with a Soviet-installed communist regime, which stayed in power until the Fall of Communism in the 1980s. The remaining German residents of the city who had survived the war fled or were expelled to postwar Germany. The city was repopulated by ethnic Poles; up to 18 percent (1948) of them had been deported by the Soviets in two major waves from pre-war eastern Polish areas annexed by the Soviet Union.

===Post World War II (1945–1989)===

In 1946, the communists executed 17-year-old Danuta Siedzikówna and 42-year-old Feliks Selmanowicz, known Polish resistance members, in the local prison. The port of Gdańsk was one of the three Polish ports through which Greeks and Macedonians, refugees of the Greek Civil War, reached Poland. In 1949, four transports of Greek and Macedonian refugees arrived at the port of Gdańsk, from where they were transported to new homes in Poland.
Parts of the historic old city of Gdańsk, which had suffered large-scale destruction during the war, were rebuilt during the 1950s and 1960s. The reconstruction sought to dilute the &quot;German character&quot; of the city, and set it back to how it supposedly looked like before the annexation to Prussia in 1793. Nineteenth-century transformations were ignored as &quot;ideologically malignant&quot; by post-war administrations, or regarded as &quot;Prussian barbarism&quot; worthy of demolition, while Flemish/Dutch, Italian and French influences were emphasized in order to &quot;neutralize&quot; the German influx on the general outlook of the city.

Boosted by heavy investment in the development of its port and three major shipyards for Soviet ambitions in the Baltic region, Gdańsk became the major shipping and industrial centre of the People&#x27;s Republic of Poland. In December 1970, Gdańsk was the scene of anti-regime demonstrations, which led to the downfall of Poland&#x27;s communist leader Władysław Gomułka. During the demonstrations in Gdańsk and Gdynia, military as well as the police opened fire on the demonstrators causing several dozen deaths. Ten years later, in August 1980, Gdańsk Shipyard was the birthplace of the Solidarity trade union movement.

In September 1981, to deter Solidarity, Soviet Union launched Exercise Zapad-81, the largest military exercise in history, during which amphibious landings were conducted near Gdańsk. Meanwhile, the Solidarity held its first national congress in Hala Olivia, Gdańsk when more than 800 deputies participated. Its opposition to the Communist regime led to the end of Communist Party rule in 1989, and sparked a series of protests that overthrew the Communist regimes of the former Eastern Bloc.

===Contemporary history (1990–present)===
Solidarity&#x27;s leader, Lech Wałęsa, became President of Poland in 1990. In 2014 the European Solidarity Centre, a museum and library devoted to the history of the movement, opened in Gdańsk.

On 9 July 2001, the city was flooded, with 200 million zł being estimated in damage, 4 people killed, and 304 evacuated. As a result, the city has built 50 reservoirs, the number of which is rising.
Gdańsk native Donald Tusk is Prime Minister of Poland from 2007 to 2014 and again from 2023 to present and was President of the European Council from 2014 to 2019. In 2014, the remains of Danuta Siedzikówna and Feliks Selmanowicz were found at the local Garrison Cemetery, and then their state burial was held in Gdańsk in 2016, with the participation of thousands of people from all over Poland and the highest Polish authorities.

In January 2019, the Mayor of Gdańsk, Paweł Adamowicz, was assassinated by a man who had just been released from prison for violent crimes. After stabbing the mayor in the abdomen near the heart, the man claimed that the mayor&#x27;s political party had been responsible for imprisoning him. Though Adamowicz underwent a multi-hour surgery, he died the next day.

In October 2019, the City of Gdańsk was awarded the Princess of Asturias Award in the Concord category as a recognition of the fact that &quot;the past and present in Gdańsk are sensitive to solidarity, the defense of freedom and human rights, as well as to the preservation of peace&quot;.

In a 2023 Report on the Quality of Life in European Cities compiled by the European Commission, Gdańsk was named as the fourth best city to live in Europe alongside Leipzig, Stockholm and Geneva.

==Geography==
Gdańsk lies at the mouth of the Motława river to the Martwa Wisła, a branch of the Vistula. It is located on the border between different physiographic regions: Vistula Spit (waterside part of the city), Vistula Fens (eastern part of the city), Kashubian Coastland (north-western part of the city) and Kashubian Lake District (western part of the city).

===Climate===

Gdańsk has a climate with both oceanic and continental influences. According to some categorizations, it has an oceanic climate (Cfb), while others classify it as belonging to the humid continental climate (Dfb). It actually depends on whether the mean reference temperature for the coldest winter month is set at or . Gdańsk&#x27;s dry winters and the precipitation maximum in summer are indicators of continentality. However seasonal extremes are less pronounced than those in inland Poland.

The city has moderately cold and cloudy winters with mean temperature in January and February near or below and mild summers with frequent showers and thunderstorms. Average temperatures range from and average monthly rainfall varies per month with a rather low annual total of . In general, the weather is damp, variable, and mild.

The seasons are clearly differentiated. Spring starts in March and is initially cold and windy, later becoming pleasantly warm and often increasingly sunny. Summer, which begins in June, is predominantly warm but hot at times with temperature reaching as high as at least couple times a year with plenty of sunshine interspersed with heavy rain. Gdańsk averages 1,700 hours of sunshine per year. July and August are the warmest months. Autumn comes in September and is at first warm and usually sunny, turning cold, damp, and foggy in November. Winter lasts from December to March and includes periods of snow. January and February are the coldest months with the temperature sometimes dropping as low as .

==Economy==
The industrial sections of the city are dominated by shipbuilding, petrochemical, and chemical industries, as well as food processing. The share of high-tech sectors such as electronics, telecommunications, IT engineering, cosmetics, and pharmaceuticals is on the rise. Amber processing is also an important part of the local economy, as the majority of the world&#x27;s amber deposits lie along the Baltic coast.

Major companies based in Gdańsk include multinational clothing company LPP, Energa, Remontowa, the Gdańsk Shipyard, Ziaja, and BreakThru Films. The city also served as a major base for Grupa Lotos, with the Gdańsk Refinery having been the second-largest in Poland, with a capacity of . Gdańsk also hosts the biennial BALTEXPO International Maritime Fair and Conference, the largest fair dedicated to the maritime industry in Poland.

The largest shopping center located in the city is Forum Gdańsk, which covers a large plot in the city centre. In 2021, the registered unemployment rate in the city was estimated at 3.6%.

==Main sights==
===Architecture===
The city has some buildings surviving from the time of the Hanseatic League. Most tourist attractions are located in the area of the Main City of Gdańsk, along or near Ulica Długa (&quot;Long Street&quot;) and Długi Targ (&quot;Long Market&quot;), a pedestrian thoroughfare surrounded by buildings reconstructed in historical (primarily during the 17th century) style and flanked at both ends by elaborate city gates. This part of the city is sometimes referred to as the Royal Route, since it was once the path of processions for visiting Kings of Poland.

Walking from end to end, sites encountered on or near the Royal Route include:
*Highland Gate (&quot;Brama Wyżynna&quot;), which marks the beginning of the Royal Route
*Torture House (&quot;Katownia&quot;) and Prison Tower (&quot;Wieża więzienna&quot;), now housing the Amber Museum (&quot;Muzeum Bursztynu&quot;)
*Mansion of the Society of Saint George (&quot;Dwór Bractwa św. Jerzego&quot;)
*Golden Gate (&quot;Złota Brama&quot;)
*&quot;Ulica Długa&quot; (&quot;Long Lane&quot;), filled with picturesque tenements
**Uphagen&#x27;s House (&quot;Dom Uphagena&quot;), branch of the Museum of Gdańsk
**Lion&#x27;s Castle (&quot;Lwi Zamek&quot;)
**Main Town Hall (&quot;Ratusz Głównego Miasta&quot;, built 1378–1492)
*&quot;Długi Targ&quot; (&quot;Long Market&quot;)
**Artus&#x27; Court (&quot;Dwór Artusa&quot;)
**Neptune&#x27;s Fountain (&quot;Fontanna Neptuna&quot;), a masterpiece by architect Abraham van den Blocke, 1617. It is the oldest working fountain in Poland.
**New Jury House (&quot;Nowy Dom Ławy&quot;), in which the seemingly 17th-century &quot;Maiden in the Window&quot; appears every day during the tourist season, referring to a popular novel &quot;Panienka z okienka&quot; (&quot;Maiden in the Window&quot;) by Jadwiga Łuszczewska, set in 17th-century Gdańsk
**Golden House (&quot;Złota Kamienica&quot;), a distinctive Renaissance townhouse from the early 17th century, decorated with numerous reliefs and sculptures
*Green Gate (&quot;Zielona Brama&quot;), a Mannerist gate, built as a formal residence of Polish kings, now housing a branch of the National Museum in Gdańsk
*Olivia Business Centre, a district made up of six buildings
**Olivia Star, the tallest building in Gdańsk and the rest of northern Poland. It was finished in 2018 and measures at .


Gdańsk has a number of historical churches, including St. Catherine&#x27;s Church and St. Mary&#x27;s Church (&quot;Bazylika Mariacka&quot;). This latter is a municipal church built during the 15th century, and is one of the largest brick churches in the world. The city&#x27;s 17th-century fortifications represent one of Poland&#x27;s official national Historic Monuments (&quot;Pomnik historii&quot;), as designated on 16 September 1994 and tracked by the National Heritage Board of Poland.

Other main sights in the historical city centre include:
*Royal Chapel of the Polish King John III Sobieski
*&quot;Żuraw&quot; – medieval port crane
*Granaries on the Ołowianka and Granary Islands
*John III Sobieski Monument
*Old Town Hall
*Mariacka Street
*Polish Post Office, site of the 1939 battle
*Brick gothic town gates, i.e., Mariacka Gate, Straganiarska Gate, Cow Gate

Main sights outside the historical city centre include:
*Abbot&#x27;s Palace in the Oliwa Park
*Oliwa Cathedral
*Brzeźno Pier
*Medieval city walls
*Westerplatte
*Wisłoujście Fortress
*Gdańsk Zoo

===Museums===

*National Museum (&quot;Muzeum Narodowe&quot;)
**Department of Ancient Art – contains a number of important artworks, including Hans Memling&#x27;s &quot;Last Judgement&quot;
**Green Gate
**Department of Modern Art – in the Abbot&#x27;s Palace in Oliwa
**Ethnography Department – in the Abbot&#x27;s Granary in Oliwa
**Gdańsk Photography Gallery
*Historical Museum (&quot;Muzeum Historyczne Miasta Gdańska&quot;):
**Main Town Hall
**Artus&#x27; Court
**Uphagen&#x27;s House
**Amber Museum (&quot;Muzeum Bursztynu&quot;)
**Museum of the Polish Post (&quot;Muzeum Poczty Polskiej&quot;)
**&quot;Wartownia nr 1 na Westerplatte&quot;
**Museum of Tower Clocks (&quot;Muzeum Zegarów Wieżowych&quot;)
**Wisłoujście Fortress
*National Maritime Museum, Gdańsk (&quot;Narodowe Muzeum Morskie&quot;):
**museum ship &quot;SS Sołdek&quot; is anchored on the Motława River and was the first ship built in post-war Poland.
*European Solidarity Centre. Museum and library dedicated to the history of the Solidarity movement.
*Archdiocese Museum (&quot;Muzeum Archidiecezjalne&quot;)
*Museum of the Second World War

===Entertainment===
*Polish Baltic Philharmonic
*Baltic Opera
*Gdańsk Shakespeare Theatre is a Shakespearean theatre built on the historical site of a 17th-century playhouse where English travelling players came to perform. The new theatre, completed in 2014, hosts the annual Gdańsk Shakespeare Festival.

==Transport==


The city&#x27;s core transport infrastructure includes Gdańsk Lech Wałęsa Airport, an international airport located in Gdańsk,
and the Szybka Kolej Miejska, (SKM) which functions as a rapid transit system for the Tricity area, including Gdańsk, Sopot and Gdynia, operating frequent trains to 27 stations covering the Tricity., as well as the long-distance railways.

The principal station in Gdańsk is Gdańsk Główny railway station, served by both SKM local trains and PKP long-distance trains. In addition, long-distance trains also stop at Gdańsk Oliwa railway station, Gdańsk Wrzeszcz railway station, Sopot, and Gdynia. Gdańsk also has nine other railway stations, served by local SKM trains; Long-distance trains are operated by PKP Intercity which provides connections with all major Polish cities, including Warsaw, Kraków, Łódź, Poznań, Katowice, Szczecin, and Częstochowa, and with the neighbouring Kashubian Lakes region.

Between 2011 and 2015, the rail route between Gdańsk, Gdynia, and Warsaw underwent a major upgrade, resulting in improvements in the railway&#x27;s speed and critical infrastructure such as signalling systems, as well as the construction of the Pomorska Kolej Metropolitalna, a major suburban railway, which was opened in 2015.

City buses and trams are operated by ZTM Gdańsk (Zarząd Transportu Miejskiego w Gdańsku). The Port of Gdańsk is a seaport located on the southern coast of Gdańsk Bay, located within the city, and the Obwodnica Trójmiejska and A1 autostrada allow for automotive access to the city. Additionally, Gdańsk is part of the Rail-2-Sea project. This project&#x27;s objective is to connect the city with the Romanian Black Sea port of Constanța with a long railway line passing through Poland, Slovakia, Hungary and Romania.

==Sport==

There are many popular professional sports teams in the Gdańsk and Tricity area. The city&#x27;s professional football club is Lechia Gdańsk. Founded in 1945, they play in the , Poland&#x27;s top division. Their home stadium, Stadion Miejski, was one of the four Polish stadiums to host the UEFA Euro 2012 competition, as well as the host of the 2021 UEFA Europa League Final. Other notable football clubs are Gedania 1922 Gdańsk and SKS Stoczniowiec Gdańsk, which both played in the second tier in the past. Other notable clubs include speedway club Wybrzeże Gdańsk, rugby club Lechia Gdańsk, ice hockey club Stoczniowiec Gdańsk, and volleyball club Trefl Gdańsk.

The city&#x27;s Hala Olivia was a venue for the official 2009 EuroBasket, and the Ergo Arena was one of the 2013 Men&#x27;s European Volleyball Championship, 2014 FIVB Volleyball Men&#x27;s World Championship and 2014 IAAF World Indoor Championships venues.

==Politics and local government==
Contemporary Gdańsk is one of the major centres of economic and administrative life in Poland. It has been the seat of a Polish central institution, the Polish Space Agency, several supra-regional branches of further central institutions, as well as the supra-regional (appellate-level) institutions of justice. As the capital of the Pomeranian Voivodeship it has been the seat of the Pomeranian Voivodeship Office, the Sejmik, and the Marshall&#x27;s Office of the Pomeranian Voivodeship and other voivodeship-level institutions.

Legislative power in Gdańsk is vested in a unicameral Gdańsk city council (Rada Miasta), which comprises 34 members. Council members are elected directly every four years. Like most legislative bodies, the City Council divides itself into committees, which have the oversight of various functions of the city government.

; City Council in 2024–2029:

* KO (15)
** PO (9)
** iPL (1)
** Ind. (5)
* WDG (11)
** WDG (10)
** NL (1)
* PiS (8)
** PiS (6)
* Ind. (2)

===Districts===
Gdańsk is divided into 34 administrative divisions: 6 and 28 . A full list can be found at Districts of Gdańsk, but the largest include Śródmieście, Przymorze Wielkie, Chełm, Wrzeszcz Dolny, and Wrzeszcz Górny.

==Education and science==
There are 15 higher schools in the city, including three universities. Notable educational institutions include the University of Gdańsk, Gdańsk University of Technology, and Gdańsk Medical University. The city is also home to the Baltic Institute.

==International relations==
===Consulates===

There are four consulates general in Gdańsk – China, Germany, Hungary, Russia, one consulate – Ukraine, and 17 honorary consulates – Austria, Bangladesh, Bulgaria, Estonia, Ethiopia, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Mexico, Moldova, Netherlands, Peru, Seychelles, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Uruguay.

===Twin towns – sister cities===

Gdańsk is twinned with:
* Helsingør, Denmark
* Bremen, Germany
* Cleveland, United States
* Kalmar, Sweden

* Nice, France
* Astana, Kazakhstan

* Rotterdam, Netherlands
* Sefton, United Kingdom
* Turku, Finland
* Vilnius, Lithuania
===Former twin towns===
* Kaliningrad, Russia
* Saint Petersburg, Russia

On 3 March 2022, Gdańsk City Council passed a unanimous resolution to terminate the cooperation with the Russian cities of Kaliningrad and Saint Petersburg as a response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine.

===Partnerships and cooperation===
Gdańsk also cooperates with:
* Ghent, Belgium
* Le Havre, France
* Marseille, France
* Odesa, Ukraine

==Demographics==


The 1923 census conducted in the Free City of Danzig indicated that of all inhabitants, 95% were German, and 3% were Polish and Kashubian. The end of World War II is a significant break in continuity with regard to the inhabitants of Gdańsk.

German citizens began to flee en masse as the Soviet Red Army advanced, composed of both spontaneous flights driven by rumors of Soviet atrocities, and organised evacuation starting in the summer of 1944 which continued into the spring of 1945. Approximately 1% (100,000) of the German civilian population residing east of the Oder–Neisse line perished in the fighting prior to the surrender in May 1945. German civilians were also sent as &quot;reparations labour&quot; to the Soviet Union.

Poles from other parts of Poland replaced the former German-speaking population, with the first settlers arriving in March 1945. On 30 March 1945, the Gdańsk Voivodeship was established as the first administrative Polish unit in the Recovered Territories. As of 1 November 1945, around 93,029 Germans remained within the city limits. The locals of German descent who declared Polish nationality were permitted to remain; as of 1 January 1949, 13,424 persons who had received Polish citizenship in a post-war &quot;ethnic vetting&quot; process lived in Gdańsk.

The settlers can be grouped according to their background:
*Poles that had been freed from forced labor in Nazi Germany
*Repatriates: Poles expelled from the areas east of the new Polish-Soviet border. This included assimilated minorities such as the Polish-Armenian community
*Poles incl. Kashubians relocating from nearby villages and small towns
*Settlers from central Poland migrating voluntarily
*Non-Poles forcibly resettled during Operation Vistula in 1947. Large numbers of Ukrainians were forced to move from south-eastern Poland under a 1947 Polish government operation aimed at dispersing, and therefore assimilating, those Ukrainians who had not been expelled eastward already, throughout the newly acquired territories. Belarusians living around the area around Białystok were also pressured into relocating to the formerly German areas for the same reasons. This scattering of members of non-Polish ethnic groups throughout the country was an attempt by the Polish authorities to dissolve the unique ethnic identity of groups like the Ukrainians, Belarusians, and Lemkos, and broke the proximity and communication necessary for strong communities to form.
*Jewish Holocaust survivors, most of them Polish repatriates from the Eastern Borderlands.
*Greeks and Slav Macedonians, refugees of the Greek Civil War.

==People==
==See also==

*Tourism in Poland
*List of honorary citizens of Gdańsk
*764 Gedania – a minor planet orbiting the Sun
*Danzig Highflyer
*Father Eugeniusz Dutkiewicz SAC Hospice
*Kashubians
*List of neighbourhoods of Gdańsk
*St. Mary&#x27;s Church, Gdańsk
*Laznia Centre for Contemporary Art
*Ronald Reagan Park
*&quot;Live in Gdańsk&quot;
*Orunia Park

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="0" end="6" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="24" end="30" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="49" end="55" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54180" start="80" end="102" title="Pomeranian Voivodeship" label="Pomeranian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="187" end="194" title="seaport" label="seaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950176" start="228" end="235" title="Motława" label="Motława"/>
<link wikidata="Q213367" start="282" end="292" title="Gdańsk Bay" label="Gdańsk Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q385" start="315" end="321" title="Gdynia" label="Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q317548" start="330" end="341" title="resort town" label="resort town"/>
<link wikidata="Q92689" start="345" end="350" title="Sopot" label="Sopot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907114" start="365" end="382" title="metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q732001" start="394" end="401" title="Tricity, Poland" label="Tricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="612" end="623" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="659" end="675" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="723" end="738" title="#Architecture" label="urban landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="874" end="894" title="Partitions of Poland" label="Partitions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="920" end="927" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="952" end="965" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q154705" start="986" end="1008" title="unification of Germany" label="unification of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1020" end="1031" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="1040" end="1060" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q216173" start="1071" end="1080" title="Free City of Danzig" label="Free City"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="1109" end="1126" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q533034" start="1190" end="1201" title="Battle of Westerplatte" label="first clash"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1205" end="1217" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q517081" start="1221" end="1233" title="Westerplatte" label="Westerplatte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293310" start="1281" end="1295" title="Territorial changes of Poland immediately after World War II" label="border changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16837151" start="1297" end="1307" title="Flight and expulsion of Germans from Poland during and after World War II" label="expulsions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1312" end="1326" title="Gdańsk#Demographics" label="new settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003" start="1386" end="1396" title="Solidarity (Polish trade union)" label="Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="1452" end="1464" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q69163529" start="1470" end="1493" title="fall of the Berlin Wall" label="fall of the Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="1521" end="1532" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758009" start="1557" end="1577" title="University of Gdańsk" label="University of Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q465922" start="1579" end="1610" title="Gdańsk University of Technology" label="Gdańsk University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968661" start="1616" end="1631" title="National Museum, Gdańsk" label="National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529385" start="1637" end="1663" title="Gdańsk Shakespeare Theatre" label="Gdańsk Shakespeare Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q11129717" start="1669" end="1699" title="Museum of World War II in Gdańsk" label="Museum of the Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q805784" start="1705" end="1731" title="Polish Baltic Philharmonic" label="Polish Baltic Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q18203370" start="1737" end="1756" title="Polish Space Agency" label="Polish Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q534403" start="1765" end="1791" title="European Solidarity Centre" label="European Solidarity Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135657" start="1855" end="1864" title="Gdańsk Town Hall" label="Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450669" start="1870" end="1880" title="Green Gate" label="Green Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q715753" start="1882" end="1893" title="Artus Court" label="Artus Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q783294" start="1895" end="1918" title="Neptune&amp;#x27;s Fountain, Gdańsk" label="Neptune&amp;#x27;s Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q933903" start="1924" end="1946" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Gdańsk" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q779984" start="2018" end="2044" title="Gdańsk Lech Wałęsa Airport" label="Gdańsk Lech Wałęsa Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q275195" start="2065" end="2086" title="List of airports in Poland" label="third busiest airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587758" start="2298" end="2321" title="St. Dominic&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="St. Dominic&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q15981101" start="2589" end="2607" title="List of Historic Monuments (Poland)" label="national monuments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950176" start="2732" end="2739" title="Motława" label="Motława"/>
<link wikidata="Q747537" start="2827" end="2839" title="Proto-Slavic language" label="Proto-Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34698" start="2840" end="2849" title="adjective" label="adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q134830" start="2850" end="2856" title="prefix" label="prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q817136" start="2893" end="2896" title="wetness" label="wet"/>
<link wikidata="Q217651" start="2912" end="2917" title="moisture" label="moist"/>
<link wikidata="Q43249" start="2949" end="2957" title="morpheme" label="morpheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q384662" start="2964" end="2965" title="ń" label="ń"/>
<link wikidata="Q102047" start="2995" end="3001" title="suffix" label="suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q243427" start="3082" end="3101" title="Adalbert of Prague" label="St. Adalbert&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q878035" start="3814" end="3826" title="epenthesis" label="epenthetical"/>
<link wikidata="Q606972" start="3979" end="3988" title="Polish alphabet" label="diacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="4205" end="4210" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q742782" start="4561" end="4569" title="Lechitic languages" label="Lechitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33690" start="4871" end="4889" title="Kashubian language" label="Kashubian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q147804" start="5208" end="5216" title="Kashubia" label="Kashubia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="5436" end="5446" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="5578" end="5589" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="5594" end="5601" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q601401" start="5701" end="5706" title="trade" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937043" start="5731" end="5742" title="Pomeranians (tribe)" label="Pomeranians"/>
<link wikidata="Q53435" start="5775" end="5784" title="Mieszko I" label="Mieszko I"/>
<link wikidata="Q77394" start="5886" end="5900" title="Adalbert (Archbishop of Magdeburg)" label="Saint Adalbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q243427" start="5948" end="5966" title="Adalbert of Prague" label="Adalbert of Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q53436" start="6081" end="6099" title="Bolesław I Chrobry" label="Bolesław the Brave"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6388" end="6400" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q53435" start="6546" end="6565" title="Mieszko I of Poland" label="Mieszko I of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q353227" start="6635" end="6647" title="History of Poland (966–1385)" label="Polish state"/>
<link wikidata="Q201615" start="6661" end="6674" title="Piast dynasty" label="Piast dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="6704" end="6714" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q166886" start="6879" end="6884" title="Duke" label="duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q316796" start="6902" end="6912" title="Samborides" label="Samborides"/>
<link wikidata="Q11747294" start="7051" end="7075" title="Basilica of St. Nicholas, Gdańsk" label="St Nicholas&amp;#x27; Church"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7159" end="7184" title="Pomeranian duchies and dukes#Duchy of Pomerelia" label="Pomerelian splinter duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843" start="7281" end="7287" title="Lübeck" label="Lübeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q696750" start="7406" end="7419" title="Świętopełk II, Duke of Pomerania" label="Świętopełk II"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="7478" end="7492" title="Teutonic Order" label="Teutonic Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q326188" start="7731" end="7740" title="Pomerelia" label="Pomerelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q686235" start="7788" end="7798" title="Lübeck law" label="Lübeck law"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981896" start="7844" end="7860" title="German town law" label="autonomy charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q326188" start="7966" end="7975" title="Pomerelia" label="Pomerelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q572038" start="7982" end="7992" title="Mestwin II, Duke of Pomerania" label="Mestwin II"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="8253" end="8267" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q148499" start="8585" end="8596" title="Margraviate of Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q333023" start="8718" end="8726" title="Teutonic takeover of Danzig (Gdańsk)" label="massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q147239" start="9248" end="9258" title="Kashubians" label="Kashubians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446303" start="9371" end="9379" title="Lechites" label="Lechitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q524980" start="9501" end="9507" title="Komtur" label="Komtur"/>
<link wikidata="Q608585" start="9595" end="9605" title="Rechtstadt" label="Rechtstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q561381" start="9616" end="9624" title="Kulm law" label="Kulm law"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="9653" end="9669" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="9755" end="9761" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235" start="9763" end="9771" title="Veliky Novgorod" label="Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="9773" end="9779" title="Lisbon" label="Lisboa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8717" start="9785" end="9792" title="Seville" label="Sevilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165324" start="9811" end="9819" title="Old Town (Gdańsk)" label="Old Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q4371264" start="9962" end="9982" title="Polish–Teutonic Wars" label="Polish-Teutonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q573380" start="9991" end="10014" title="Treaty of Kalisz (1343)" label="Treaty of Kalisz (1343)"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="10078" end="10082" title="fief" label="fief"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="10092" end="10104" title="Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Polish Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q10564271" start="10288" end="10294" title="potash" label="potash"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="10361" end="10368" title="Vistula" label="Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q405155" start="10375" end="10389" title="trade route" label="trading routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q33570" start="10710" end="10728" title="Battle of Grunwald" label="Battle of Grunwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q14635000" start="10780" end="10797" title="Poland during the Jagiellon dynasty" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26679" start="10822" end="10842" title="Peace of Thorn (1411)" label="First Peace of Thorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q281484" start="10960" end="10982" title="Prussian Confederation" label="Prussian Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q53459" start="11263" end="11283" title="Casimir IV Jagiellon" label="Casimir IV of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q315921" start="11363" end="11387" title="Thirteen Years&amp;#x27; War (1454–1466)" label="Thirteen Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q156020" start="11411" end="11438" title="State of the Teutonic Order" label="State of the Teutonic Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="11611" end="11617" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q104712" start="11694" end="11700" title="Elbląg" label="Elbląg"/>
<link wikidata="Q53459" start="11848" end="11868" title="Casimir IV Jagiellon" label="Casimir IV of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="12231" end="12238" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="12243" end="12250" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q233532" start="12823" end="12851" title="Second Peace of Thorn (1466)" label="Second Peace of Thorn (1466)"/>
<link wikidata="Q589662" start="12966" end="12979" title="Royal Prussia" label="Royal Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500794" start="13003" end="13026" title="Greater Poland Province, Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Greater Poland Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="13052" end="13071" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965339" start="13100" end="13114" title="Narratio Prima" label="Narratio Prima"/>
<link wikidata="Q103983" start="13156" end="13175" title="heliocentric theory" label="heliocentric theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q963303" start="13216" end="13231" title="Union of Lublin" label="Union of Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q881566" start="13338" end="13348" title="Danzig law" label="Danzig law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156016" start="13455" end="13469" title="Royal elections in Poland" label="royal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q110223" start="13521" end="13530" title="Mennonite" label="Mennonite"/>
<link wikidata="Q150862" start="13662" end="13675" title="Maximilian II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Maximilian II"/>
<link wikidata="Q54030" start="13700" end="13715" title="Stephen Báthory of Poland" label="Stephen Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="13815" end="13822" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q150726" start="13827" end="13845" title="Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Emperor Maximilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625471" start="13889" end="13904" title="Siege of Danzig (1577)" label="Siege of Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q54030" start="14130" end="14145" title="Stephen Báthory of Poland" label="Stephen Báthory"/>
<link wikidata="Q881566" start="14195" end="14205" title="Danzig law" label="Danzig law"/>
<link wikidata="Q193360" start="14236" end="14248" title="List of Polish monarchs" label="Polish kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q203607" start="14330" end="14337" title="Guilder" label="guldens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985977" start="14391" end="14422" title="Polish–Swedish War (1626–1629)" label="Polish–Swedish War of 1626–1629"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967790" start="14443" end="14458" title="Battle of Oliwa" label="Battle of Oliwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q267167" start="14547" end="14558" title="Polish Navy" label="Polish Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q631163" start="14634" end="14640" title="Deluge (history)" label="Deluge"/>
<link wikidata="Q582029" start="14670" end="14688" title="Siege of Danzig (1655–1660)" label="besieged by Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q17335" start="14726" end="14741" title="Treaty of Oliwa" label="Treaty of Oliwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447540" start="14781" end="14786" title="Oliwa" label="Oliwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q57963" start="14860" end="14877" title="Johannes Hevelius" label="Johannes Hevelius"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14894" end="14918" title=":pl:Obserwatorium Astronomiczne Jana Heweliusza w Gdańsku" label="astronomical observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165324" start="14926" end="14934" title="Old Town (Gdańsk)" label="Old Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q53454" start="14948" end="14965" title="John III Sobieski" label="John III Sobieski"/>
<link wikidata="Q326188" start="15109" end="15118" title="Pomerelia" label="Pomerelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9078" start="15197" end="15213" title="Latvian language" label="Latvian-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639939" start="15214" end="15224" title="Kursenieki" label="Kursenieki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581823" start="15226" end="15234" title="Southern Netherlands" label="Flemings"/>
<link wikidata="Q200569" start="15240" end="15245" title="Dutch people" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q181634" start="15272" end="15277" title="Scottish people" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="15389" end="15411" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="15454" end="15465" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="15533" end="15563" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599700" start="15756" end="15773" title="The plague during the Great Northern War" label="last great plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q54022" start="15937" end="15958" title="Stanisław Leszczyński" label="Stanisław Leszczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q212658" start="15988" end="16016" title="War of the Polish Succession" label="War of the Polish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="16038" end="16046" title="Russian Empire" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354105" start="16057" end="16072" title="Siege of Danzig (1734)" label="Siege of Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q579938" start="16201" end="16214" title="Baltic region" label="Baltic region"/>
<link wikidata="Q831727" start="16220" end="16243" title="Danzig Research Society" label="Danzig Research Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q597506" start="16310" end="16335" title="First Partition of Poland" label="First Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="16351" end="16358" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q161947" start="16424" end="16448" title="Province of West Prussia" label="Province of West Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="16498" end="16505" title="exclave" label="exclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770786" start="16550" end="16563" title="List of monarchs of Prussia" label="Prussian king"/>
<link wikidata="Q157008" start="16685" end="16698" title="cattle plague" label="cattle plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q209208" start="16933" end="16946" title="German cities" label="German cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q103930" start="16960" end="16973" title="Polish cities" label="Polish cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q601401" start="17080" end="17085" title="trade" label="trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q124490" start="17107" end="17114" title="Violence" label="violent"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="17202" end="17220" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025374" start="17237" end="17263" title="Second Partition of Poland" label="Second Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863053" start="17635" end="17652" title="Baroque in Poland" label="Baroque in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499641" start="17683" end="17703" title="Uphagen&amp;#x27;s House" label="Uphagen&amp;#x27;s House"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="17847" end="17862" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q901954" start="17886" end="17907" title="Siege of Danzig (1807)" label="besieged and captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q71084" start="17926" end="17932" title="First French Empire" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102497" start="17934" end="17940" title="Polish Legions (Napoleonic period)" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q223936" start="17942" end="17949" title="Kingdom of Italy (Napoleonic)" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q153015" start="17951" end="17956" title="Kingdom of Saxony" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q186320" start="17962" end="17967" title="Grand Duchy of Baden" label="Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q901974" start="17997" end="18006" title="Free City of Danzig (Napoleonic)" label="free city"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992111" start="18038" end="18046" title="Siege of Danzig (1813)" label="captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="18127" end="18142" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q161947" start="18225" end="18237" title="West Prussia" label="West Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409002" start="18260" end="18280" title="Wisłoujście Fortress" label="Wisłoujście Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210074" start="18350" end="18368" title="Resistance movements in partitioned Poland (1795–1918)" label="resistance members"/>
<link wikidata="Q462964" start="18400" end="18408" title="November Uprising" label="November"/>
<link wikidata="Q473670" start="18413" end="18420" title="January Uprising" label="January"/>
<link wikidata="Q129797" start="18453" end="18470" title="Russian Partition" label="Russian Partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q866378" start="18589" end="18603" title="Biskupia Górka" label="Biskupia Górka"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="18785" end="18791" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="18797" end="18811" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="18820" end="18833" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q720008" start="18845" end="18861" title="Great Emigration" label="Great Emigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699" start="18975" end="18994" title="Revolutions of 1848 in the German states" label="revolutions of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q154705" start="19017" end="19039" title="unification of Germany" label="unification of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q182034" start="19063" end="19071" title="hegemony" label="hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="19101" end="19114" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="19174" end="19185" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="19611" end="19622" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="19665" end="19671" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="19688" end="19702" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q157648" start="19716" end="19731" title="Fourteen Points" label="Fourteen Points"/>
<link wikidata="Q489691" start="20118" end="20126" title="Masurian dialects" label="Masurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="20250" end="20267" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Versailles Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q216173" start="20283" end="20302" title="Free City of Danzig" label="Free City of Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="20357" end="20374" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="20628" end="20643" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q871859" start="20645" end="20655" title="Volkstag" label="parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q700109" start="20730" end="20743" title="Danzig gulden" label="Danzig gulden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="20765" end="20771" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629561" start="20787" end="20808" title="anti-Polish sentiment" label="anti-Polish sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q326128" start="20828" end="20841" title="Germanisation" label="Germanisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="20846" end="20857" title="Racial segregation" label="segregation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="21311" end="21321" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451250" start="21439" end="21448" title="Gauleiter" label="Gauleiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q704305" start="21449" end="21463" title="Albert Forster" label="Albert Forster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345608" start="21573" end="21590" title="High Commissioner" label="High Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q715753" start="22248" end="22259" title="Artus Court" label="Artus Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q783294" start="22268" end="22291" title="Neptune&amp;#x27;s Fountain, Gdańsk" label="Neptune&amp;#x27;s Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="22572" end="22590" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="22607" end="22619" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="22737" end="22756" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="22759" end="22780" title="NSDAP" label="The German government"/>
<link wikidata="Q471855" start="22886" end="22898" title="jurisdiction" label="jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q156654" start="22932" end="22947" title="Polish Corridor" label="Polish Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q157136" start="23251" end="23261" title="Lebensraum" label="Lebensraum"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="23585" end="23600" title="Invasion of Poland" label="attacked Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="23636" end="23657" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="a non-aggression pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q517081" start="23758" end="23770" title="Westerplatte" label="Westerplatte"/>
<link wikidata="Q533034" start="23896" end="23904" title="Battle of Westerplatte" label="resisted"/>
<link wikidata="Q564388" start="23989" end="23994" title="Defence of the Polish Post Office in Danzig" label="fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q4188196" start="24124" end="24129" title="Zaspa" label="Zaspa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="24247" end="24259" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q510368" start="24286" end="24315" title="Reichsgau Danzig-West Prussia" label="Reichsgau Danzig-West Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11709939" start="24353" end="24369" title="History of the Jews in Gdańsk" label="Jewish community"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="24410" end="24416" title="pogrom" label="pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36756" start="24444" end="24457" title="Kristallnacht" label="Kristallnacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="24570" end="24579" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="24748" end="24757" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383487" start="24776" end="24792" title="Kehilla (modern)" label="Jewish community"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="24876" end="24894" title="Gestapo" label="Nazi secret police"/>
<link wikidata="Q702638" start="25054" end="25074" title="Operation Tannenberg" label="Operation Tannenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="25125" end="25137" title="Polish people" label="ethnic Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q326193" start="25352" end="25383" title="Stutthof concentration camp" label="Sicherheitsdienst camp Stutthof"/>
<link wikidata="Q821391" start="25489" end="25504" title="Massacres in Piaśnica" label="Piaśnica forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q152543" start="25571" end="25585" title="Einsatzgruppen" label="Einsatzgruppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060" start="25624" end="25637" title="Romani people" label="Romani people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597208" start="25659" end="25670" title="Stalag XX-B" label="Stalag XX-B"/>
<link wikidata="Q321177" start="25671" end="25691" title="German prisoner-of-war camps in World War II" label="prisoner-of-war camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="25696" end="25702" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q326193" start="25737" end="25764" title="Stutthof concentration camp" label="Stutthof concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="25811" end="25817" title="Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="25830" end="25858" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="invasion of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="25931" end="25942" title="Red Army" label="Soviet Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="25983" end="25997" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q698067" start="26077" end="26100" title="East Pomeranian Offensive" label="final Soviet offensives"/>
<link wikidata="Q103801" start="26221" end="26233" title="East Prussia" label="East Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q385" start="26477" end="26483" title="Gdynia" label="Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q108266326" start="26677" end="26727" title="Siege of Danzig (1945)" label="captured the heavily damaged city on 30 March 1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293887" start="26753" end="26757" title="Rape during the liberation of Poland" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q161227" start="26825" end="26830" title="Yalta Conference" label="Yalta"/>
<link wikidata="Q151187" start="26835" end="26842" title="Potsdam Conference" label="Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="26977" end="26994" title="Fall of Communism" label="Fall of Communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16837151" start="27077" end="27098" title="Flight and expulsion of Germans from Poland during and after World War II" label="fled or were expelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026" start="27154" end="27159" title="Polish people" label="Poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q450355" start="27202" end="27225" title="Polish population transfers (1944–1946)" label="deported by the Soviets"/>
<link wikidata="Q931904" start="27229" end="27244" title="Repatriation of Poles (1955–1959)" label="two major waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168846" start="27266" end="27306" title="Territories of Poland annexed by the Soviet Union" label="Polish areas annexed by the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q45379" start="27391" end="27409" title="Danuta Siedzikówna" label="Danuta Siedzikówna"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27426" end="27444" title=":pl:Feliks Selmanowicz" label="Feliks Selmanowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363019" start="27452" end="27469" title="Polish resistance movement in World War II" label="Polish resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="27567" end="27573" title="Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436423" start="27578" end="27589" title="Macedonians (ethnic group)" label="Macedonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307676" start="27591" end="27622" title="refugees of the Greek Civil War" label="refugees of the Greek Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q579938" start="28555" end="28568" title="Baltic region" label="Baltic region"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="28632" end="28664" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Poland" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q760020" start="28708" end="28734" title="Polish 1970 protests" label="anti-regime demonstrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q159603" start="28796" end="28813" title="Władysław Gomułka" label="Władysław Gomułka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736541" start="28990" end="29005" title="Gdańsk Shipyard" label="Gdańsk Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003" start="29032" end="29042" title="Solidarity (Polish trade union)" label="Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042315" start="29128" end="29145" title="Exercise Zapad-81" label="Exercise Zapad-81"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732849" start="29312" end="29323" title="Hala Olivia" label="Hala Olivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="29545" end="29557" title="Eastern Bloc" label="Eastern Bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q444" start="29628" end="29639" title="Lech Wałęsa" label="Lech Wałęsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054799" start="29648" end="29667" title="President of Poland" label="President of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q534403" start="29689" end="29715" title="European Solidarity Centre" label="European Solidarity Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q123213" start="29852" end="29854" title="Polish złoty" label="zł"/>
<link wikidata="Q946" start="30010" end="30021" title="Donald Tusk" label="Donald Tusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259469" start="30025" end="30049" title="Prime Minister of Poland" label="Prime Minister of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q735587" start="30107" end="30140" title="President of the European Council" label="President of the European Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q45379" start="30184" end="30202" title="Danuta Siedzikówna" label="Danuta Siedzikówna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065090" start="30467" end="30482" title="Paweł Adamowicz" label="Paweł Adamowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q60614851" start="30488" end="30500" title="Assassination of Paweł Adamowicz" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q329157" start="30845" end="30871" title="Princess of Asturias Awards" label="Princess of Asturias Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="31160" end="31179" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="31250" end="31257" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="31259" end="31268" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="31273" end="31279" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950176" start="31328" end="31335" title="Motława" label="Motława"/>
<link wikidata="Q2134229" start="31349" end="31361" title="Martwa Wisła" label="Martwa Wisła"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="31379" end="31386" title="Vistula" label="Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067021" start="31434" end="31454" title="physiographic region" label="physiographic region"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601" start="31457" end="31469" title="Vistula Spit" label="Vistula Spit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736104" start="31500" end="31512" title="Vistula Fens" label="Vistula Fens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31541" end="31560" title="Kashubian Coastland" label="Kashubian Coastland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16494121" start="31598" end="31621" title="Kashubian Lake District" label="Kashubian Lake District"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="31778" end="31793" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="31846" end="31871" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q25381" start="33485" end="33490" title="Amber" label="Amber"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="33615" end="33621" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11752350" start="33701" end="33704" title="LPP (company)" label="LPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q9253957" start="33706" end="33712" title="Energa" label="Energa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9266563" start="33714" end="33723" title="Remontowa" label="Remontowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736541" start="33729" end="33744" title="Gdańsk Shipyard" label="Gdańsk Shipyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959237" start="33757" end="33772" title="BreakThru Films" label="BreakThru Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256909" start="33815" end="33826" title="Grupa Lotos" label="Grupa Lotos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529384" start="33837" end="33852" title="Gdańsk Refinery" label="Gdańsk Refinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q155930" start="34034" end="34051" title="maritime industry" label="maritime industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q65164240" start="34115" end="34127" title="Forum Gdańsk" label="Forum Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="34347" end="34363" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q570116" start="34370" end="34388" title="tourist attraction" label="tourist attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q82117" start="34694" end="34703" title="city gate" label="city gate"/>
<link wikidata="" start="34947" end="34960" title=":pl:Brama Wyżynna w Gdańsku" label="Brama Wyżynna"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35136" end="35152" title=":pl:Muzeum Bursztynu w Gdańsku" label="Muzeum Bursztynu"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35207" end="35231" title=":pl:Dwór Bractwa św. Jerzego w Gdańsku" label="Dwór Bractwa św. Jerzego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426552" start="35240" end="35251" title="Golden Gate (Gdańsk)" label="Golden Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q695682" start="35285" end="35296" title="Ulica Długa" label="Ulica Długa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499641" start="35364" end="35384" title="Uphagen&amp;#x27;s House" label="Uphagen&amp;#x27;s House"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35472" end="35481" title=":pl:Lwi Zamek" label="Lwi Zamek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135657" start="35491" end="35505" title="Gdańsk Town Hall" label="Main Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q679506" start="35567" end="35577" title="Długi Targ" label="Długi Targ"/>
<link wikidata="Q715753" start="35612" end="35629" title="Artus Court" label="Artus&amp;#x27; Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q783294" start="35658" end="35681" title="Neptune&amp;#x27;s Fountain, Gdańsk" label="Neptune&amp;#x27;s Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q73334" start="35741" end="35763" title="Abraham van den Blocke" label="Abraham van den Blocke"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35840" end="35853" title=":pl:Nowy Dom Ławy w Gdańsku" label="Nowy Dom Ławy"/>
<link wikidata="Q274324" start="36074" end="36093" title="Jadwiga Łuszczewska" label="Jadwiga Łuszczewska"/>
<link wikidata="" start="36144" end="36159" title=":pl:Złota Kamienica w Gdańsku" label="Złota Kamienica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903045" start="36182" end="36193" title="Renaissance in Poland" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450669" start="36281" end="36291" title="Green Gate" label="Green Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750805" start="36323" end="36332" title="Mannerist architecture and sculpture in Poland" label="Mannerist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968661" start="36412" end="36437" title="National Museum, Gdańsk" label="National Museum in Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11798040" start="36439" end="36461" title="Olivia Business Centre" label="Olivia Business Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q479323" start="36676" end="36703" title="St Catherine&amp;#x27;s Church, Gdańsk" label="St. Catherine&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q933903" start="36708" end="36730" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Gdańsk" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q15981101" start="36977" end="36995" title="List of Historical Monuments (Poland)" label="Historic Monuments"/>
<link wikidata="Q15981101" start="37003" end="37018" title="Pomnik historii" label="Pomnik historii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1963390" start="37081" end="37114" title="Narodowy Instytut Dziedzictwa" label="National Heritage Board of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q53454" start="37207" end="37224" title="John III Sobieski" label="John III Sobieski"/>
<link wikidata="Q534329" start="37284" end="37293" title="Ołowianka" label="Ołowianka"/>
<link wikidata="Q11823548" start="37315" end="37341" title="John III Sobieski Monument in Gdańsk" label="John III Sobieski Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q564399" start="37375" end="37393" title="Polish Post Office (Danzig)" label="Polish Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q564388" start="37407" end="37418" title="Defence of the Polish Post Office in Danzig" label="1939 battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q252800" start="37553" end="37572" title="Abbot&amp;#x27;s Palace (Oliwa)" label="Abbot&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236685" start="37592" end="37607" title="Oliwa Cathedral" label="Oliwa Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q24945334" start="37609" end="37621" title="Brzeźno Pier" label="Brzeźno Pier"/>
<link wikidata="Q86458169" start="37623" end="37642" title="City walls of Gdańsk" label="Medieval city walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q517081" start="37644" end="37656" title="Westerplatte" label="Westerplatte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409002" start="37658" end="37678" title="Wisłoujście Fortress" label="Wisłoujście Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384936" start="37680" end="37690" title="Gdańsk Zoo" label="Gdańsk Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968661" start="37708" end="37723" title="National Museum, Gdańsk" label="National Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q106851" start="37835" end="37847" title="Hans Memling" label="Hans Memling"/>
<link wikidata="Q701035" start="37861" end="37875" title="The Last Judgment (Memling)" label="Last Judgement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450669" start="37884" end="37894" title="Green Gate" label="Green Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q252800" start="37931" end="37950" title="Abbot&amp;#x27;s Palace (Oliwa)" label="Abbot&amp;#x27;s Palace"/>
<link wikidata="" start="38079" end="38112" title=":pl:Muzeum Historyczne Miasta Gdańska" label="Muzeum Historyczne Miasta Gdańska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135657" start="38123" end="38137" title="Gdańsk Town Hall" label="Main Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q715753" start="38140" end="38157" title="Artus Court" label="Artus&amp;#x27; Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499641" start="38160" end="38180" title="Uphagen&amp;#x27;s House" label="Uphagen&amp;#x27;s House"/>
<link wikidata="" start="38203" end="38219" title=":pl:Muzeum Bursztynu w Gdańsku" label="Muzeum Bursztynu"/>
<link wikidata="" start="38262" end="38284" title=":pl:Muzeum Poczty Polskiej w Gdańsku" label="Muzeum Poczty Polskiej"/>
<link wikidata="" start="38300" end="38330" title=":pl:Wartownia nr 1 na Westerplatte" label="Wartownia nr 1 na Westerplatte"/>
<link wikidata="" start="38369" end="38393" title=":pl:Muzeum Zegarów Wieżowych" label="Muzeum Zegarów Wieżowych"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409002" start="38403" end="38423" title="Wisłoujście Fortress" label="Wisłoujście Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845346" start="38425" end="38457" title="National Maritime Museum, Gdańsk" label="National Maritime Museum, Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q575727" start="38499" end="38510" title="museum ship" label="museum ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q455096" start="38517" end="38526" title="SS Sołdek" label="SS Sołdek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950176" start="38552" end="38559" title="Motława" label="Motława"/>
<link wikidata="Q534403" start="38616" end="38642" title="European Solidarity Centre" label="European Solidarity Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003" start="38695" end="38705" title="Solidarity (Polish trade union)" label="Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="" start="38743" end="38766" title=":pl:Muzeum Archidiecezjalne w Gdańsku" label="Muzeum Archidiecezjalne"/>
<link wikidata="Q11129717" start="38775" end="38805" title="Museum of the Second World War" label="Museum of the Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q805784" start="38828" end="38854" title="Polish Baltic Philharmonic" label="Polish Baltic Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146544" start="38856" end="38868" title="Baltic State Opera" label="Baltic Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529385" start="38870" end="38896" title="Gdańsk Shakespeare Theatre" label="Gdańsk Shakespeare Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529381" start="39084" end="39111" title="Gdańsk Shakespeare Festival" label="Gdańsk Shakespeare Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q779984" start="39185" end="39211" title="Gdańsk Lech Wałęsa Airport" label="Gdańsk Lech Wałęsa Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478985" start="39265" end="39285" title="Szybka Kolej Miejska (Tricity)" label="Szybka Kolej Miejska"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503" start="39314" end="39327" title="rapid transit" label="rapid transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q92689" start="39375" end="39380" title="Sopot" label="Sopot"/>
<link wikidata="Q385" start="39385" end="39391" title="Gdynia" label="Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q557448" start="39532" end="39561" title="Gdańsk Główny railway station" label="Gdańsk Główny railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478985" start="39578" end="39581" title="Szybka Kolej Miejska (Tricity)" label="SKM"/>
<link wikidata="Q249591" start="39599" end="39602" title="Polskie Koleje Panstwowe" label="PKP"/>
<link wikidata="Q594376" start="39672" end="39700" title="Gdańsk Oliwa railway station" label="Gdańsk Oliwa railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q934967" start="39702" end="39733" title="Gdańsk Wrzeszcz railway station" label="Gdańsk Wrzeszcz railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563186" start="39735" end="39740" title="Sopot railway station" label="Sopot"/>
<link wikidata="Q800808" start="39746" end="39752" title="Gdynia Główna railway station" label="Gdynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478985" start="39815" end="39818" title="Szybka Kolej Miejska (Tricity)" label="SKM"/>
<link wikidata="Q590406" start="39864" end="39877" title="PKP Intercity" label="PKP Intercity"/>
<link wikidata="Q103930" start="39920" end="39933" title="List of cities and towns in Poland" label="Polish cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="39945" end="39951" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="39953" end="39959" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q580" start="39961" end="39965" title="Łódź" label="Łódź"/>
<link wikidata="Q268" start="39967" end="39973" title="Poznań" label="Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q588" start="39975" end="39983" title="Katowice" label="Katowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q393" start="39985" end="39993" title="Szczecin" label="Szczecin"/>
<link wikidata="Q103217" start="39999" end="40010" title="Częstochowa" label="Częstochowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11823715" start="40308" end="40337" title="Pomorska Kolej Metropolitalna" label="Pomorska Kolej Metropolitalna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997403" start="40407" end="40412" title="Trams in Gdańsk" label="trams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567868" start="40486" end="40500" title="Port of Gdańsk" label="Port of Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q213367" start="40547" end="40557" title="Gdańsk Bay" label="Gdańsk Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075613" start="40592" end="40613" title="Obwodnica Trójmiejska" label="Obwodnica Trójmiejska"/>
<link wikidata="Q429163" start="40618" end="40631" title="A1 autostrada (Poland)" label="A1 autostrada"/>
<link wikidata="Q107506958" start="40709" end="40719" title="Rail-2-Sea" label="Rail-2-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="40800" end="40809" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q79808" start="40818" end="40827" title="Constanța" label="Constanța"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="41030" end="41038" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q734785" start="41047" end="41060" title="Lechia Gdańsk" label="Lechia Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q182385" start="41146" end="41161" title="Stadion Miejski (Gdańsk)" label="Stadion Miejski"/>
<link wikidata="Q22669" start="41211" end="41225" title="UEFA Euro 2012" label="UEFA Euro 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q59656863" start="41266" end="41295" title="2021 UEFA Europa League Final" label="2021 UEFA Europa League Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q65049495" start="41330" end="41349" title="Gedania 1922 Gdańsk" label="Gedania 1922 Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11821976" start="41354" end="41377" title="SKS Stoczniowiec Gdańsk" label="SKS Stoczniowiec Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4021139" start="41471" end="41486" title="Wybrzeże Gdańsk" label="Wybrzeże Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11753568" start="41499" end="41512" title="RC Lechia Gdańsk" label="Lechia Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892749" start="41530" end="41549" title="Stoczniowiec Gdańsk" label="Stoczniowiec Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538317" start="41571" end="41583" title="Trefl Gdańsk" label="Trefl Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732849" start="41602" end="41613" title="Hala Olivia" label="Hala Olivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81274" start="41643" end="41658" title="2009 EuroBasket" label="2009 EuroBasket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247814" start="41668" end="41678" title="Ergo Arena" label="Ergo Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q181337" start="41694" end="41742" title="2013 Men&amp;#x27;s European Volleyball Championship" label="2013 Men&amp;#x27;s European Volleyball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520188" start="41744" end="41794" title="2014 FIVB Volleyball Men&amp;#x27;s World Championship" label="2014 FIVB Volleyball Men&amp;#x27;s World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814406" start="41799" end="41835" title="2014 IAAF World Indoor Championships" label="2014 IAAF World Indoor Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q18203370" start="42032" end="42051" title="Polish Space Agency" label="Polish Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q54180" start="42213" end="42235" title="Pomeranian Voivodeship" label="Pomeranian Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="42472" end="42484" title="city council" label="city council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021144" start="42765" end="42767" title="Civic Coalition (Poland)" label="KO"/>
<link wikidata="Q156868" start="42776" end="42778" title="Civic Platform" label="PO"/>
<link wikidata="Q73386729" start="42786" end="42789" title="Polish Initiative" label="iPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="42797" end="42801" title="Independent politician" label="Ind."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42808" end="42811" title="Everything for Gdańsk" label="WDG"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42820" end="42823" title="Everything for Gdańsk" label="WDG"/>
<link wikidata="Q107418166" start="42832" end="42834" title="New Left (Poland)" label="NL"/>
<link wikidata="Q156874" start="42841" end="42844" title="Law and Justice (Poland)" label="PiS"/>
<link wikidata="Q156874" start="42852" end="42855" title="Law and Justice (Poland)" label="PiS"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="42862" end="42866" title="Independent politician" label="Ind."/>
<link wikidata="Q11820796" start="42979" end="42998" title="Districts of Gdańsk" label="Districts of Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3594194" start="43024" end="43035" title="Śródmieście, Gdańsk" label="Śródmieście"/>
<link wikidata="Q7253669" start="43037" end="43054" title="Przymorze Wielkie" label="Przymorze Wielkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q234184" start="43056" end="43061" title="Chełm" label="Chełm"/>
<link wikidata="Q9378195" start="43063" end="43077" title="Wrzeszcz Dolny" label="Wrzeszcz Dolny"/>
<link wikidata="Q9378197" start="43083" end="43097" title="Wrzeszcz Górny" label="Wrzeszcz Górny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758009" start="43242" end="43262" title="University of Gdańsk" label="University of Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q465922" start="43264" end="43295" title="Gdańsk University of Technology" label="Gdańsk University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5529378" start="43301" end="43326" title="Gdańsk Medical University" label="Gdańsk Medical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q585807" start="43357" end="43373" title="Baltic Institute" label="Baltic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="43468" end="43473" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="43475" end="43482" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="43484" end="43491" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="43493" end="43499" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="43517" end="43524" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="43555" end="43562" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="43564" end="43574" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="43576" end="43584" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="43586" end="43593" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="43595" end="43603" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="43605" end="43615" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="43617" end="43623" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="43625" end="43634" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="43636" end="43642" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="43644" end="43651" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="43653" end="43664" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="43666" end="43670" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042" start="43672" end="43682" title="Seychelles" label="Seychelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="43684" end="43689" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="43691" end="43700" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="43702" end="43708" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="43710" end="43717" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="43764" end="43771" title="Sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q26881" start="43780" end="43789" title="Helsingør" label="Helsingør"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="43801" end="43807" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="43819" end="43828" title="Cleveland, Ohio" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26345" start="43846" end="43852" title="Kalmar" label="Kalmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="43864" end="43868" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520" start="43879" end="43885" title="Astana" label="Astana"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="43901" end="43910" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546645" start="43926" end="43932" title="Metropolitan Borough of Sefton" label="Sefton"/>
<link wikidata="Q38511" start="43951" end="43956" title="Turku" label="Turku"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="43968" end="43975" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829" start="44013" end="44024" title="Kaliningrad" label="Kaliningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="44035" end="44051" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="44238" end="44265" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="44334" end="44339" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q42810" start="44351" end="44359" title="Le Havre" label="Le Havre"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="44370" end="44379" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="44390" end="44395" title="Odesa" label="Odesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="44575" end="44587" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="44721" end="44729" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514383" start="44797" end="44814" title="Soviet war crimes" label="Soviet atrocities"/>
<link wikidata="Q160928" start="44995" end="45011" title="Oder–Neisse line" label="Oder–Neisse line"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="45146" end="45158" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377174" start="45312" end="45330" title="Gdańsk Voivodeship (1945–1975)" label="Gdańsk Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607319" start="45394" end="45415" title="Recovered Territories" label="Recovered Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="45813" end="45841" title="forced labor in Nazi Germany" label="forced labor in Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q450355" start="45843" end="45854" title="Polish population transfers (1944–1946)" label="Repatriates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569569" start="45969" end="45998" title="Armenians in Poland" label="the Polish-Armenian community"/>
<link wikidata="Q147239" start="46012" end="46022" title="Kashubians" label="Kashubians"/>
<link wikidata="Q422493" start="46160" end="46177" title="Operation Vistula" label="Operation Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q837881" start="46800" end="46806" title="Lemkos" label="Lemkos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="46893" end="46899" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="46900" end="46909" title="Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q450355" start="46934" end="46952" title="Polish population transfers (1944–1946)" label="Polish repatriates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411476" start="46962" end="46981" title="Eastern Borderlands" label="Eastern Borderlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602101" start="46984" end="46990" title="Greeks in Poland" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436423" start="46995" end="47011" title="Macedonians (ethnic group)" label="Slav Macedonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307676" start="47013" end="47044" title="refugees of the Greek Civil War" label="refugees of the Greek Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642765" start="47073" end="47090" title="Tourism in Poland" label="Tourism in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1838377" start="47092" end="47127" title="List of honorary citizens of Gdańsk" label="List of honorary citizens of Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q156994" start="47129" end="47140" title="764 Gedania" label="764 Gedania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221471" start="47176" end="47192" title="Danzig Highflyer" label="Danzig Highflyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437595" start="47194" end="47233" title="Father Eugeniusz Dutkiewicz SAC Hospice" label="Father Eugeniusz Dutkiewicz SAC Hospice"/>
<link wikidata="Q147239" start="47235" end="47245" title="Kashubians" label="Kashubians"/>
<link wikidata="Q11820796" start="47247" end="47279" title="List of neighbourhoods of Gdańsk" label="List of neighbourhoods of Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q933903" start="47281" end="47311" title="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Gdańsk" label="St. Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11689636" start="47313" end="47347" title="Laznia Centre for Contemporary Art" label="Laznia Centre for Contemporary Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q11811598" start="47349" end="47367" title="Ronald Reagan Park" label="Ronald Reagan Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085726" start="47375" end="47389" title="Live in Gdańsk" label="Live in Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11811468" start="47397" end="47408" title="Orunia Park" label="Orunia Park"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12100" wikidata="Q103585" url="?curid=12100" title="Graviton">
<text>In theories of quantum gravity, the graviton is the hypothetical elementary particle that mediates the force of gravitational interaction. There is no complete quantum field theory of gravitons due to an outstanding mathematical problem with renormalization in general relativity. In string theory, believed by some to be a consistent theory of quantum gravity, the graviton is a massless state of a fundamental string.

If it exists, the graviton is expected to be massless because the gravitational force has a very long range, and appears to propagate at the speed of light. The graviton must be a spin-2 boson because the source of gravitation is the stress–energy tensor, a second-order tensor (compared with electromagnetism&#x27;s spin-1 photon, the source of which is the four-current, a first-order tensor). Additionally, it can be shown that any massless spin-2 field would give rise to a force indistinguishable from gravitation, because a massless spin-2 field would couple to the stress–energy tensor in the same way gravitational interactions do. This result suggests that, if a massless spin-2 particle is discovered, it must be the graviton.

== Theory ==
It is hypothesized that gravitational interactions are mediated by an as yet undiscovered elementary particle, dubbed the &quot;graviton&quot;. The three other known forces of nature are mediated by elementary particles: electromagnetism by the photon, the strong interaction by gluons, and the weak interaction by the W and Z bosons. All three of these forces appear to be accurately described by the Standard Model of particle physics. In the classical limit, a successful theory of gravitons would reduce to general relativity, which itself reduces to Newton&#x27;s law of gravitation in the weak-field limit.

== History ==
Albert Einstein discussed quantized gravitational radiation in 1916, the year following his publication of general relativity.
The term &quot;graviton&quot; was coined in 1934 by Soviet physicists Dmitry Blokhintsev and . Paul Dirac reintroduced the term in a number of lectures in 1959, noting that the energy of the gravitational field should come in quanta. A mediation of the gravitational interaction by particles was anticipated by Pierre-Simon Laplace. Just like Newton&#x27;s anticipation of photons, Laplace&#x27;s anticipated &quot;gravitons&quot; had a greater speed than the speed of light in vacuum formula_1, the speed of gravitons expected in modern theories, and were not connected to quantum mechanics or special relativity, since these theories didn&#x27;t yet exist during Laplace&#x27;s lifetime.

=== Gravitons and renormalization ===
When describing graviton interactions, the classical theory of Feynman diagrams and semiclassical corrections such as one-loop diagrams behave normally. However, Feynman diagrams with at least two loops lead to ultraviolet divergences. These infinite results cannot be removed because quantized general relativity is not perturbatively renormalizable, unlike quantum electrodynamics and models such as the Yang–Mills theory. Therefore, incalculable answers are found from the perturbation method by which physicists calculate the probability of a particle to emit or absorb gravitons, and the theory loses predictive veracity. Those problems and the complementary approximation framework are grounds to show that a theory more unified than quantized general relativity is required to describe the behavior near the Planck scale.

=== Comparison with other forces ===
Like the force carriers of the other forces (see photon, gluon, W and Z bosons), the graviton plays a role in general relativity, in defining the spacetime in which events take place. In some descriptions energy modifies the &quot;shape&quot; of spacetime itself, and gravity is a result of this shape, an idea which at first glance may appear hard to match with the idea of a force acting between particles. Because the diffeomorphism invariance of the theory does not allow any particular space-time background to be singled out as the &quot;true&quot; space-time background, general relativity is said to be background-independent. In contrast, the Standard Model is &quot;not&quot; background-independent, with Minkowski space enjoying a special status as the fixed background space-time. A theory of quantum gravity is needed in order to reconcile these differences. Whether this theory should be background-independent is an open question. The answer to this question will determine the understanding of what specific role gravitation plays in the fate of the universe.

== Energy and wavelength ==
While gravitons are presumed to be massless, they would still carry energy, as does any other quantum particle. Photon energy and gluon energy are also carried by massless particles. It is unclear which variables might determine graviton energy, the amount of energy carried by a single graviton.

Alternatively, if gravitons are massive at all, the analysis of gravitational waves yielded a new upper bound on the mass of gravitons. The graviton&#x27;s Compton wavelength is at least , or about 1.6 light-years, corresponding to a graviton mass of no more than . This relation between wavelength and mass-energy is calculated with the Planck–Einstein relation, the same formula that relates electromagnetic wavelength to photon energy. 

== Experimental observation ==
Unambiguous detection of individual gravitons, though not prohibited by any fundamental law, has been thought to be impossible with any physically reasonable detector. The reason is the extremely low cross section for the interaction of gravitons with matter. For example, a detector with the mass of Jupiter and 100% efficiency, placed in close orbit around a neutron star, would only be expected to observe one graviton every 10 years, even under the most favorable conditions. It would be impossible to discriminate these events from the background of neutrinos, since the dimensions of the required neutrino shield would ensure collapse into a black hole. It has been proposed that detecting single gravitons would be possible by quantum sensing. Even quantum events may not indicate quantization of gravitational radiation.

LIGO and Virgo collaborations&#x27; observations have directly detected gravitational waves. Others have postulated that graviton scattering yields gravitational waves as particle interactions yield coherent states. Although these experiments cannot detect individual gravitons, they might provide information about certain properties of the graviton. For example, if gravitational waves were observed to propagate slower than &quot;c&quot; (the speed of light in vacuum), that would imply that the graviton has mass (however, gravitational waves must propagate slower than &quot;c&quot; in a region with non-zero mass density if they are to be detectable). Observations of gravitational waves put an upper bound of on the graviton&#x27;s mass. Solar system planetary trajectory measurements by space missions such as Cassini and MESSENGER give a comparable upper bound of . The gravitational wave and planetary ephemeris need not agree: they test different aspects of a potential graviton-based theory.

Astronomical observations of the kinematics of galaxies, especially the galaxy rotation problem and modified Newtonian dynamics, might point toward gravitons having non-zero mass.

== Difficulties and outstanding issues ==
Most theories containing gravitons suffer from severe problems. Attempts to extend the Standard Model or other quantum field theories by adding gravitons run into serious theoretical difficulties at energies close to or above the Planck scale. This is because of infinities arising due to quantum effects; technically, gravitation is not renormalizable. Since classical general relativity and quantum mechanics seem to be incompatible at such energies, from a theoretical point of view, this situation is not tenable. One possible solution is to replace particles with strings. String theories are quantum theories of gravity in the sense that they reduce to classical general relativity plus field theory at low energies, but are fully quantum mechanical, contain a graviton, and are thought to be mathematically consistent.

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q234181" start="15" end="30" title="quantum gravity" label="quantum gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q103585" start="36" end="44" title="Graviton" label="graviton"/>
<link wikidata="Q43116" start="65" end="84" title="elementary particle" label="elementary particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q54505" start="160" end="180" title="quantum field theory" label="quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047702" start="242" end="257" title="renormalization" label="renormalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="261" end="279" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q33198" start="284" end="297" title="string theory" label="string theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024141" start="380" end="388" title="Massless particle" label="massless"/>
<link wikidata="Q719048" start="466" end="474" title="Mass in special relativity" label="massless"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="601" end="605" title="Spin (physics)" label="spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43101" start="608" end="613" title="boson" label="boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q876346" start="655" end="675" title="stress–energy tensor" label="stress–energy tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q188524" start="692" end="698" title="tensor" label="tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="714" end="730" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="745" end="751" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074152" start="780" end="792" title="four-current" label="four-current"/>
<link wikidata="Q104934" start="1338" end="1344" title="Fundamental interaction" label="forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="1393" end="1409" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="1417" end="1423" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11415" start="1429" end="1447" title="strong interaction" label="strong interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299" start="1451" end="1456" title="gluon" label="gluon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11418" start="1467" end="1483" title="weak interaction" label="weak interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q211922" start="1491" end="1505" title="W and Z bosons" label="W and Z bosons"/>
<link wikidata="Q18338" start="1574" end="1588" title="Standard Model" label="Standard Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090317" start="1617" end="1632" title="classical limit" label="classical limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="1683" end="1701" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q134465" start="1727" end="1759" title="Newton&amp;#x27;s law of gravitation" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s law of gravitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="1800" end="1815" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="1907" end="1925" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232515" start="1997" end="2015" title="Dmitry Blokhintsev" label="Dmitry Blokhintsev"/>
<link wikidata="Q47480" start="2022" end="2032" title="Paul Dirac" label="Paul Dirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q44481" start="2238" end="2258" title="Pierre-Simon Laplace" label="Pierre-Simon Laplace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2270" end="2307" title="Light#Particle theory" label="Newton&amp;#x27;s anticipation of photons"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="2501" end="2518" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11455" start="2522" end="2540" title="special relativity" label="special relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q81745" start="2699" end="2715" title="classical theory" label="classical theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q386272" start="2719" end="2734" title="Feynman diagram" label="Feynman diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092319" start="2774" end="2790" title="one-loop diagram" label="one-loop diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032228" start="2867" end="2889" title="ultraviolet divergence" label="ultraviolet divergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="2951" end="2969" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q911364" start="2977" end="2991" title="Perturbation theory (quantum mechanics)" label="perturbatively"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047702" start="2992" end="3006" title="renormalizable" label="renormalizable"/>
<link wikidata="Q234881" start="3015" end="3038" title="quantum electrodynamics" label="quantum electrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192873" start="3062" end="3079" title="Yang–Mills theory" label="Yang–Mills theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q468999" start="3471" end="3483" title="Planck scale" label="Planck scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q24364" start="3532" end="3545" title="force carrier" label="force carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q104934" start="3554" end="3566" title="fundamental interaction" label="other forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="3572" end="3578" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299" start="3580" end="3585" title="gluon" label="gluon"/>
<link wikidata="Q211922" start="3587" end="3601" title="W and Z bosons" label="W and Z bosons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="3633" end="3651" title="general relativity" label="general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="3669" end="3678" title="spacetime" label="spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3707" end="3727" title="General relativity#Definition and basic applications" label="In some descriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q133327" start="3769" end="3778" title="spacetime" label="spacetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058314" start="3944" end="3958" title="diffeomorphism" label="diffeomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q429258" start="4134" end="4156" title="background-independent" label="background-independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q464794" start="4238" end="4253" title="Minkowski space" label="Minkowski space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024141" start="4663" end="4671" title="massless particle" label="massless"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="4696" end="4702" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303639" start="4740" end="4753" title="Photon energy" label="Photon energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324100" start="4758" end="4770" title="gluon energy" label="gluon energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4147361" start="4941" end="4972" title="massive gravity" label="if gravitons are massive at all"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423" start="5043" end="5047" title="mass" label="mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145377" start="5082" end="5100" title="Compton wavelength" label="Compton wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="5128" end="5138" title="light-year" label="light-year"/>
<link wikidata="Q18388892" start="5264" end="5288" title="Planck–Einstein relation" label="Planck–Einstein relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41364" start="5336" end="5346" title="wavelength" label="wavelength"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303639" start="5350" end="5363" title="photon energy" label="photon energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17128025" start="5598" end="5611" title="cross section (physics)" label="cross section"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="5699" end="5706" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202" start="5759" end="5771" title="neutron star" label="neutron star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126" start="5953" end="5961" title="neutrino" label="neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="6046" end="6056" title="black hole" label="black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q255371" start="6228" end="6232" title="LIGO" label="LIGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063130" start="6237" end="6242" title="Virgo interferometer" label="Virgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q22683173" start="6282" end="6299" title="First observation of gravitational waves" label="directly detected"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032070" start="6427" end="6441" title="coherent state" label="coherent state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="6674" end="6688" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q165585" start="7046" end="7053" title="Cassini–Huygens" label="Cassini"/>
<link wikidata="Q182539" start="7058" end="7067" title="MESSENGER" label="MESSENGER"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475614" start="7305" end="7328" title="galaxy rotation curve" label="galaxy rotation problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503556" start="7333" end="7360" title="modified Newtonian dynamics" label="modified Newtonian dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q468999" start="7686" end="7698" title="Planck scale" label="Planck scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047702" start="7794" end="7808" title="renormalizable" label="renormalizable"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="7849" end="7866" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376436" start="8025" end="8032" title="String (physics)" label="strings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="12101" wikidata="Q431863" url="?curid=12101" title="Göta Canal">
<text>The Göta Canal () is a Swedish canal constructed in the early 19th century. 
The canal is long, of which were dug or blasted, with a width varying between and a maximum depth of about . The speed is limited to 5 knots in the canal.

The Göta Canal is a part of a waterway long, linking a number of lakes and rivers to provide a route from Gothenburg (Göteborg) on the west coast to Söderköping on the Baltic Sea via the Trollhätte kanal and Göta älv river, through the large lakes Vänern and Vättern.
This waterway was dubbed as Sweden&#x27;s Blue Ribbon ().
Contrary to the popular belief it is not correct to consider this waterway as a sort of &quot;greater&quot; Göta Canal: the Trollhätte Canal and the Göta Canal are completely separate entities.

==History==

The idea of a canal across southern Sweden was first put forward as early as 1516, by Hans Brask, the bishop of Linköping. However, it was not until the start of the 19th century that Brask&#x27;s proposals were put into action by Baltzar von Platen, a German-born former officer in the Swedish Navy. He organised the project and obtained the necessary financial and political backing. His plans attracted the enthusiastic backing of the government and the new king, Charles XIII, who saw the canal as a way of kick-starting the modernisation of Sweden. Von Platen himself extolled the modernising virtues of the canal in 1806, claiming that mining, agriculture and other industries would benefit from &quot;a navigation way through the country.&quot;

The project was inaugurated on 11 April 1810 with a budget of 24 million Swedish riksdalers. It was by far the greatest civil engineering project ever undertaken in Sweden up to that time, taking 22 years of effort by more than 58,000 workers. Much of the expertise and equipment had to be acquired from abroad, notably from Britain, whose canal system was the most advanced in the world at that time. The Scottish civil engineer Thomas Telford, renowned for his design of the Caledonian Canal in Scotland, developed the initial plans for the canal and travelled to Sweden in 1810 to oversee some of the early work on the route. Many other British engineers and craftsmen were imported to assist with the project, along with significant quantities of equipment - even apparently mundane items such as pickaxes, spades and wheelbarrows.

The Göta Canal was officially opened on 26 September 1832. Von Platen himself did not live to see the completion of the canal, having died shortly before its opening. However, the return on investment for the canal didn&#x27;t live up to the hopes of the government. Bishop Hans Brask&#x27;s original justifications for the canal&#x27;s construction were the onerous Sound Dues imposed by Denmark–Norway on all vessels passing through the narrow Øresund channel between Sweden and Denmark and the trouble with the Hanseatic League. The canal enabled vessels travelling to or from the Baltic Sea to bypass the Øresund and so evade the Danish toll. In 1851, the tycoon André Oscar Wallenberg founded the Company for Swedish Canal Steamboat Transit Traffic to carry goods from England to Russia via the canal. However, it only ran two trips between St Petersburg and Hull via Motala before the Crimean War halted Anglo-Russian trade. After the war ended, the great powers pressured Denmark into ending the four-hundred-year-old tradition of the Sound Dues, thus eliminating at a stroke the canal&#x27;s usefulness as an alternative to the Øresund. 

The arrival of the railways in 1855 quickly made the canal redundant, as trains could carry passengers and goods far more rapidly and did not have to shut down with the arrival of winter, which made the canal impassable for five months of the year. By the 1870s, the canal&#x27;s goods traffic had dwindled to just three major types of bulk goods - forest products, coal and ore, none of which required rapid transportation. Traffic volumes stagnated after that and never recovered.

The canal had one major industrial legacy in the shape of Motala Verkstad - a factory established in Motala to produce the machines such as cranes and steam dredgers that were needed to build the canal. This facility has sometimes been referred to as the &quot;cradle of the Swedish engineering industry&quot;. After the canal was opened, Motala Verkstad focused on producing equipment, locomotives and rolling stock for the newly constructed railways, beginning a tradition of railway engineering that continues to this day in the form of AB Svenska Järnvägsverkstädernas Aeroplanavdelning (ASJA) that was bought by the aeroplane manufacturer SAAB in Linköping.

==Description==

These days the canal is primarily used as a tourist and recreational attraction. Around two million people visit the canal each year on pleasure cruises - either on their own boats or on one of the many cruise ships - and related activities. The canal sometimes is ironically called the &quot;divorce ditch&quot; () because of the troubles that inexperienced couples have to endure while trying to navigate the narrow canal and the many locks by themselves.
===Locks===
The canal has 58 locks and can accommodate vessels up to long, wide and in draft.

From the east-coast of Sweden to Lake Vänern the locks are as follows (with meters of height difference per lock):

*Mem, 3
*Tegelbruket, 2.3
*Söderköping, 2.4
*Duvkullen nedre, 2.3
*Duvkullen övre, 2.4
*Mariehov nedre, 2.1
*Mariehov övre, 2.6
*Carlsborg nedre, 5.1
*Carlsborg övre, 4.7
*Klämman, open
*Hulta, 3.2
*Bråttom, 2.3
*Norsholm, 0.8
*Carl Johans slussar (seven locks), 18.8
*Oskars slussar, 4.8
*Karl Ludvig Eugéns slussar, 5.5
*Brunnby, 5.3
*Heda, 5.2
*Borensberg, 0.2
*Borenshult, 15.3
*Motala, 0.1

&quot;Lake Vättern&quot; (88 m above sea level)

*Forsvik, 3.5

&quot;Lake Viken&quot; (92 m above sea level – canal&#x27;s highest point)

*Tåtorp, 0.2
*Hajstorp övre, 5.0
*Hajstorp nedre, 5.1
*Riksberg, 7.5
*Godhögen, 5.1
*Norrkvarn övre, 2.9
*Norrkvarn nedre, 2.9
*Sjötorp 7-8, 4.6
*Sjötorp 6, 2.4
*Sjötorp 4-5, 4.8
*Sjötorp 2-3, 4.8
*Sjötorp 1, 2.9

After Lake Vänern (44 m above sea level) Trollhätte kanal to Gothenburg and the west-coast of Sweden.

==See also==
*Caledonian Canal - Sister canal in Scotland
*Kiel Canal
*Øresund
*List of government enterprises of Sweden

==Bibliography and references==
*Eric de Maré, &quot;Swedish Cross Cut&quot;, Sweden, 1965. (In English)
*

==External links==
*Göta Canal - Official site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q431863" start="4" end="14" title="Göta Canal" label="Göta Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="23" end="30" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="31" end="36" title="canal" label="canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q128822" start="212" end="216" title="Knot (unit)" label="knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="339" end="349" title="Gothenburg" label="Gothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q984831" start="382" end="393" title="Söderköping" label="Söderköping"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="401" end="411" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757387" start="420" end="436" title="Trollhätte Canal" label="Trollhätte kanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q214748" start="441" end="449" title="Göta älv" label="Göta älv"/>
<link wikidata="Q173596" start="481" end="487" title="Vänern" label="Vänern"/>
<link wikidata="Q188195" start="492" end="499" title="Vättern" label="Vättern"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992645" start="853" end="863" title="Hans Brask" label="Hans Brask"/>
<link wikidata="Q25413" start="879" end="888" title="Linköping" label="Linköping"/>
<link wikidata="Q77915" start="998" end="1016" title="Baltzar von Platen (1766–1829)" label="Baltzar von Platen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141396" start="1054" end="1066" title="Swedish Navy" label="Swedish Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q52928" start="1234" end="1246" title="Charles XIII of Sweden" label="Charles XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338813" start="1593" end="1610" title="Swedish riksdaler" label="Swedish riksdaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1845" end="1852" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984375" start="1860" end="1872" title="History of the British canal system" label="canal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="1926" end="1934" title="Scotland" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582652" start="1935" end="1949" title="civil engineer" label="civil engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q380875" start="1950" end="1964" title="Thomas Telford" label="Thomas Telford"/>
<link wikidata="Q909073" start="1997" end="2013" title="Caledonian Canal" label="Caledonian Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="2017" end="2025" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q707337" start="2724" end="2734" title="Sound Dues" label="Sound Dues"/>
<link wikidata="Q62651" start="2746" end="2760" title="Denmark–Norway" label="Denmark–Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q104662" start="2803" end="2810" title="Øresund" label="Øresund"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="2871" end="2887" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064438" start="3024" end="3046" title="Wallenberg family" label="André Oscar Wallenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="3203" end="3216" title="St Petersburg" label="St Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q128147" start="3221" end="3225" title="Kingston upon Hull" label="Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q54357" start="3230" end="3236" title="Motala" label="Motala"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="3248" end="3259" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q225323" start="3508" end="3531" title="Rail transport in Sweden" label="arrival of the railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q6917118" start="4046" end="4061" title="Motala Verkstad" label="Motala Verkstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411829" start="4528" end="4578" title="AB Svenska Järnvägsverkstädernas Aeroplanavdelning" label="AB Svenska Järnvägsverkstädernas Aeroplanavdelning"/>
<link wikidata="Q219501" start="4632" end="4636" title="Saab AB" label="SAAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q25413" start="4640" end="4649" title="Linköping" label="Linköping"/>
<link wikidata="Q244777" start="5214" end="5219" title="Draft (hull)" label="draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q173596" start="5260" end="5266" title="Vänern" label="Vänern"/>
<link wikidata="Q6814180" start="5339" end="5342" title="Mem Castle" label="Mem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5347" end="5358" title="Tegelbruket" label="Tegelbruket"/>
<link wikidata="Q984831" start="5365" end="5376" title="Söderköping" label="Söderköping"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5383" end="5398" title="Duvkullen nedre" label="Duvkullen nedre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5405" end="5419" title="Duvkullen övre" label="Duvkullen övre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5426" end="5440" title="Mariehov nedre" label="Mariehov nedre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5447" end="5460" title="Mariehov övre" label="Mariehov övre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5467" end="5482" title="Carlsborg nedre" label="Carlsborg nedre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5489" end="5503" title="Carlsborg övre" label="Carlsborg övre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5510" end="5517" title="Klämman" label="Klämman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5525" end="5530" title="Hulta Locks" label="Hulta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5537" end="5544" title="Bråttom" label="Bråttom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095935" start="5551" end="5559" title="Norsholm" label="Norsholm"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5566" end="5585" title="Berg Locks" label="Carl Johans slussar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5607" end="5621" title="Bergs Locks" label="Oskars slussar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5628" end="5654" title="Bergs Locks" label="Karl Ludvig Eugéns slussar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5661" end="5668" title="Brunnby Lock" label="Brunnby"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5675" end="5679" title="Heda Locks" label="Heda"/>
<link wikidata="Q834832" start="5686" end="5696" title="Borensberg" label="Borensberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5703" end="5713" title="Borenshult" label="Borenshult"/>
<link wikidata="Q54357" start="5721" end="5727" title="Motala" label="Motala"/>
<link wikidata="Q188195" start="5745" end="5752" title="Vättern" label="Vättern"/>
<link wikidata="Q759763" start="5784" end="5791" title="Forsvik" label="Forsvik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938681" start="5804" end="5814" title="Viken (lake)" label="Lake Viken"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5875" end="5881" title="Tåtorp" label="Tåtorp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5888" end="5901" title="Hajstorp övre" label="Hajstorp övre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5908" end="5922" title="Hajstorp nedre" label="Hajstorp nedre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5929" end="5937" title="Riksberg" label="Riksberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5944" end="5952" title="Godhögen" label="Godhögen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5959" end="5973" title="Norrkvarn övre" label="Norrkvarn övre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5980" end="5995" title="Norrkvarn nedre" label="Norrkvarn nedre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6002" end="6013" title="Sjötorp 7-8" label="Sjötorp 7-8"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6020" end="6029" title="Sjötorp 6" label="Sjötorp 6"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6036" end="6047" title="Sjötorp 4-5" label="Sjötorp 4-5"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6054" end="6065" title="Sjötorp 2-3" label="Sjötorp 2-3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6072" end="6081" title="Sjötorp 1" label="Sjötorp 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q173596" start="6099" end="6105" title="Vänern" label="Vänern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757387" start="6129" end="6145" title="Trollhatte canal" label="Trollhätte kanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="6149" end="6159" title="Gothenburg" label="Gothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q909073" start="6205" end="6221" title="Caledonian Canal" label="Caledonian Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="6240" end="6248" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q144825" start="6250" end="6260" title="Kiel Canal" label="Kiel Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q104662" start="6262" end="6269" title="Øresund" label="Øresund"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621774" start="6271" end="6311" title="List of government enterprises of Sweden" label="List of government enterprises of Sweden"/>
</links>
</doc>
